Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 33

Spiritual Gifts

And again, I exhort you, my brethren, that ye deny not the gifts of God,

for they are many; and they come from the same God.

And there are different ways that these gifts are administered;

but it is the same God who worketh all in all;

and they are given by the manifestations of the Spirit of God unto men,

to profit them.

-Moroni 10:8

When Peter, James, and John restored the authority to confer the gift of the Holy Ghost upon the newly baptized, the meridian First Presidency also restored the authority by which special spiritual gifts or talents are given. Following the ordinance of baptism, someone holding the Melchizedek Priesthood must lay hands upon the head of those who have been baptized to both confirm them a member of the Church and convey to them the gift or right to the companionship of the Holy Ghost (see D&C 20:43; 33:15; 39:23; 49:14; 68:25). The companionship of the Holy Ghost is essential not only because of its sanctifying power and because its recipients are entitled to the Spirit of revelation but because each one receiving these promises is also given a special gift from God, known as a spiritual gift. These gifts, as different as the people to whom they are given, assure that every member of the Church is divinely endowed to make a special contribution to the body of the Church. This principle is a marvelous manifestation of the genius of God. It assures that every member has a meaningful contribution to make and that all are benefited by their association with others who are a part of the family or community of Saints.

The knowledge of the role spiritual gifts were to play in the community of believers was lost to the world when the authority by which they are conveyed was lost. With the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood comes the restoration of these gifts and the power to edify and bless that is associated with them. Where faith and the authority of the priesthood are found, these gifts must also be found. Their existence constitutes another evidence that the church established by Christ and his disciples has been restored in its pristine purity and that Joseph Smith was indeed a prophet. To that end let us consider the nature and purpose of spiritual gifts and how they are governed.

The Nature of Spiritual Gifts

The Prophet Joseph Smith received two revelations on spiritual gifts. The first, a translation of the words of Moroni, is found in the last chapter of the Book of Mormon, published in March 1829. The second and more detailed revelation was given 8 March 1831 and is now known as D&C 46. Both revelations are sufficiently similar to the writings of the Apostle Paul on this subject as to suggest that gospel principles are taught in essentially the same language and manner in all dispensations (see 1 Cor. 12). At the same time, both revelations add understanding to that which is preserved from the pen of the meridian Apostle. The March 1831 revelation is particularly helpful in placing the concept of spiritual gifts within the bounds of the discipline and order of the Church.

Spiritual gifts assume a key role in keeping the doctrines and practices of the Church pure. D&C 46 was given, at least in part, that the Saints Ânot be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men.Â Further we are told that they have been given for the benefit of those who love the Lord and keep all the commandments, as well as those who seek so to do. (See D&C 46:7, 9.) The revelation specifically states that spiritual gifts are given Âunto the churchÂ and that they are conveyed by the Holy Ghost (see D&C 46:10, 13, 15, 16).

All three revelations tell us that there are many gifts and then cite illustrations of the same (see 1 Cor. 12:4; Moro. 10:8; D&C 46:11). ÂTo some,Â we are told, Âit is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the worldÂ (D&C 46:13). Given that all are to have this testimony before being admitted to the Church by baptism, we would understand this expression to mean that some are given this testimony in greater measure than that generally enjoyed by those in the household of faith. These Saints have the special ability and capacity through the bearing of their testimony to raise the spiritual level of a meeting and to touch the hearts of men and women in an unforgettable manner. It is such a testimony that must be taken to the ends of the earth, and so it is naturally associated with the special witness that is to be born by the Apostles or special witnesses of Christ in all the world (see D&C 107:23).

To others is given the capacity to believe on the words of those specially endowed teachers. To some is given the ability to teach or preach, while others are given administrative or organizational abilities. To one might be given the gift of wisdom, to another the gift of knowledge, to another the ability to work miracles. Still another may be granted a special talent to heal the sick, to another the capacity to entertain angels, and to yet another the ability to discern spirits, and so forth.

The gifts of the Spirit are as diverse as those to whom they are given and as countless as the shapes of the clouds. Each gift is tailored to fit the person to whom it is given. ÂTo some is given one, and to some is given another,Â the scriptures tell us, Âthat all may be profited therebyÂ (D&C 46:12). Thus each person in the community of the Saints is endowed with an ability and capacity to bless others in a unique and special way. Everyone has a special contribution to make. Salvation is to be found in the community of Saints, in our assisting one another. When we fail to be an active part of the community of Saints in the Church, we rob others of the encouragement and strength that would have come from the union of our gift with theirs. In like manner, we forfeit all the richness and goodness that we would have enjoyed through the gifts that they were given.

All who have been baptized by that authority restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and who are worthy of the companionship of the Holy Ghost, are given a spiritual gift. These gifts are a manifestation of the grace of God. They are a sacred stewardship by which we are blessed and by which we bless others. Let us illustrate how spiritual gifts operate, taking as our illustration the gift of healing. Every faithful holder of the Melchizedek Priesthood has the authority to administer to and heal the sick. All who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood should be prepared to do so. Some, however, are given this power in greater measure than others. We could liken their special talent to that of a vocal soloist. When we sing congregational hymns, all are invited to sing. Indeed, the Lord has said: ÂMy soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their headsÂ (D&C 25:12). The Lord did not say that only those with trained voices, or those with beautiful and melodic voices, were to sing. He invited all to sing and extended a promise of blessing to all that do so. Nevertheless, there are some who have been especially blessed with musical talents. We thrill to hear them sing. Their voices lift our spirits and inspire us. So it is with the gift of healing or, as previously mentioned, the testimony of Christ. Some have been especially endowed to teach of him and testify of him in a manner that enhances listenersÂ feelings and faith beyond what the generality of us can do. We thrill to hear them do so and, like the talented vocalist, they stir our souls as few people can. Thus it is that both the speaker and the hearer rejoice together, for both have been edified (see D&C 50:22).

We all can edify each other with our spiritual gifts. Some gifts are noticeable, while others are more unobtrusive and quiet. This is not to say that one is of greater worth than the other. In fact, the Prophet Joseph Smith observed that the Âmost useful giftsÂ might go unobserved (Teachings, p. 246). Paul reminded us that the body is not one member but many. Thus the foot cannot say, because I am not the hand, I am not of the body. Nor the ear say, because I am not the eye, I am not of the body. If the body is to be whole and perfect, each of its members must function as God ordained them to function. (See 1 Cor. 12:14Â24.) Thus it is that we gather together to teach, bless, and encourage each other, each one of us having something special to contribute and in need of being blessed by the gifts that have been entrusted to others. It is a manifestation of the genius of God. We need one another and are blessed as we bless each other.

How Spiritual Gifts Are Governed

So it is that the Lord has asked each of us to seek after the best gifts. What, then, are the best gifts? They are those gifts that it would be best for us to have to bless those with whom we have been called to labor. They will be as different as our labors are different. Now, one may ask, ÂAre not some gifts greater than others?Â To which we would respond, ÂCan the hand say to the arm, I have no need of thee?Â Paul said that all need not be Apostles, or prophets, or even teachers. We need good music, we need people with organizational ability, we need those with discernment. We need people with knowledge and others with wisdom, those with the gift of healing, those with the gift of faith, and those who can work miracles-miracles of all kinds and varieties. Again, all of us are in need of the association and blessings that are a part of the household of faith. All who share that faith have been endowed with a special gift, or gifts, of God to contribute to that household. Thus in the diversity of our spiritual talents we find unity. Through their proper use we become of one heart and one mind, united in the cause of truth.

As to the governing of this multitude of spiritual gifts, the revelation explains that Âthe bishop of the churchÂ and all others God has called to preside over and look after the welfare of the church Âare to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of GodÂ (D&C 46:27). This gift of discernment functions in two ways. First, the presiding officer, the one holding keys, uses this gift to discern how to most effectively utilize the gifts of those who labor under his direction. Second, those holding this gift are granted a special ability to discern when gifts are being used improperly and to detect those instances in which counterfeit gifts or false spirits are being used to manipulate or deceive the Saints.

To that end the revelation tells us that Âunto some it may be given to have all those gifts, that there may be a head, in order that every member may be profited therebyÂ (D&C 46:29). One who would be entitled to Âall those giftsÂ would be the prophet or President of the Church. We would not understand this to mean that he need be the most spiritually gifted in all ways, that none could have spiritual talents greater than his; rather, the President would enjoy an association with all the gifts of the Spirit to the extent that he could naturally and comfortably preside. Again the analogy of the choir director or the conductor of an orchestra serves well. The choir director does not have to have the most beautiful voice in the choir, nor does the conductor of an orchestra have to be its most talented musician. What is needed on their part is an understanding of the proper role of all who sing in the choir or play in the orchestra. Thus the conductor can blend the talents of others into a harmonious expression that magnifies the talents of all.

In writing to the Saints in Corinth, Paul encouraged them to Âcovet earnestly the best giftsÂ (1 Cor. 12:31). Similarly, Moroni, in the concluding chapter of the Book of Mormon, counseled us to Âdeny not the gifts of GodÂ (Moro. 10:8). And in our own day the Lord, speaking through the Prophet Joseph Smith, directed us to Âseek ye earnestly the best giftsÂ (D&C 46:8). We return again to the issue: What are the best gifts, or what gifts ought we seek? The answer: those gifts that would find best service in the office and call that is ours. For the Apostle it may be the testimony of Christ. For the bishop it may be the gift of discernment. For a patriarch it will likely be the gift of prophecy. A faithful father might seek to be endowed with the gift of wisdom, while a mother might yearn in prayer for the pure love of Christ. The newly called missionary might seek to speak with the tongue of angels. And so forth. With the companionship of the Holy Ghost comes the right to a gift, but none are limited to a single gift save those who fail to seek others.

Inspiration is essential in seeking for gifts. Spiritual gifts are not to be sought for any purpose other than the LordÂs. They are for the blessing of the Church, not the curiosity or gratification of an individual. Salvation is not found in the accumulation of gifts but rather grows out of service faithfully rendered and talents wisely used to bless others. To fail to use the gifts that we have been given is to risk losing them. Conversely, to properly use them assures that we will be trusted with other gifts. Teaching the principle, the Savior said: ÂFor unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hathÂ (Matt. 25:29). ÂFor what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift.Â (D&C 88:33.)

Conclusion

ÂHave angels ceased to appear unto the children of men?Â Mormon asked. ÂOr has he withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain.Â (Moro. 7:36Â37.) Indeed, where the church and kingdom of God is established, there are the gifts of the Spirit-those wonders and signs and miracles that are always bestowed by a gracious Lord upon his covenant people.

With the restoration of the holy priesthood and that system of salvation we know as the gospel, there comes that Âtrain of attendantsÂ-Âapostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, gifts, wisdom, knowledge, miracles, healings, tongues, interpretation of tongues, etc. All these appear when faith appears on the earth, and disappear when it disappears from the earth; for these are the effects of faith. . . . For where faith is, there will the knowledge of God be also, with all things which pertain thereto-revelations, visions, and dreams, as well as every necessary thing, in order that the possessors of faith may be perfected, and obtain salvation.Â (Lectures on Faith 7:20.) We cannot use the gifts of the Spirit without being reminded of the goodness of God, his love for us, and our dependence on him. The existence of spiritual gifts among the Saints stands as another of the many evidences of the restored gospel and of the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith.
