Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 34

Heirs of God, Joint Heirs with Christ

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God-

wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death,

or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are ChristÂs,

and Christ is GodÂs.

-D&C 76:58Â59

Joseph Smith stood as a revealer of truth, a legal administrator, a prophet and seer. He spoke as one having authority. In the name of the Lord who called him, he challenged man-made philosophies and false traditions. His was a living voice, and the church he established was the Âtrue and living churchÂ (D&C 1:30). Among hundreds of other matters, Joseph the Seer restored a mighty truth that had been lost from the minds of religionists-the doctrine that man can grow, line upon line, in spiritual graces until he passes the tests of mortality, gains the assurance of eternal life, and then qualifies to enter the divine presence and become as God is.

Faith unto Life and Salvation

In the winter of 1834Â35, the Prophet Joseph Smith prepared and delivered a series of lectures to the men who constituted the School of the Prophets. These came to be known as the Lectures on Faith. This collection is a systematic study of faith: what it is, the objects on which it rests, and the fruits that flow from it. These seven lectures contain some of the most profound and mind-expanding teachings in our literature. They are worthy of serious and sober reflection on the part of Latter-day Saints who desire to grow in faith and come unto Christ. The Lectures on Faith were contained in the first edition (1835) of the Doctrine and Covenants. That edition was made up of two parts: part one was called ÂDoctrineÂ and consisted of the Lectures on Faith; part two was called ÂCovenantsÂ and consisted of many of the revelations received to that point in time. The Lectures on Faith remained in subsequent editions of the Doctrine and Covenants until 1921.

Lecture one is a discussion of the nature of faith. The Prophet describes faith as Âthe first principle in revealed religion, and the foundation of all righteousnessÂ (1:1). Faith is presented as Âthe assurance which men have of the existence of things which they have not seen, and the principle of action in all intelligent beingsÂ (1:9). In temporal affairs, the Prophet points out, no one would function in the most menial of tasks if there were not faith or belief in some eventuality. For example, the farmer would never sow if he had no hope of reaping. ÂIn a word, is there anything that you would have done, either physical or mental, if you had not previously believed? Are not all your exertions of every kind, dependent on your faith? Or, may we not ask, what have you, or what do you possess, which you have not obtained by reason of your faith?Â (1:11.)

The Prophet went on to show from scripture that faith is not only the underlying principle behind all action but also Âa principle of power.Â He observed that, as taught in Heb. 11:3, Âthe principle of power which existed in the bosom of God, by which the worlds were framed, was faith; and . . . it is by reason of this principle of power existing in the Deity, that all created things exist; so that all things in heaven, on earth, or under the earth, exist by reason of faith as it existed in Him. . . . It is the principle by which Jehovah works, and through which he exercises power over all temporal as well as eternal things.Â (1:15Â16.) This equation that describes faith as a principle of power is an important one. Faith thereby becomes more than an inert wish or even a strong longing or yearning for some eventuality to occur. It helps us to understand the SaviorÂs statement that ÂIf ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the fig tree [that is, wither it], but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done. And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.Â (Matt. 21:21Â22.)

Lecture two is a statement as to how faith comes-namely, by the power of human testimony. The Choice Seer taught that after Adam and Eve were cast from the Garden of Eden, they did not lose the knowledge they had gained in Eden. Although the knowledge of their premortal existence was veiled from memory, manÂs Âtransgression did not deprive him of the previous knowledge with which he was endowed relative to the existence and glory of his Creator.Â That is, Adam and Eve Âretained a knowledge of [GodÂs] existence, and that sufficiently to move them to call upon him.Â (2:19, 25.) Further, after the expulsion from Eden, God continued to reveal himself to our first parents. They in turn taught their children about the Almighty and the plan of salvation. ÂAnd the evidences which these men had of the existence of a God, was the testimony of their fathers in the first instanceÂ (2:33). This knowledge was then transmitted from generation to generation, Âas a matter of tradition at least; for we cannot suppose that a knowledge of this important fact could have existed in the mind of any of the before-mentioned individuals, without their having made it known to their posterityÂ (2:53). And so Âit was human testimony, and human testimony only, that excited this inquiry, in the first instance, in their minds. It was the credence they give to the testimony of their fathersÂ that resulted Âin the most glorious discoveries and eternal certainty.Â (2:56.)

In the third lecture, the Prophet Joseph Smith set forth three prerequisites for the exercise of faith in God unto life and salvation:

Lectures three and four deal with the character and attributes of God; these presentations establish that God possesses all virtues, traits, and ennobling qualities in perfection. That is what it means to be God. Thus God is all-wise, all-caring, all-truthful, all-benevolent, all-patient, and forevermore consistent, constant, and dependable. Further, man must know that God embodies all of these attributes and qualities in order to exercise faith in him. How, for example, could one call upon the Almighty with confidence if there were any question about GodÂs judgment, his sense of justice, or his approachability? How could one dare to call upon God for forgiveness if there were any doubt as to GodÂs willingness to forgive? ÂSuch is the weakness of man,Â the Prophet taught, Âand such his frailties, that he is liable to sin continually, and if God were not long-suffering, and full of compassion, gracious and merciful, and of a forgiving disposition, man would be cut off from before him, in consequence of which he would be in continual doubt and could not exercise faith; for where doubt is, there faith has no powerÂ (From Questions and Answers to Lectures on Faith 3:20.)

In the same vein, consider the plight of man if there were any question in the mind of man as to God having all power or knowing all things. ÂWithout the knowledge of all things God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in himÂ (4:11). Anyone, therefore, who doubts GodÂs power, knowledge, or ability will never acquire the kind and quality of faith that leads unto life and salvation. Truly, ÂGod is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fullness and perfection dwell; who is omnipotent, omnipresent, and omniscient; without beginning of days or end of life; and . . . in him every good gift and every good principle dwell; and . . . he is the Father of lightsÂ (2:2).

Lecture five continues a discussion of the nature of God and focuses primarily on the perfections of Deity and the relationship of the Father and the Son. This lecture is particularly deep and penetrating and requires prayerful and serious reflection to grasp its message. Of Lecture five, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

Using the holy scriptures as the recorded source of the knowledge of God, knowing what the Lord has revealed to them of old in visions and by the power of the Spirit, and writing as guided by that same Spirit, Joseph Smith and the early brethren of this dispensation prepared a creedal statement on the Godhead. It is without question the most excellent summary of revealed and eternal truth relative to the Godhead that is now extant in mortal language. In it is set forth the mystery of Godliness; that is, it sets forth the personalities, missions, and ministries of those holy beings who comprise the supreme presidency of the universe. To spiritually illiterate persons, it may seem hard and confusing; to those whose souls are aflame with heavenly light, it is a nearly perfect summary of those things which must be believed to gain salvation. (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 72.)

On an earlier occasion, Elder McConkie stated: ÂIn my judgment, it is the most comprehensive, intelligent, inspired utterance that now exists . . . in one place defining, interpreting, expounding, announcing, and testifying what kind of being God is. It was written by the power of the Holy Ghost, by the spirit of inspiration. It is, in effect, eternal scripture; it is true.Â (ÂThe Lord God of Joseph Smith,Â p. 4.)

As Latter-day Saints we go to great lengths to establish that the Father and the Son are separate and distinct personages, that they are not somehow magically intertwined, not merely two manifestations of the same person. And yet, it is worth stating that our Heavenly Father and his Beloved Son are infinitely more one than they are separate; they happen to be separate in person. They are one in glory, one in purpose, one in focus and mission, and one in the sense that they both possess all of the attributes of godliness in perfection. The Prophet also taught that they are one in mind, and that their oneness of mind is assured and maintained through the indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit. The Father and the Son possess Âthe same mind, the same wisdom, glory, power, and fullness-filling all in all; the Son being filled with the fullness of the mind, glory, and power; or, in other words, the spirit, glory, and power, of the Father.Â The lecture goes on to state how mortal man-frail and weak and in constant need of divine intervention-may grow and develop into a similar spiritual union with the gods. That Holy Spirit which conveys the mind of God Âis shed forth upon all who believe on his name and keep his commandments; and all those who keep his commandments shall grow up from grace to grace, and become heirs of the heavenly kingdom, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ; possessing the same mind, being transformed into the same image or likeness, even the express image of him who fills all in all; being filled with the fullness of his glory, and become one in him, even as the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are one.Â (5:2.)

The Knowledge That Saves

For most Latter-day Saints, the first prerequisite for saving faith-the idea that God exists-is no obstacle at all. We know of his existence by reason and by revelation. We accept the unmistakable witness of all things that attest to a supreme Being, in other words, external evidence; and we believe the testimony of those who know for sure, in other words, internal evidence. The second prerequisite-a correct idea as to his nature-is a little more difficult to meet, but even here we can learn of God by serious study of the scriptures and by giving heed to those, past and present, who have known him. The third criterion for faith-a knowledge that the course in life we are pursuing is according to the divine will-is the greatest challenge of all. The first two require us to learn and understand something about God. The third requires that we know something about ourselves. That is to say, faith unto life and salvation is dependent upon confidence, a word the Prophet often used interchangeably with faith. We must have confidence that there is a God, confidence that he is who he says he is and that he has all power. And then, we must have some degree of confidence in ourselves, a quiet assurance that the Lord is pleased with us. One who doubts his standing before God, who constantly questions his own goodness and impugns his own righteousness, who is always and forever feeling inadequate and inferior, cannot develop faith unto life and salvation. Though a certain measure of humility is typical of those who come unto Christ (see 2 Ne. 4:17Â18; Ether 3:2), yet there must also be a hope in Christ-an anticipation of divine acceptance because of him, assurance of eternal life through him, and expectation of glory with him-if one is to chart a course and follow it to salvation.

ÂAn actual knowledge to any person, that the course of life which he pursues is according to the will of God, is essentially necessary to enable him to have that confidence in God without which no person can obtain eternal life. It was this that enabled the ancient saints to endure all their afflictions and persecutions, and to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing (not believing merely) that they had a more enduring substance.Â Indeed, Âsuch was, and always will be, the situation of the saints of God, that unless they have an actual knowledge that the course they are pursuing is according to the will of God they will grow weary in their minds, and faint.Â (6:2, 4.) Stated another way, the people of God need to know that the Lord is pleased with them and that their works and faith are acceptable to him if they are to have the courage and the faith to overcome the world. ÂFor a man to lay down his all, his character and reputation, his honor, and applause, his good name among men, his houses, his lands, his brothers and sisters, his wife and children, and even his own life also-counting all things but filth and dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ-requires more than mere belief or supposition that he is doing the will of God; but actual knowledge, realizing that, when these sufferings are ended, he will enter into eternal rest, and be a partaker of the glory of GodÂ (6:5).

And how does one gain such a knowledge? How do we come to know that we are on course, that our lives are in order and thus approved of the heavens? The members of the School of the Prophets were taught-and this is one of the transcendent verities of the Restoration-that we must be willing to sacrifice all things for the gospel cause. If we would become inheritors of all that the Father has, we must be willing to give up all that we have. With us, it must be the kingdom of God or nothing. We must be willing to yield our hearts unto God (see Hel. 3:35), have an eye single to his glory (see D&C 88:67), and be willing to surrender to the Captain of our souls. Like the father of Lamoni, we must be willing to give up all we possess, forsake our individual kingdoms, and give away all our sins to know God (see Alma 22:15, 18). ÂLet us here observe,Â the Prophet declared, Âthat a religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvationÂ (Lectures on Faith 6:7). Only a church that will ask everything of its members-everything!-is in a position to promise its members the riches of eternity. Total surrender is always prerequisite to total victory. Only those who reach the point in their spiritual development where they are at last able and willing to fully consecrate themselves to the Lord and his church and kingdom and to do so without hindrance can gain that confidence before God of which the scriptures speak (see D&C 121:45), a confidence that results in the promise of eternal life.

President David O. McKay often spoke of spirituality as a Âconsciousness of victory over self, and of communion with the InfiniteÂ (Gospel Ideals, p. 390). It is not just that one has become victor over self, having conquered the flesh or transcended the demands of a fallen world. In addition, such a one knows that he has gained victory over self. That knowledge is liberating; it allows us to ignore those who taunt and chant from the great and spacious building and to sever ourselves from the things of this world that have no lasting value. It makes us comfortable in the presence of good people and anxious for the company of holy beings. The Lord therefore explained: ÂAll among them [the Saints who had been driven and persecuted in Missouri] who know their hearts are honest, and are broken, and their spirits contrite, and are willing to observe their covenants by sacrifice-yea, every sacrifice which I, the Lord, shall command-they are accepted of meÂ (D&C 97:8).

In lecture seven the Prophet Joseph Smith taught of the fruits of faith, namely spiritual gifts enjoyed by the faithful and ultimately complete salvation granted to the fully consecrated. Further, we learn that one of the benefits of true faith is that it develops in us a Christlike character, leading us onward toward the imitation of Christ our Master. Jesus is indeed the Prototype of all saved beings. ÂSalvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like himÂ (7:9). The plan of salvation is in fact Âa system of faith-it begins with faith, and continues by faith; and every blessing which is obtained in relation to it is the effect of faith, whether it pertains to this life or that which is to comeÂ (7:17).

Having established what faith is, what underlies that faith, and what is required of us in order to be counted among the favored of heaven, the Prophet explained what it means to work by faith. ÂWe understand that when a man works by faith he works by mental exertion instead of physical force. It is by words, instead of exerting his physical powers, with which every being works when he works by faith.Â (7:3.) But we are not to understand from this statement that working by faith is merely an intellectual exercise or that those with unusual mental capacities necessarily have more faith. Rather, the mental exertion of which the Prophet spoke seems to be the rigor and strenuous labor, the soul-searching and personal denial associated with coming to know the mind and will of God and then acting upon it. Elder McConkie has observed:

There may be those whose mental powers and thought processes are greater than any of the saints, but only persons who are in tune with the Infinite can exercise the spiritual forces and powers that come from him. . . .

. . . He who is the Author of faith, he whose power faith is, he whose works are the embodiment of justice and judgment and wisdom and all good things, even he must approve the use of his power in the case at hand. Faith cannot be exercised contrary to the order of heaven or contrary to the will and purposes of him whose power it is. Men work by faith when they are in tune with the Spirit and when what they seek to do by mental exertion and by the spoken word is the mind and will of the Lord. (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 192.)

The Elect of God

Joseph Smith revealed a doctrine that is unknown and unintelligible to those without spiritual understanding. He taught that as men and women live in such a way as to cultivate the gift and gifts of the Holy Ghost, they eventually receive the assurance of eternal life-they make their calling and election sure. ÂAfter a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, . . . and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure.Â (Teachings, p. 150.) That is, the Lord seals an exaltation upon him and seals him up unto eternal life. In receiving the promise of salvation, the individual has thereby passed the tests of mortality and qualified for exaltation and godhood hereafter.

King Benjamin closed his magnificent sermon with this invitation: ÂTherefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal lifeÂ (Mosiah 5:15). While laboring tirelessly with the people of the Church, particularly those in transgression, Alma the elder received the following commendation and promise from God: ÂBlessed art thou, Alma, and blessed are they who were baptized in the waters of Mormon. Thou art blessed because of thy exceeding faith in the words alone of my servant Abinadi. . . . And blessed art thou because thou hast established a church among this people; and they shall be established, and they shall be my people. . . . And because thou hast inquired of me concerning the transgressor, thou art blessed. Thou art my servant; and I covenant with thee that thou shalt have eternal life.Â (Mosiah 26:15, 17, 19Â20.) In our dispensation, the Lord made a like promise to the latter-day Seer: ÂI am the Lord thy God, and will be with thee even unto the end of the world, and through all eternity; for verily I seal upon you your exaltation, and prepare a throne for you in the kingdom of my Father, with Abraham your father.Â In light of our discussion earlier in this chapter, the words that follow are especially meaningful: ÂBehold, I have seen your sacrifices, and will forgive all your sins; I have seen your sacrifices in obedience to that which I have told you.Â (D&C 132:49Â50.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that after one has made his calling and election sure, Âthen it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints. . . . Now what is this other Comforter? It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God.Â (Teachings, pp. 150Â51.) Receiving the Second Comforter is an additional blessing, a revelation beyond making oneÂs calling and election sure. That is to say, one may indeed make his calling and election sure-may receive the certain promise from God that his salvation is assured-and yet not enjoy the blessings of the Second Comforter (see McConkie, The Promised Messiah, p. 586). On the other hand, if one qualifies for the presence of the Son, or as President Joseph Fielding Smith expressed it, Âif a man gets knowledge enough to have the companionship of the Son of God, the chances are his call and election would be sureÂ (Doctrines of Salvation 1:55).

Those who grow up in the Lord (see Hel. 3:21) and receive Âa fulness of the Holy GhostÂ (see D&C 109:14Â15) prepare themselves for association with holy beings. The role of the Holy Ghost is to lead men and women to the point of illumination and inspiration at which they are ready to be ushered into the presence of the Father and the Son. That is, the Holy Ghost Âshall bring all things to remembrance, whatsoever things I [the Lord] have said unto you; he shall teach you until ye come to me and my FatherÂ (The Words of Joseph Smith, pp. 14Â15; spelling and punctuation modernized). Joseph thus taught the brethren in the School of the Prophets that Âafter any portion of the human family are made acquainted with the important fact that there is a God who has created and does uphold all things, the extent of their knowledge respecting his character and glory will depend upon their diligence and faithfulness in seeking after him, until, like Enoch, the brother of Jared, and Moses, they shall obtain faith in God and power with him to behold him face to faceÂ (Lectures on Faith 2:55). In our own day we have been instructed to Âseek the face of the Lord alwaysÂ (D&C 101:38), with the promise that Âinasmuch as you strip yourselves from jealousies and fears, and humble yourselves before me, for ye are not sufficiently humble, the veil shall be rent and you shall see me and know that I amÂ (D&C 67:10; see also 93:1).

The scriptures speak of those who qualify for exaltation as being the church of the Firstborn (see D&C 76:54, 67, 102). The church of the Firstborn is the inner circle of faithful Saints who have proven true and faithful to their covenants. As baptism is the gate to membership in the church of Jesus Christ on earth, so celestial marriage opens the door to membership in the heavenly church. (See Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 2:42; Man: His Origin and Destiny, p. 272; The Way to Perfection, p. 208; McConkie, The Promised Messiah, p. 47; A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 337.) The church of the Firstborn is the Church beyond the veil, the organized body of Saints who qualify for exaltation. It is made up of those who qualify for the blessings of the Firstborn. Jesus is the Firstborn of the Father and as such is entitled to the birthright. As an act of consummate mercy and grace, our blessed Savior makes it possible for us to inherit, receive, and possess the same blessings he receives, as though we were the Firstborn. As we mentioned earlier in this work, those who come into the Church and live worthy of the companionship of the Holy Ghost are born again; they become the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ by adoption. If they continue faithful, receive thereafter the covenants and ordinances of the temple-including the endowment and celestial marriage-and are true to those higher covenants, they will eventually become the sons and daughters of God, meaning the Father. They become heirs of God, joint heirs or coinheritors with Christ of all that the Father has, including eternal life. ÂWherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of GodÂ (D&C 76:58). President Brigham Young therefore stated that Âthe ordinances of the house of God are expressly for the Church of the FirstbornÂ (in Journal of Discourses 8:154).

These blessings are deep and profound, deeper and far more profound than those of the world can comprehend. To borrow the words of Mormon in regard to the ministry of angels, these supernal privileges are given Âunto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godlinessÂ (Moro. 7:30). They do not come to the sign-seeker, the curious, or the man or woman possessed of excessive zeal. Latter-day Saints who have received the ordinances of the temple may press forward in the work of the Lord and with quiet dignity and patient maturity seek to be worthy of gaining the certain assurance of salvation before the end of their mortal lives. But should one not formally receive the glorious promise in this life, he or she has the scriptural promise that faithfully enduring to the end eventuates in eternal life, whether that assurance be received here or hereafter (see 2 Ne. 31:20; D&C 14:7; 50:5; 53:7).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie counseled:

We donÂt need to get a complex or get a feeling that you have to be perfect to be saved. You donÂt. . . . What you have to do is get on the straight and narrow path-thus charting a course leading to eternal life-and then, being on that path, pass out of this life in full fellowship. IÂm not saying that you donÂt have to keep the commandments. IÂm saying you donÂt have to be perfect to be saved. If you did, no one would be saved. . . . If youÂre on that path and pressing forward, and you die, youÂll never get off the path. There is no such thing as falling off the straight and narrow path in the life to come, and the reason is that this life is the time that is given to men to prepare for eternity. Now is the time and the day of your salvation, so if youÂre working zealously in this life-though you havenÂt fully overcome the world and you havenÂt done all you hoped you might do-youÂre still going to be saved. You donÂt have to do what Jacob said, ÂGo beyond the mark.Â You donÂt have to live a life thatÂs truer than true. You donÂt have to have an excessive zeal that becomes fanatical and becomes unbalancing. What you have to do is stay in the mainstream of the Church and live as upright and decent people live in the Church. . . . If youÂre on that path when death comes-because this is the time and the day appointed, this is the probationary estate-youÂll never fall off from it, and, for all practical purposes, your calling and election is made sure. (ÂThe Probationary Test of Mortality,Â pp. 12Â13.)

Conclusion

The gospel is Âthe power of God unto salvationÂ (Rom. 1:16), the power to renew and revitalize men and women. God is our Father and wants all of his children to become as he is. Thus the plan of salvation is a developmental process whereby we learn to exercise faith in God and Christ unto life and salvation. ÂBy a union of . . . three elements,Â Elder B. H. Roberts summarized, Âthat is, a belief in the existence of God, a correct conception of his character, and a knowledge that the course of life pursued is approved of him-will render faith perfect, will constitute it a principle of power, the incentive to all action . . . leading from one degree of knowledge or excellence to another, from righteousness to righteousness, until the heavens will be opened to them and they will hold communion with the Church of the First Born, with Jesus Christ, and with God the Father, and thus will they make their calling and election sure-through faith ripening into knowledgeÂ (The Gospel, p. 111).

Through the exercise of a dynamic faith in the atonement of Christ, men and women may be forgiven, cleansed, and enabled to accomplish the otherwise impossible. They receive the peaceful assurance that the Lord is pleased with them and the guarantee of eternal glory. The Prophet taught that Âas the Son partakes of the fullness of the Father through the Spirit, so the saints are, by the same Spirit, to be partakers of the same fullness, to enjoy the same glory; for as the Father and the Son are one, so, in like manner, the saints are to be one in them. Through the love of the Father, the mediation of Jesus Christ, and the gift of the Holy Spirit, they are to be heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ.Â (Lectures on Faith 5:3.)
