Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 35

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

A whole and complete and perfect union,

and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers,

and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam

even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which

never have been revealed from the foundation of the world,

but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent,

shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this,

the dispensation of the fulness of times.

—D&C 128:18

A gospel dispensation is a period of time in which the principles of salvation are dispensed or revealed anew from the heavens. If legal administrators are not still on the earth, a dispensation of the gospel will include the restoration of all necessary keys and authority. The first gospel dispensation was Adam's, for his knowledge of the gospel and his claim to priesthood authority were dispensed directly from heaven. Enoch received a dispensation of the gospel, though it did not require the restoration of priesthood authority, inasmuch as legal administrators were still upon the earth. This was also the case with Noah, Abraham, and Moses. The meridian dispensation required both the restoration of the fulness of the gospel and the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. The meridian dispensation ended with the death of the Apostles and the loss of the priesthood and keys they had received from Christ. Thus all saving truths, including the right to preach the gospel and to perform its ordinances, were lost.

The Final Gospel Dispensation

Only the "restitution of all things" would be sufficient to respond to a universal apostasy. Significantly, such a restoration had been known to and spoken of by "all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:21; see also D&C 27:6; 77:9, 14; 86:10). This final restoration was to be known as the dispensation of the fulness of times. That is, it was to be a period of fulness or completeness, a period during which all keys, power, authority, and knowledge held by the Saints in any past dispensation were to be restored. For instance, in writing to the Ephesian Saints Paul spoke of that future day: "That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he [God] might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him" (Eph. 1:10).

The dispensation of the fulness of times can be likened to a lake or an ocean into which flow the waters of revelation and authority known to all other dispensations. It is a way of binding the faith of those of all ages together. To those who stand at the head, the Lord said: "For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times. Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation; for verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you." (D&C 112:30-32.)

When Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were ordained under the hands of Peter, James, and John, they received "the keys of the [Lord's] kingdom and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times," in which the Lord said he would "gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth" (D&C 27:13). Three distinct ideas are mentioned here: first, that the gospel is being restored for the final time; second, that ours is the dispensation of fulness or completeness; and third, that there is to be a gathering of all things both in heaven and on earth. We will briefly consider the implications of each.

It is clear from the revelations of the Restoration that the gospel has been restored for the last time. Anciently, Daniel described a day in which God would "set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed" or "left to other people" but which would "break in pieces and consume all" earthly kingdoms and "stand for ever." He used the imagery of a stone cut out of a mountain without hands which rolled forth until it filled the whole earth. (See Dan. 2:44-45.) A revelation given to Joseph Smith in October 1831 stated, "The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth" (D&C 65:2).

These revelations are not simply a confirmation that the gospel will be restored and then taken to those of every nation, kindred, and tongue. They contain the assurance that once the gospel has been restored in the final, great gospel dispensation, there will be no necessity for a reformation or reorganization of the Church. Those would-be leaders who rise up from time to time, claiming some divine commission to set the Church in order or to liberate its membership from the obligations of their covenants or the direction of those they have covenanted to sustain, are clearly at odds with revelations that Daniel said were "certain" and the "interpretation thereof sure" (Dan. 2:45).

Having restored the gospel for the final time, the Lord has assured us that it will not be left to other people to correct the course charted by those the Lord has called to lead. Again drawing on the imagery of ancient prophecy, the Lord told Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery: "Thou art called to prune my vineyard with a mighty pruning, yea, even for the last time; yea, and also all those whom thou has ordained, and they shall do even according to this pattern" (D&C 24:19; see also Jacob 5:62-64, 71, 75-76). And again, "For behold, the field is white already to harvest; and it is the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard" (D&C 33:3; see also 39:17; 43:28; 88:84).

Thus we find the Lord assuring Joseph Smith and his lawful successors in these words: "Thou art blessed from henceforth that bear the keys of the kingdom given unto you; which kingdom is coming forth for the last time. Verily I say unto you, the keys of this kingdom shall never be taken from you, while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come; nevertheless, through you shall the oracles be given to another, yea, even unto the church." (D&C 90:2-4.) The dispensation of the fulness of times includes a whole and complete and perfect union of all that is eternal. Because salvation is a family affair, it naturally follows that a complete and perfect union must exist in families. That is, families are to be bound together from generation to generation according to the covenants they made one with another even before they were born, with those of our dispensation performing the sealing ordinances for those of generations past who could not do it for themselves.

None are to be saved alone. All labor in concert one with another. Malachi spoke of a curse that was to come upon the earth if the hearts of the fathers did not turn to the children and the hearts of the children in like manner turn to their fathers. Of this matter Joseph Smith wrote:

It is sufficient to know, in this case, that the earth will be smitten with a curse unless there is a welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the children, upon some subject or other—and behold what is that subject? It is the baptism for the dead [and all other vicarious ordinances]. For we without them cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect. Neither can they nor we be made perfect without those who have died in the gospel also; for it is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that bring glad tidings of good things, and that say unto Zion: Behold, thy God reigneth! As the dews of Carmel, so shall the knowledge of God descend upon them!

And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca county, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book! The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light! The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!

And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!

Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free.

Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever! And again I say, how glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, proclaiming in our ears, glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; kingdoms, principalities, and powers!

Behold, the great day of the Lord is at hand; and who can abide the day of his coming, and who can stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap; and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation. (D&C 128:18-24.)

There is no salvation independent of the family unit. As the blessing of life comes through father and mother, so the blessings of the gospel flow through family channels. Thus when Peter sought to restore the gospel to the nation of the Jews, he said: "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2:38-39; see also Teachings, p. 81.) This is the manifestation of the promise the Lord made with Abraham. His seed, meaning "the literal seed, or the seed of the body," were to be the messengers of salvation to all the families of the earth. They were to hold the priesthood and to carry "the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" to all who did not have it, and those not naturally of Abraham's blood were to be adopted into his lineage (see Abr. 2:9-11). The old blood was to be purged out, the Prophet said, making the convert "actually of the seed of Abraham" (Teachings, p. 150). So it is that when Christ visited the nation of the Nephites, he said: "And behold, ye are the children of the prophets; and ye are of the house of Israel; and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. The Father having raised me up unto you first, and sent me to bless you in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; and this because ye are the children of the covenant—and after that ye were blessed then fulfilleth the Father the covenant which he made with Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed—unto the pouring out of the Holy Ghost through me upon the Gentiles, which blessing upon the Gentiles shall make them mighty above all, unto the scattering of my people, O house of Israel." (3 Ne. 20:25-27.)

Gathering of All Things in Heaven and on Earth

The latter-day gathering or restoration of all things includes the bringing back of both the authority and knowledge of the ancients. Only after angelic messengers have restored their authority can the channels be established through which divine truths can again be communicated from the heavens. The name Elias, which means messenger or forerunner, is used in scripture to represent the composite of all the angels who came restoring keys and authority to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Thus it is said of various angels that they were the Elias who restored all things. Gabriel, who is Noah, is mentioned in this manner in modern revelation (see D&C 27:6-7; Teachings, p. 157). An angelic ministrant bearing the name Elias appeared in the Kirtland Temple to restore keys pertaining to eternal marriage within the Abrahamic covenant (see D&C 110:12). Similarly, the Elias spoken of in D&C 77, who was to "restore all things," is John the Revelator (D&C 77:9, 14). No single angel was responsible for restoring all of the keys and authority, but rather a host of angels came, each representing the special stewardship that was his in mortality: Moroni the Book of Mormon; John the Baptist the Aaronic Priesthood, including the authority to baptize; Peter, James, and John the Melchizedek Priesthood, as received at the hands of the Savior, and so forth.

As to the restoration of ancient texts, we have been promised that "the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews. And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with Abraham that I would remember his seed forever." (2 Ne. 29:13-14.)

Not only has the Lord promised to restore sacred knowledge treasured by the ancients but also to lead this dispensation beyond all that was known to those of the past. "For I deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 124:41). Yet again the Lord has said:

God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, [knowledge] that has not been revealed since the world was until now;

Which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be revealed in the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels, as held in reserve for the fulness of their glory;

A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be manifest.

All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ.

And also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—

All the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years, and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times—

According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was, that should be reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof, when every man shall enter into his eternal presence and into his immortal rest. (D&C 121:26-32.)

So it will be that "in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven" (D&C 101:32-34).

Conclusion

Using the broadest of strokes, the Lord through Enoch painted this world picture of the earth's final gospel dispensation:

And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem.

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other;

And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest. (Moses 7:62-64.)

We live in the greatest of all times—the time of restitution, the time of restoration, the age of fulness and completion. Our Lord has restored, is now restoring, and will yet restore many great and important things to the earth.
