Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Chapter 36

All of Equal Privilege

He inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness;

and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white,

bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen;

and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile.

-2 1 Ne. 26:33

In the gospel restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith, we find perfect equality. ÂWe believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the GospelÂ (A of F 1:3). None are to be excluded. There is no thought of favoritism in the atonement of Christ. All who are subject to the corruptions of the flesh-disease, aging, pain, and death-have the promise of endless life. All who are subject to the corruptions of the spirit-sin or unholiness in any form-and who have been separated by their mortal condition from the divine presence, obtain the promise of reconciliation. Indeed, the promise of the fulness of all that the Father has is extended to all of his children.

The Promised Blessings the Same

As God is without change, so is his gospel. Those who have supposed for themselves a God who progresses in knowledge and wisdom must also suppose that at some future time a more perfect system of salvation will be forthcoming. Thus we would reason that those of that future day will have a greater chance of obtaining salvation than those of us who suffered the testing of a mortal probation under the tutoring of a God of lesser wisdom. Such, however, is not the God of Joseph Smith. Indeed, no faith, the Prophet held, could be exercised in a God who did not have all attributes of godliness in their perfection. ÂAll fullness and perfectionÂ must dwell within Deity, he said (Lectures on Faith 2:1; 4:11). ÂIs it not equally as necessary that man should have an idea that God changes not, neither is there variableness with him, in order to exercise faith in him unto life and salvation? It is; because without this, he would not know how soon the mercy of God might change into cruelty, his long-suffering into rashness, his love into hatred, and in consequence of which doubt man would be incapable of exercising faith in him, but having the idea that he is unchangeable, man can have faith in him continually, believing that what he was yesterday he is to-day, and will be forever.Â (From Questions and Answers to Lectures on Faith 3:21.)

In the knowledge that the perfections of God remain unchanged and that the principles of salvation are everlastingly the same comes the faith that each of us as a child of God has rightful claim upon his grace and the promise of the fulness of his blessings. The commandment to Âask of GodÂ was not given discriminantly. It was not confined to a select few or limited to a particular time and place. The promise was that God Âgiveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not.Â (James 1:5.) The seed of faith will yield its bounty to whoever will plant and nourish it. Seeds know no distinction as to age, gender, or race. So it is in the realm of spiritual things. ÂThere is a law,Â wrote the Prophet, Âirrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated-and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicatedÂ (D&C 130:20Â21). And again, ÂFor all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the worldÂ (D&C 132:5). Thus it is that all are invited Âto come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and GentileÂ (2 Ne. 26:33).

Every principle of the gospel and every ordinance of the gospel apply alike to all of the children of God. There is no preferential treatment accorded to one person over another where the things of the Spirit are concerned.

For thus saith the Lord-I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end.

Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory.

And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations.

And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught.

For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will-yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man. (D&C 76:5Â10.)

All who would have salvation must comply with the same ordinances and be obedient to the same principles. It matters not who you are or when you lived. Even in the days of Adam it was said that Âthis same Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world alsoÂ (Moses 6:7). As to the authority and honors of men, we are told that Âeverything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your GodÂ (D&C 132:13). ÂIn other words, every person who is baptized and confirmed should have the spirit of inspiration, and should know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Every person should live in harmony with the revealed truth; and in doing that, and receiving the testimony through the Holy Spirit that Jesus lives and is the Son of God, he or she becomes a prophet or prophetess, and is entitled to the guidance of and inspiration from the Holy Ghost, which is the spirit of prophecy.Â (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 1:185.)

True it is that men alone bear the priesthood or authority to act directly for God. Yet only in the covenant of eternal marriage can either the man or the woman obtain salvation. It is for the man to bear the priesthood but it is for both the man and the woman to honor it. Paul stated the matter perfectly: ÂNeither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the LordÂ (1 Cor. 11:11). Their salvation comes together in their unity and oneness, or it comes not at all. It is only when the power of motherhood, as held only by the woman, and of the priesthood, as held only by the man, are combined that salvation can be obtained.

The priesthood was restored that Âevery man might speak in the name of GodÂ (D&C 1:20). That is, every man is to become a prophet to those of his own household, and every woman is to become a prophetess. Such has ever been the order of heaven. For instance, of Adam and Eve we read that they Âcalled upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto themÂ (Moses 5:4). Only in the union of eternal marriage can man and woman enjoy Âa fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.Â (D&C 132:19Â20.) Thus Joseph Smith explained that: ÂIf we are the children of the Most High, and are called with the same calling with which they [the ancient Saints] were called, and embrace the same covenant that they embraced, and are faithful to the testimony of our Lord as they were, we can approach the Father in the name of Christ as they approached Him, and for ourselves obtain the same promisesÂ (Teachings, p. 66).

Knowledge is not an office, nor are there spiritual privileges that are the exclusive province of certain callings. There is but one gospel, and the sacred privileges that flow from it are appended to covenants, not to positions of prominence. ÂWhat I say unto one I say unto all,Â the Lord said (D&C 61:18, 36; 93:49; compare 25:16). Thus we find Joseph Smith saying, ÂGod hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear themÂ (Teachings, p. 149). ÂIt is the privilege of every Elder,Â the Prophet explained, Âto speak of the things of God; and could we all come together with one heart and one mind in perfect faith the veil might as well be rent today as next week, or any other time, and if we will but cleanse ourselves and covenant before God, to serve Him, it is our privilege to have an assurance that God will protect us at all timesÂ (ibid., p. 9). As to the matter of who can speak by way of prophecy and revelation, the answer is simple and direct: anyone who enjoys the companionship of the Holy Ghost. ÂAnd whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvationÂ (see D&C 68:3Â4).

All Subject to Order

The equality that exists among the citizens in the kingdom of God does not preclude the necessity of discipline and order. All have equal right to importune the heavens, and all have an equal right to answers. As to the organization of the Church, as with all other organizations, a gradation of officers is necessary. Some, for a time and season, are given authority to preside over others. Given that this system of government came by revelation, the principle of revelation complies with it. The Prophet stated the principle thus: ÂIt is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or any one, to receive instruction for those in authority, higher than themselvesÂ (Teachings, p. 21). Or again, ÂIt is also the privilege of any officer in this Church to obtain revelations, so far as relates to his particular calling and duty in the ChurchÂ (ibid., p. 111). All, for instance, can entertain angels, yet Âif any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction; for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdomÂ (ibid., p. 21).

As has been noted earlier in this work, those who hold positions of leadership in the Church do so by common consent. They must receive the vote of confidence of those to whom they give direction. All are sustained only within the bounds of propriety and righteousness. None can stand independent of the principles or standards of the Church. All that is done must respect the agency of each member. It was John Taylor who told us that when the Prophet was asked by a visitor to Nauvoo how he was able to govern such a large group of people, he responded, ÂI teach the people correct principles and they govern themselvesÂ (in Journal of Discourses 10:57Â58). Such is ever the system in the church and kingdom of God.

Conclusion

Given then that the gospel is everlastingly the same, then the fruits that come from it must in like manner be the same in all generations where the gospel is to be found. If the lifeblood of the gospel is revelation in one generation, then it must be so in all generations. If prophets are required to lead the Church in one age, then prophets will be required in all ages. If faith, repentance, and receipt of the Holy Ghost were essential to salvation in the days of Adam, as we learn from the revelations of the Restoration, then they will be necessary in all generations and among all people who have the hope of salvation. As God changes not, so the requirements to come into his presence or to obtain his favor remain the same. Only the constancy and consistency of God give men and women the hope from which that kind of faith that leads to life and salvation comes.

With faith like the ancients, Joseph Smith the Prophet and Seer produced fruits like the ancients and freely shared the seeds of faith with all who would listen. In the exercise of faith, he found answers and invited us to do the same. He saw the difference between men in the realm of spiritual things to be a difference of faith. ÂThis is the reason that the Former-day Saints knew more, and understood more, of heaven and of heavenly things than all others beside,Â he said,

because this information is the effect of faith-to be obtained by no other means. And this is the reason that men, as soon as they lose their faith, run into strifes, contentions, darkness, and difficulties; for the knowledge which tends to life disappears with faith, but returns when faith returns; for when faith comes it brings its train of attendants with it-apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, gifts, wisdom, knowledge, miracles, healings, tongues, interpretation of tongues, etc. All these appear when faith appears on the earth, and disappear when it disappears from the earth; for these are the effects of faith, and always have attended, and always will, attend it. For where faith is, there will the knowledge of God be also, with all things which pertain thereto-revelations, visions, and dreams, as well as every necessary thing, in order that the possessors of faith may be perfected, and obtain salvation; for God must change, otherwise faith will prevail with him. And he who possesses it will, through it, obtain all necessary knowledge and wisdom, until he shall know God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, whom he has sent-whom to know is eternal life. Amen. (Lectures on Faith 7:20.)
