Robert L. Millet, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Joseph Smith: The Choice Seer ( 1996)

Epilogue: Praise to the Man

There is more evidence of the prophetic ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith than for any other prophet, save Jesus only, who ever lived. Paramount among the evidences that could be cited are the doctrines that he taught! A prophet is first and foremost a witness of God. His competence as a witness is predicated on knowledge, that is, the extent to which he unveils the heavens and reveals the mind and will of the Almighty. He is also a revelator and a teacher; he reveals and teaches the principles of salvation. The message is not his own but the FatherÂs who sent him. Yet the prophet must be a pure vessel in order that the message not be soiled. Of that which he taught, Joseph Smith said: ÂThis is good doctrine. It tastes good. I can taste the principles of eternal life, and so can you. They are given to me by the revelations of Jesus Christ; and I know that when I tell you these words of eternal life as they are given to me, you taste them, and I know that you believe them. You say honey is sweet, and so do I. I can also taste the spirit of eternal life. I know it is good; and when I tell you of these things which were given me by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, you are bound to receive them as sweet, and rejoice more and more.Â (Teachings, p. 355.)

It is in those teachings that we rejoice. As we study them and teach them and write about them, we find ourselves rejoicing Âmore and more.Â Their taste is sweet. They are light and truth. They lift the soul and expand the mind. They carry within them, as all truth does, the evidence of their own truthfulness. Separately and collectively they testify that Joseph Smith was a prophet. This book has been divided into three sections, each a witness of the ProphetÂs divine calling. Part I deals with Joseph the Prophet-Teacher. Each of its twelve chapters testifies of his prophetic office. Part II deals with the Prophet as a legal administrator, one holding priesthood keys, powers, and authority. Each of its twelve chapters testifies that he instituted the order of heaven and that he was divinely chosen, prepared by angelic ministers, and endowed with power from on high. Part III deals with Joseph SmithÂs role as a visionary-a seer, one who restores the knowledge of both the past and the future and invites every honest truth seeker to gaze with him on the scenes of eternity. Each of its twelve chapters attests that he saw with anointed eyes and that when the mantle of seer rested upon him, he could speak of past, present, and future as if they were one.

Of all that the Prophet taught we can but say: It tastes good; it lifts the soul and enlightens the mind. President Brigham Young said that when Joseph Smith taught the principles of the gospel, he Âwould unite heaven with earthÂ (in Journal of Discourses 4:54). Yet the ProphetÂs message is but a distant echo from the past with which our hearts reunite as they would with a long-lost friend. The truths he restored come to us like the warmth of the sun after the winterÂs night. They give meaning, bring purpose, and inspire hope, faith, and courage. We know of no other principles that are their equal. Indeed, we know of none that are deserving of a place even in their shadow. It is our hope that all would choose to feast upon them, ÂFor what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift.Â (D&C 88:33.)

As a concluding testimony, let us once again cite twelve doctrinal witnesses-each a principle of light-that testify that Joseph Smith did indeed unite heaven and earth.

Mother Eve stated it thus: ÂWere it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedientÂ (Moses 5:11). Enoch testified: ÂBecause that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death; and we are made partakers of misery and woe. Behold Satan hath come among the children of men, and tempteth them to worship him; and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God.Â (Moses 6:48Â49.) In this fallen state, we are subject to death and decay and sin. All things move toward dissolution. Unaided, we are absolutely incapable and powerless; without divine assistance we will remain unredeemed and unfulfilled. Left to ourselves, we remain lost and fallen, unable to generate enough willpower to change our nature and enough grit to fight against the enticements of the flesh. In the words of Aaron, son of King Mosiah, ÂSince man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sinsÂ (Alma 22:14).

Â That God condescended to father a son in the flesh with a mortal woman in order that this Son might have both the capacity to lay down his life, which he received from his mother, and the power to take it up again, which he received from his divine Father.

Â That the Son condescended to leave the royal courts on high, come to the earth, descend below all things, and suffer Âdeath in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto himÂ (D&C 18:11).

Â That the resurrection is corporeal and that in and through Christ all living things will enjoy an inseparable union of body and spirit. Only in this resurrected state can they receive Âa fulness of joyÂ (D&C 93:33; see also 138:50); without it they would have become the children of perdition (see 2 Ne. 9:9).

Â That in and through the atonement of Christ we may be perfected (see D&C 76:69), become equal with him Âin power, and in might, and in dominionÂ (D&C 76:95), and thus receive the fulness of the Father (see D&C 93:19Â20) and enjoy a continuation of the family unit (see D&C 132:22).

As the man who stands at the head of the dispensation of the fulness of times, Joseph Smith is the preeminent prophetic witness of Christ and the source through which we receive every saving principle and the attendant authority to perform every saving ordinance. To him the Lord said: ÂI have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things, and make known unto you all things in due time. And verily, verily, I say unto you, that whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven.Â (D&C 132:45Â46.)

It was at this time [in Philadelphia in 1839] that I received from [Joseph Smith] the first idea of eternal family organization, and the eternal union of the sexes in those inexpressibly endearing relationships which none but the highly intellectual, the refined and pure in heart, know how to prize, and which are at the very foundation of everything worthy to be called happiness.

Till then I had learned to esteem kindred affections and sympathies as appertaining solely to this transitory state, as something from which the heart must be entirely weaned, in order to be fitted for its heavenly state.

It was Joseph Smith who taught me how to prize the endearing relationships of father and mother, husband and wife; of brother and sister, son and daughter.

It was from him that I learned that the wife of my bosom might be secured to me for time and all eternity; and that the refined sympathies and affections which endeared us to each other emanated from the fountain of divine eternal love. It was from him that I learned that we might cultivate these affections, and grow and increase in the same to all eternity. . . .

I had loved before, but I knew not why. But now I loved-with a pureness-an intensity of elevated, exalted feeling, which would lift my soul from the transitory things of this grovelling sphere and expand it as the ocean. I felt that God was my heavenly Father indeed; that Jesus was my brother, and that the wife of my bosom was an immortal, eternal companion; a kind ministering angel, given to me as a comfort, and a crown of glory for ever and ever. In short, I could now love with the spirit and with the understanding also. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 259Â60.)

Because of Joseph Smith, we have a hope born of the Spirit and strengthened by prophetic declaration that the faithfulness of parents to their temple covenants can secure their children everlastingly. ÂWhen a seal is put upon the father and mother,Â said the Choice Seer, Âit secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and motherÂ (Teachings, p. 321). In the words of Elder Orson F. Whitney:

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared-and he never taught more comforting doctrine-that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return. They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving fatherÂs heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God.

Who are these straying sheep-these wayward sons and daughters? They are children of the Covenant, heirs of the promises, and have received, if baptized, the gift of the Holy Ghost, which makes manifest the things of God. Could all that go for naught? (In Conference Report, April 1929, pp. 110Â11.)

As authors, we share a great love for the Prophet Joseph Smith. We seek to honor his name and his ministry. We desire with all our hearts to be loyal to him. Through him we have come to know our Lord and Savior and to experience the sweet fruits that come only from living the gospel. It was the Lord Jesus himself who told the Prophet that Âthe ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; while the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy handÂ (D&C 122:1Â2). We desire to be numbered always among those who have sought counsel, authority, and blessings from under his hand. We do not desire to be misunderstood. We do not worship Joseph Smith, for our worship is reserved for the Gods of heaven who are the source of salvation. But we gladly sing praises to and express undying gratitude for the preeminent prophetic witness of the one who has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men and women than any man who ever lived (see D&C 135:3).

Ours is the song of praise to the man ordained from eternity past to part the veil and open the heavens, for through him the fulness of truth and the fulness of priesthood powers have come to earth again. We testify that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of the living God. We testify that the Father and the Son appeared to him in the Sacred Grove in the spring of 1820. We testify that angels appeared to instruct him and endow him with power. We testify further that the spirit of Brother Joseph is with the leaders of this Church today. Of this we have no question. President Joseph F. Smith once stated:

I feel quite confident that the eyes of Joseph the Prophet, and of the martyrs of this dispensation, and of Brigham and John and Wilford, and those faithful men who were associated with them in their ministry upon the earth, are carefully guarding the interests of the Kingdom of God in which they labored and for which they strove during their mortal lives. I believe they are as deeply interested in our welfare today, if not with greater capacity, with far more interest, behind the veil, than they were in the flesh. I believe they know more; I believe their minds have expanded beyond their comprehension in mortal life, and their interests are enlarged in the work of the Lord to which they gave their lives and their best service. . . . I have a feeling in my heart that I stand in the presence not only of the Father and of the Son, but in the presence of those whom God commissioned, raised up, and inspired, to lay the foundations of the work in which we are engaged. (In Clark, Messages of the First Presidency 5:6.)

We know that loyalty to Joseph Smith and the Restoration will reap rich rewards for individual members of the Church and will result in miraculous conversions throughout the earth. Parley P. Pratt wrote:

While visiting with brother Joseph in Philadelphia, a very large church was opened for him to preach in, and about three thousand people assembled to hear him. Brother Rigdon spoke first, and dwelt on the Gospel, illustrating his doctrine by the Bible. When he was through, brother Joseph arose like a lion about to roar; and being full of the Holy Ghost, spoke in great power, bearing testimony of the visions he had seen, the ministering of angels which he had enjoyed; and how he had found the plates of the Book of Mormon, and translated them by the gift and power of God. He commenced by saying: ÂIf nobody else had the courage to testify of so glorious a message from Heaven, and of the finding of so glorious a record, he felt to do it in justice to the people, and leave the event with God.Â

The entire congregation were astounded; electrified, as it were, and overwhelmed with the sense of the truth and power by which he spoke, and the wonders which he related. A lasting impression was made; many souls were gathered into the fold. And I bear witness, that he, by his faithful and powerful testimony, cleared his garments of their blood. Multitudes were baptized in Philadelphia and in the regions around; while, at the same time, branches were springing up in Pennsylvania, in Jersey, and in various directions. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 298Â99.)

We choose the words of Elder Pratt to conclude this volume, a tribute that also points toward our duty to build upon the solid and eternal foundation laid by the head of this dispensation.

He has organized the kingdom of God.-We will extend its dominion.

He has restored the fulness of the Gospel.-We will spread it abroad.

He has laid the foundation of Nauvoo.-We will build it up.

He has laid the foundation of the Temple.-We will build up the top-stone with shouting.

He has kindled a fire.-We will fan the flame.

He has kindled up the dawn of a day of glory.-We will bring it to its meridian splendour.

He was a Âlittle one,Â and became a thousand. We are a small one, and will become a strong nation.

In short, he quarried the stone from the mountain; we will cause it to become a great mountain and fill the whole earth. (Millennial Star 5:151Â52.)

That the Lord may bless us all to be loyal to the work set in motion by Joseph Smith, the Choice Seer, and that we will ever be found in harmony with his successors in the presidency of the restored Church-and thus with him whose church this is-is our sincere prayer.

Appendix A: 1832 Recital of the First Vision

This 1832 account was dictated by the Prophet Joseph Smith to Frederick G. Williams between the summer of 1832 and the end of November of that year.1

A History of the life of Joseph Smith Jr. an account of his marvilous experience and of all the mighty acts which he doeth in the name of Jesus[Ch[r]ist the son of the living God of whom he beareth record and also an account of the rise of the church of Christ in the eve of time according as the Lord brough < forth and established by his hand < he receiving the testamony from on high seccondly the ministering of Angels thirdly the reception of the holy Priesthood by the ministring of Aangels to adminster the letter of the Gospel-< and the ordinencs, forthly a confirmation and reception of the high Priesthood after the holy order of the son of the living God power and ordinence from on high to preach the Gospel in the administration and demonstration of the spirit the Kees of the Kingdom of God confered upon him and the continuation of the blessings of God to him &c--- I was born in the town of Charon in the < of Vermont North America on the twenty third day of December AD 1805 of goodly Parents who spared no pains to instructing me in < christian religion at the age of about ten years my Father Joseph Smith Siegnior moved to Palmyra Ontario County in the State of New York and being in indigent circumstances were obliged to labour hard for the support of a large Family having nine children and as it required the exertions of all that were able to render any assistance for the support of the Family therefore we were deprived of the bennifit of an education suffice it to say I was mearly instructid in reading and writing and the ground < of Arithmatic which constuted my whole literary acquirements. At about the age of twelve years my mind become seriously imprest with regard to the all importent concerns for the wellfare of my immortal Soul which led me to searching the scriptures believeing as I was taught, that they contained the word of God thus applying myself to them and my intimate acquaintance with those of different denominations led me to marvel excedingly for I discovered that < instead of adorning their profession by a holy walk and Godly conversation agreeable to what I found contained in that sacred depository this was a grief to my Soul thus from the age of twelve years to fifteen I pondered many things in my heart concerning the sittuation of the world of mankind the contentions and divions the wickeness and abominations and the darkness which pervaded the of the minds of mankind my mind become excedingly distressed for I became convicted of my sins and by searching the scriptures I found that mand < did not come unto the Lord but that they had apostatised from the true and liveing faith and there was no society or denomination that built upon the gospel of Jesus Christ as recorded in the new testament and I felt to mourn for my own sins and for the sins of the world for I learned in the scriptures that God was the same yesterday to day and forever that he was no respecter to persons for he was God for I looked upon the sun the glorious luminary of the earth and also the moon rolling in their magesty through the heavens and also the stars shining in their courses and the earth also upon which I stood and the beast of the field and the fowls of heaven and the fish of the waters and also man walking forth upon the face of the earth in magesty and in the strength of beauty whose power and intiligence in governing the things which are so exceding great and marvilous even in the likeness of him who created him < and when I considered upon these things my heart exclaimed well hath the wise man said the < fool < saith in his heart there is no God my heart exclaimed all all these bear testimony and bespeak an omnipotant and omnipreasant power a being who makith Laws and decreeeth and bindeth all things in their bounds who filleth Eternity who was and is and will be from all Eternity to Eternity and when I considered all these things and that < being Seeketh such to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth therefore I cried unto the Lord for mercy for there was none else to whom I could go and to obtain mercy and the Lord heard my cry in the wilderness and while in < attitude of calling upon the Lord <2 a piller of fire light above the brightness of the sun at noon day come down from above and rested upon me and I was filled with the spirit of god and the < opened the heavens upon me and I saw the Lord and he spake unto me saying Joseph < thy sins are forgiven thee. go thy < walk in my statutes and keep my commandments behold I am the Lord of glory I was crucifyed for the world that all those who believe on my name may have Eternal life < the world lieth in sin and at this time and none doeth good no not one they have turned asside from the gospel and keep not < commandments they draw near to me with their lips while their hearts are far from me and mine anger is kindling against the inhabitants of the earth to visit them acording to thir ungodliness and to bring to pass that which < been spoken by the mouth of the prophets and Apstles behold and lo I come quickly as it written of me in the cloud < in the glory of my Father and my soul was filled with love and for many days I could rejoice with great Joy and the Lord was with me but could find none that would believe the hevnly vision Nevertheless . . . I fell into transgressions and sinned in many things which brought a wound upon my soul and there were many things which transpired that cannot be writen and my Fathers family have suffered many persicutions and afflictions.

Appendix B: 1835 Recital of the First Vision

In 1835 Joseph Smith spoke of his first vision to a man named Matthias. Warren Cowdery recorded this account.

Monday Nov. 9th. . . . While sitting in his house this morning between the hours of ten and eleven, a man came in and introduced himself to him calling himself Joshua, the Jewish Minister, His appearance was something singular, having, a beard about three inches in length which is quite gray. his hair was also long and considerably silvered with age. He had the appearance of a man about 50 or 55 years old. He was tall and straight, slender frame, blue eyes, thin visage, and fair complexion. He wore a green frock coat and pantaloons of the same color. He had on a black fur hat with a narrow brim. When speaking he frequently shuts his eyes and exhibits a kind of scowl upon his countenance. He (Joseph) made some inquiry after his name, but, received no definite answer. The conversation soon turned upon the subject of Religion, and after the subject of this narrative had made some remarks concerning the bible, he commenced giving him a relation of the circumstances, connected with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, which were nearly as follows. Being wrought up in my mind respecting the subject of Religion, and looking at the different systems taught the children of men, I knew not who was right or who was wrong, but considered it of the first importance to me that I should be right, in matters of so much moment,[matter[s] involving eternal consequences. Being thus perplexed in mind I retired to the silent grove and there bowed down before the Lord, under a realizing sense, (if the bible be true) ask and you shall receive, knock and it shall be opened, seek and you shall find, and again, if any man lack wisdom, let [him ask] of God who giveth to all men liberally & upbraideth not. Information was what I most desired at this time, and with a fixed determination to obtain it, I called on the Lord for the first time in the place above stated, or in other words, I made a fruitless attempt to pray My tongue seemed to be swoolen in my mouth, so that I could not utter. I heard a noise behind me like some one walking towards me: I strove again to pray, but could not; the noise of walking seemed to draw nearer; I sprang upon my feet and looked round, but saw no person, or thing that was calculated to produce the noise of walking. I kneeled again, my mouth was opened and my tongue loosed; I called on the Lord in mighty prayer. A pillar of fire appeared above my head; which presently rested down upon me, and filled me with unspeakable joy. A personage appeared in the midst of this pillar of flame, which spread all around and yet nothing consumed. Another personage soon appeared like unto the first: he said unto me thy sins are forgiven thee. He testified also unto me that Jesus Christ is the son of God. I saw many angels in this vision. I was about 14 years old when I received this first communication. . . .

Appendix C: The Wentworth Letter

The Wentworth Letter was written by the Prophet Joseph in response to a request regarding the origins of Mormonism. It was published in the 1 March 1842 issue of the Times and Seasons.

I was born in the town of Sharon Windsor co., Vermont, on the 23 of December, a.d. 1805. When ten years old my parents removed to Palmyra New York, where we resided about four years, and from thence we removed to the town of Manhester.

My father was a farmer and taught me the art of husbandry. When about fourteen years of age I began to reflect upon the importance of being prepared for a future state, and upon enquiring [about] the plan of salvation I found that there was a great clash in religious sentiment; if I went to one society they referred me to one plan, and another to another; each one pointing to his own particular creed as the summum bonum of perfection: considering that all could not be right, and that God could not be the author of so much confusion I determined to investigate the subject more fully, believing that if God had a Church it would not be split up into factions, and that if he taught one society to worship one way, and administer in one set of ordinances, he would not teach another principles which were diametrically opposed. Believing the word of God I had confidence in the declaration of James; ÂIf any man lack wisdom let him ask of God who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not and it shall be given him,Â I retired to a secret place in a grove, and began to call upon the Lord, while fervently engaged in supplication my mind was taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded, and I was enwrapped in a heavenly vision and saw two glorious personages who exactly resembled each other in features, and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon-day. They told me that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as his Church and kingdom. And I was expressly commanded to Âgo not after them,Â at the same time receiving a promise that the fulness of the gospel should at some future time be made known unto me.

On the evening of the 21st of September, a.d. 1823, while I was praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious promises of scripture on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a far purer and more glorious appearance, and brightness burst into the room, indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded. This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God sent to bring the joyful tidings, that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the gospel, in all its fulness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the millennial reign.

I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of his purposes in this glorious dispensation.

I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this country, and shown who they were, and from whence they came; a brief sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments, of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being finally withdrawn from them as a people was made known unto me: I was also told where there was deposited some plates on which were engraven an abridgment of the records of the ancient prophets that had existed on this continent. The angel appeared to me three times the same night and unfolded the same things. After having received many visits from the angels of God unfolding the majesty, and glory of the events that should transpire in the last days, on the morning of the 22 of September a.d. 1827, the angel of the Lord delivered the records into my hands.

These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold, each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings, in Egyptian characters and bound together in a volume, as the leaves of a book with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small, and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument which the ancients called ÂUrim and Thummim,Â which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate.

Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift, and power of God.

In this important and interesting book the history of ancient America is unfolded, from its first settlement by a colony that came from the tower of Babel, at the confusion of languages to the beginning of the fifth century of the Christian era. We are informed by these records that America in ancient times has been inhabited by two distinct races of people. The first were called Jaredites and came directly from the tower of Babel. The second race came directly from the city of Jerusalem, about six hundred years before Christ. They were principally Israelites, of the descendants of Joseph. The Jaredites were destroyed about the time that the Israelites came from Jerusalem, who succeeded them in the inheritance of the country. The principal nation of the second race fell in battle towards the close of the fourth century. The remnant are the Indians that now inhabit this country. This book also tells us that our Savior made his appearance upon this continent after his resurrection, that he planted the gospel here in all its fulness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that they had apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers and evangelists; the same order, the same priesthood, the same ordinances, gifts, powers, and blessing, as was enjoyed on the eastern continent, that the people were cut off in consequence of their transgressions, that the last of their prophets who existed among them was commanded to write an abridgement of their prophesies, history &c., and to hide it up in the earth, and that it should come forth and be united with the bible for the accomplishment of the purposes of God in the last days. For a more particular account I would refer to the Book of Mormon, which can be purchased at Nauvoo, or from any of our traveling elders.

As soon as the news of this discovery was made known, false reports, misrepresentation and slander flew as on the wings of the wind in every direction, the house was frequently beset by mobs, and evil designing persons, several times I was shot at, and very narrowly escaped, and every device was made use of to get the plates away from me, but the power and blessing of God attended me, and several began to believe my testimony.

On the 6th of April, 1830, the ÂChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints,Â was first organized in the town of Manchester, Ontario co., state of New York.1 Some few were called and ordained by the spirit of revelation, and prophesy, and began to preach as the spirit gave them utterance, and though weak, yet were they strengthened by the power of God, and many were brought to repentance, were immersed in the water, and were filled with the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. They saw visions and prophesied, devils were cast out and the sick healed by the laying on of hands. From that time the work rolled forth with astonishing rapidity, and churches were soon formed in the states of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri; in the last named state a considerable settlement was formed in Jackson co.; numbers joined the church and we were increasing rapidly; we made large purchases of land, our farms teemed with plenty, and peace and happiness was enjoyed in our domestic circle and throughout our neighborhood; but as we could not associate with our neighbors who were many of them of the basest of men and had fled from the face of civilized society, to the frontier country to escape the hand of justice, in their midnight revels, their sabbath breaking, horseracing, and gambling, they commenced at first to ridicule, then to persecute, and finally an organized mob assembled and burned our houses, tarred, and feathered, and whipped many of our brethren and finally drove them from their habitations; who houseless, and homeless, contrary to law, justice and humanity, had to wander on the bleak prairies till the children left the tracks of their blood on the prairie, this took place in the month of November, and they had no other covering but the canopy of heaven, in this inclement season of the year; this proceeding was winked at by the government and although we had warrantee deeds for our land, and had violated no law we could obtain no redress.

There were many sick, who were thus inhumanly driven from their houses, and had to endure all this abuse and to seek homes where they could be found. The result was, that a great many of them being deprived of the comforts of life, and the necessary attendances, died; many children were left orphans; wives, widows; and husbands widowers:-Our farms were taken possession of by the mob, many thousands of cattle, sheep, horses, and hogs were taken and our household goods, store goods, and printing press, and type were broken, taken, or otherwise destroyed.

Many of our brethren removed to Clay where they continued until 1836, three years; there was no violence offered but there were threatnings of violence. But in the summer of 1836, these threatnings began to assume a more serious form; from threats, public meetings were called, resolutions were passed, vengeance and destruction were threatened, and affairs again assumed a fearful attitude, Jackson county was a sufficient precedent, and as the authorities in that county did not interfere, they boasted that they would not in this, which on application to the authorities we found to be too true, and after much violence, privation and loss of property we were again driven from our homes.

We next settled in Caldwell, and Davies counties, where we made large and extensive settlements, thinking to free ourselves from the power of oppression, by settling in new counties, with very few inhabitants in them; but here we were not allowed to live in peace, but in 1838 we were again attacked by mobs an exterminating order was issued by Gov. Boggs, and under the sanction of law an organized banditti ranged through the country, robbed us of our cattle, sheep, hogs &c., many of our people were murdered in cold blood, the chastity of our women was violated, and we were forced to sign away our property at the point of the sword, and after enduring every indignity that could be heaped upon us by an inhuman, ungodly band of marauders, from twelve to fifteen thousand souls men, women, and children were driven from their own fire sides, and from lands that they had warrantee deeds of, houseless, friendless, and homeless (in the depth of winter,) to wander as exiles on the earth or to seek an asylum in a more genial clime, and among a less barbarous people.

Many sickened and died, in consequence of the cold, and hardships they had to endure; many wives were left widows, and children orphans, and destitute. It would take more time than is allotted me here to describe the injustice, the wrongs, the murders, the bloodshed, the theft, misery and woe that has been caused by the barbarous, inhuman, and lawless, proceedings of the state of Missouri.

In the situation before alluded to we arrived in the state of Illinois in 1839, where we found a hospitable people and a friendly home; a people who were willing to be governed by the principles of law and humanity. We have commenced to build a city called ÂNauvooÂ in Hancock co., we number from six to eight thousand here besides vast numbers in the county around and in almost every county of the state. We have a city charter granted us and a charter for a legion the troops of which now number 1500. We have also a charter for a university, for an agricultural and manufacturing society, have our own laws and administrators, and possess all the privileges that other free and enlightened citizens enjoy.

Persecution has not stopped the progress of truth, but has only added fuel to the flame, it has spread with increasing rapidity, proud of the cause which they have espoused and conscious of their innocence and of the truth of their system amidst calumny and reproach have the elders of this church gone forth, and planted the gospel in almost every state in the Union; it has penetrated our cities, it has spread over our villages, and has caused thousands of our intelligent, noble, and patriotic citizens to obey its divine mandates, and be governed by its sacred truths. It has also spread into England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales: in the year of 1839 where a few of our missionaries were sent over five thousand joined the standard of truth, there are numbers now joining in every land.

Our missionaries are going forth to different nations, and in Germany, Palestine, New Holland, the East Indies, and other places, the standard of truth has been erected: no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing, persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished and the great Jehovah shall say the work is done.

We believe in God the Eternal Father, and in his son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

We believe that men will be punished for their own sins and not for AdamÂs transgression.

We believe that through the atonement of Christ all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel.

We believe that these ordinances are 1st, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; 2d, Repentance; 3d, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; 4th, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

We believe that a man must be called of God by Âprophesy, and by laying on of handsÂ by those who are in authority to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive church, viz: apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists &c.

We believe in the gift of tongues, prophesy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues &c.

We believe the bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God.

We believe all that God has revealed, all that he does now reveal, and we believe that he will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the kingdom of God.

We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes. That Zion will be built upon this [the American] continent. That Christ will reign personally upon the earth, and that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradasaic glory.

We claim the privilege of worshipping Almighty God according to the dictates of our conscience, and allow all men the same privilege let them worship how, where, or what they may.

We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law.

We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul Âwe believe all things, we hope all things,Â we have endured many things and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is any thing virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praise worthy we seek after these things. Respectfully &c.,

Joseph Smith

--------

Works Cited

Andrus, Hyrum L. and Helen Mae Andrus, comps. They Knew the Prophet. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974.

Backman, Milton V., Jr. Joseph SmithÂs First Vision, 2d ed. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980.

Benson, Ezra Taft. ÂWhat I Hope You Will Teach Your Children About the Temple.Â Ensign 15 (August 1985): 6Â10.

Cannon, George Q. Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1964.

Clark, James R., comp. Messages of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965Â75.

Collier, Fred C., comp. Unpublished Revelations of the Prophets and Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: CollierÂs Publishing Co., 1979.

Conference Reports. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. October 1925; April 1929; April 1930; April 1971; October 1973; April 1976; October 1981; October 1984; October 1985; April 1992.

Cowley, Matthias F. Wilford Woodruff. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964.

Dahl, Larry E. ÂThe Theological Significance of the First Vision.Â In Studies in Scripture: The Pearl of Great Price. Ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson. Salt Lake City: Randall Book Co., 1985.

Ehat, Andrew F. Â ÂIt Seems Like Heaven Began on EarthÂ: Joseph Smith and the Constitution of the Kingdom of God.Â Brigham Young University Studies 20 (spring 1980): 253Â80.

ÂFamily Meeting in Nauvoo.Â Minutes of a meeting of the Richards and Young families, held in Nauvoo, Ill., 8 Jan 1845. Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 11 (July 1920): 104Â17.

Hinckley, Gordon B. Faith, the Essence of True Religion. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989.

Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985.

Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. London: Latter-day Saints Book Depot, 1854Â86.

Journal History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Church Historical Department, Salt Lake City.

Kimball, Spencer W. Faith Precedes the Miracle. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972.

---. The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball. Ed. Edward L. Kimball. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982.

Lee, Harold B. ÂBe Loyal to the Royal Within You.Â In Speeches of the Year: BYU Devotional and Ten-Stake Fireside Addresses 1973. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1974.

---. Stand Ye in Holy Places. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974.

---. The Teachings of Harold B. Lee. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1996.

Lundwall, N. B., comp. The Vision. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.

Maxwell, Neal A. A Wonderful Flood of Light. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990.

McConkie, Bruce R. ÂThe Bible: A Sealed Book.Â Eighth Annual Church Educational System Religious EducatorsÂ Symposium on the New Testament, August 1984.

---. Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965Â73.

---. ÂThe Doctrinal Restoration.Â In The Joseph Smith Translation, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet. Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985.

---. The Lord God of Joseph Smith. Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year. Provo, Utah, 4 January 1972.

---. The Millennial Messiah. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982.

---. Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966.

---. The Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979Â81.

---. ÂA New Commandment: Save Thyself and Thy Kindred.Â Ensign 6 (August 1976): pp. 7Â11

---. A New Witness for the Articles of Faith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985.

---. ÂThe Probationary Test of Mortality.Â Address given at the Salt Lake Institute of Religion, 10 January 1982.

---. The Promised Messiah. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co, 1978.

---. ÂThis Generation Shall Have My Word Through You.Â In Hearken O Ye People. Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1984.

McConkie, Joseph Fielding. Here We Stand. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1995.

---. His Name Shall Be Joseph. Salt Lake City: Hawkes Publishing, 1980.

---. Prophets and Prophecy. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988.

McConkie, Joseph Fielding and Robert L. Millet. The Holy Ghost. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988.

---. Sustaining and Defending the Faith. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985.

McKay, David O. Gospel Ideals. Salt Lake City: The Improvement Era, 1953.

Melvin J. Ballard-Crusader for Righteousness. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966.

Millet, Robert L. An Eye Single to the Glory of God. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991.

---. By Grace Are We Saved. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989.

---. When a Child Wanders. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996.

Millet, Robert L. and Joseph Fielding McConkie. The Life Beyond. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986.

---. Our Destiny: The Call and Election of the House of Israel. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993.

Nelson, Russell M. ÂThanks for the Covenant.Â In 1988Â89 Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year. Provo, Utah: University Publications, 1989.

Nibley, Hugh. The World and the Prophets. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1954.

Packer, Boyd K. The Holy Temple. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980.

Pratt, Orson. Orson PrattÂs Works. Salt Lake City: Parker Pratt Robinson, 1965.

Pratt, Parley P. The Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt. Ed. Parley P. Pratt Jr. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994.

---. Key to the Science of Theology. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978.

Roberts, B. H. A Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930.

---. Defense of the Faith and the Saints, 2 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1907.

---. The Gospel and ManÂs Relationship to Deity. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965.

Romney, Marion G. Learning for the Eternities. Comp. George J. Romney. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977.

Smith, George Albert. The Teachings of George Albert Smith. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1996.

Smith, Joseph. ÂThe Answer.Â Times and Seasons 4 (1February 1843): 82Â85; 5 (1 January 1844): 757Â61.

---. History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. Comp. B. H. Roberts. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978.

---. Lectures on Faith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985.

---. The Papers of Joseph Smith, 2 vols. Ed. Dean C. Jessee. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989.

---. The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith. Comp. Dean C. Jessee. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984.

---. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Sel. Joseph Fielding Smith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976.

---. The Words of Joseph Smith. Comp. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook. Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980.

Smith, Joseph F. Gospel Doctrine , 5th ed. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972.

Smith, Joseph Fielding. Address given at the funeral of Richard L. Evans, 4 November 1971. Typescript, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City.

---. Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols. Comp. Bruce R. McConkie. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954Â56.

---. Man: His Origin and Destiny. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954.

---. The Way to Perfection. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972.

Snow, Lorenzo. ÂTeaching the Gospel in the Spirit World.Â In Collected Discourses, comp. Brian Stuy, 5 vols. Sandy, Utah: B.H.S. Publishing, 1987Â92.

---. The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow. Comp. Clyde J. Williams. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984.

Stuy, Brian, comp. Collected Discourses, 5 vols. Sandy, Utah: B.H.S Publishing, 1987Â92.

Talmage, James E. ÂThe Eternity of Sex.Â Young WomanÂs Journal 25 (October 1914): 600Â604.

Taylor, John. The Gospel Kingdom. Comp. G. Homer Durham. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1987.

---. The Mediation and Atonement. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1882.

---. ÂPatriarchal.Â Times and Seasons 6 (1 June 1845): 920Â27.

Walker, Charles L. Diary of Charles L. Walker, 2 vols. Comp. A. Karl and Catherine Miles Larson. Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1980.

Webster, Noah. The American Dictionary of the English Language. San Francisco: Foundation for American Christian Education, 1828.

Whitmer, John. An Early Latter Day Saint History: The Book of John Whitmer. Ed. F. Mark McKiernan and Roger D. Launius. Independence, Missouri: Herald Publishing House, 1980.

Whitney, Orson F. The Life of Heber C. Kimball, 2d ed. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1945.

Young, Brigham. Discourses of Brigham Young. Comp. John A. Widtsoe. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978.

---. ÂThe Resurrection.Â EldersÂ Journal 1 (July 1904): 152Â55.
