James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

Section 1

Reaching the One

1

The Odyssey to Happiness

Because we are and because we are here on earth, most of us share with all mankind the desire to be happy. Most of us claim this as a God-given right to pursue, for our American founding fathers said that among our inalienable rights is the right to pursue happiness. Early philosophers such as Aristotle, Locke, Aquinas, and Mill declared that the most fundamental of all human searches is for happiness. One thing we must be ever mindful of as we search is the conflict that always exists between feeling happy at a given moment and being happy for a lifetime; or, expressing this concept in another way, always living happily. It will often be necessary for all of us to choose between having a good time and leading a good life.

Aristotle chose to define a happy man as one who wants for nothing. Plato, in this regard, was wiser than Aristotle because he related happiness to spiritual well-being, producing a harmony in the soul. The Savior of the world taught us to seek that inner peace which results from a proper order of all of the soul's parts. In Plato's Republic, Socrates explains: "The just man does not permit several elements within him to interfere with one another. He sets in order his own inner life and is his own master and his own law and is at peace with himself." Tolstoy, speaking through Pierre Bezukhov in War and Peace, stated: "Man is created for happiness; that happiness lies in himself, is the satisfaction of his natural human cravings; that all unhappiness rises not from privation but from superfluity."

A very wise statement on this subject was made by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said, "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God." (History of the Church 5:134-35.)

In the minds of some there is a question as to whether all normal human beings can achieve happiness or whether it can be achieved only by those gifted with very special talents. This questioning comes because the peace about which the Savior spoke, even that peace "which passeth all understanding," seems to have escape so many of his followers. Spinoza said, "All noble things are as difficult as they are rare." Some may feel that before we can learn to live well we must learn how to face death or to live being rid of the fear of death. The rationale of the ancient philosophers seems to have been that happiness is the possession of all good things and the satisfaction of all desires.

Many years spent listening to the tribulations of man have persuaded me that the satisfaction of all desires is completely counterproductive to happiness. Instant and unrestrained gratification is the shortest and most direct route to unhappiness.

In pondering more effective routes to happiness, I am reminded of my own relationship with a great prophet, President Spencer W. Kimball. His radiance and benevolence, and his great capacity for personal relationships, are matchless. No one could ever be in his presence and leave without being permanently complimented and strengthened and sustained. So does not the odyssey to happiness lie in a large measure in our capacity to have and to be a friend?

The elusiveness of the "true peace of soul" spoken of by Spinoza lies in a discontent with things—things we have and things we wish we had. In a time when we are both obsessed and sated with the possession and the acquisition of objects, the counsel of Moses seems more needed than ever: "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, . . . nor any thing that is thy neighbour's." (Exodus 20:17.)

May I share some experiences of some people who have obtained a remarkable felicity in their lives. For well over fifty years our family has been close to little Ella Hoover, a remarkably happy and outgoing woman who is only a little over two feet tall. While still an infant, she was playfully thrown in the air by someone who failed to catch her properly, so that she fell to the ground and suffered injuries that resulted in permanent deformity of her back, her arms, and her legs. Despite these crippling physical deformities, she matured, went to school, and attended Brigham Young University for a time. Because of the sweetness of her spirit, her great personal charm, her fine intelligence, and her happy disposition, she won the love of and married a completely normal, full-sized man. Through a miracle as great as any miracle that ever happened, she was able to conceive and carry and bear a normal child, whom they named Billy after his father. One day, before Billy was three, the Bill Hoover family were riding in their car in west Salt Lake County when a tire went flat. The father pulled the car over to the side of the road and got out to check the wheels. In the process a driver, drunk with wine, came along and struck the Hoover car and killed Bill instantly.

Somehow this young widow, who never walked a step in her life without pain and without a crutch, raised this son to be an exemplary man. He in turn married and in time became a father in his own right and raised up four grandchildren, to the great joy and delight of little Ella Hoover. This remarkable woman, despite all these obstacles, difficulties, and heartaches, is and has ever been an extremely faithful, well-adjusted, noble woman. Now in her seventies, she blesses the lives of all who meet and know her because she gives so very much of one commodity—herself. Hers has been an odyssey of faith without bitterness, in which she has found great happiness through tears and pain and sorrow.

Some time ago I had the blessing of meeting Patriarch James R. Boone and his wife Ruth in Jacksonville, Florida. Their odyssey to happiness has come through their faithfulness to the redeeming principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and in being the parents of thirteen children. Brother and Sister Boone's happiness was not complete with only thirteen children, so they adopted another one, Sammy, making the total fourteen. In their Christmas letter that year they said of Sammy, "He is very special, this boy." I was at a conference meeting when Sister Boone was released as president of the stake Relief Society after having served faithfully and well for twelve years. In this family, all of the children served as full-time missionaries and nine of the boys earned Eagle Scout awards, which may be a national record. Brother and Sister Boone have had great joy and rejoicing in their posterity.

We are indebted to Dr. Homer Ellsworth for sharing with us two contrasting stories about the happiness of mothers. Often, expectant mothers are so set upon having a boy child or a girl child that when the baby comes with a different sex the mother is temporarily disappointed. Generally this disappointment is forgotten as soon as the mother cuddles her newborn in her arms for the first time. A few new mothers demonstrate their immaturity for a day or two. One who wanted a boy baby and happened to receive a girl baby threw tantrums and objects all over her hospital room for a day or two to show her displeasure. One wise old nurse, when feeding time came, took from the nursery a boy baby born with a hairlip and quietly slipped him into the disconsolate mother's arms. The immature mother replied, "This is not my child."

The wise old nurse said, "Well, it has the right sex. Maybe its mother will be willing to trade babies with you."

There were no more demonstrations of immaturity.

In contrast, some years ago there was born to a young mother a special child. This child was born without eyes. It was normal in all other respects except there was nothing to resemble eyes or sockets above the nose. This wise mother might in bitterness have said, "Why did this have to happen to my child?" or "Why did this have to happen to me?" Instead she said, "The Lord must really love us and have confidence in us. We must really be favored to have been given this child. To think the Lord picked out our home, knowing how much special love and care this child would need, is very humbling and comforting. We are grateful for this special child and for the blessings it will bring to our home."

The fox in the story The Little Prince was wiser than he knew when he said, "Now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye." The odyssey to happiness lies in the dimension of the heart. Such a journey is made on stepping-stones of selflessness, wisdom, contentment, and faith. The enemies of progress and fulfillment are self-doubt, a poor self-image, self-pity, bitterness, and despair. By substituting simple faith and humility for these enemies, we can move rapidly in our journey to true felicity.

Nephi tells us that we must "come down in the depths of humility. . . . The things of the wise and the prudent shall be hid . . . forever—yea, that happiness which is prepared for the saints" (2 Nephi 9:42-43), which to me is the answer to Spinoza. The Lord, speaking through King Benjamin, reminds us, "I would desire that ye should consider on the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God. For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal and spiritual; and if they hold out faithful to the end they are received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness." (Mosiah 2:41.)

As one travels around this land and observes the many cultural and recreational activities as advertised on theater marquees, in newspapers, and on television screens, one turns to the meaningful statement of Alma: "They have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness." (Alma 41:11.)

There is much talk these days about the rights of consumers to enjoy products free from defects. The problem is that there are too many of us trying to consume happiness rather than generate it. Happiness is not unlike an atomic energy breeder reactor. Deliver to the breeder reactor the energy of three truckloads of coal, and it will return energy equivalent to four or maybe five truckloads of coal. Shakespeare expressed a philosophy in As You Like It that seems commendable: "I am a true laborer: I earn that I eat, get that I wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness, glad of other men's good."

The relationship of money to happiness is at best questionable. Even the Wall Street Journal acknowledged, "Money is an article which may be used as a universal passport to everywhere except heaven, and as a universal provider of everything except happiness." Henrik Ibsen wrote, "Money may buy the husk of many things, but not the kernel. It brings you food, medicine, but not health; servants, but not faithfulness; many things, but not but not the appetite; acquaintances, but not friends; days of joy, but not peace or happiness."

The blind Helen Keller reminded us, "Your success and happiness lie in you. External conditions are accidents of life. The great enduring realities are love and service. Joy is the holy fire that keeps our purpose warm and our intelligence aglow. Resolve to keep happy and your joy and you will form an invincible host against difficulty."

The odyssey to happiness seems to depend almost entirely upon the degree of righteousness to which we attain in terms of the degree of selflessness we acquire, the amount of service we render, and the inner peace we enjoy. It also hangs, to some degree, on those loved ones and friends on whose smile and welfare our happiness so much depends. There are also a host of others, unknown to us personally, within and without the Church to whose destinies we are bound by ties of common interest and sympathy.

President Kimball said in The Miracle of Forgiveness: "'What is the price of happiness?' One might be surprised at the simplicity of the answer. The treasure house of happiness is unlocked to those who live the gospel of Jesus Christ in its purity and simplicity. Like a mariner without stars, like a traveler without a compass, is the person who moves along through life without a plan. The assurance of supreme happiness, the certainty of a successful life here and of exaltation and eternal life hereafter, comes to those who plan to live their lives in complete harmony with the gospel of Jesus Christ—and then consistently follow the course they have set." (Bookcraft, 1969, p. 259.)

I commend to you the first verse of Psalm 127: "Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain."

Now some who have detoured from the road to peace and happiness have done so through transgression. With all my heart I urge you to immediately see your bishop and clear up any problem, that you may again enjoy a quiet and a peaceful conscience.

May I suggest even a further distillation or refinement of the elusive and endless quest of being able to live happily every hour, every day of every month, and every year of our lives: The golden pathway that is the most certain and direct route to that happiness which would enrich and bless your life and the lives of others who cross your pathway is your ability to love. It is selfless giving of love, the kind of love that has concern and interest and some measure of charity for every living soul. It will require that you show love even for your enemies and seek to give a benediction to them that curse you. "Do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you." (Matthew 5:44.) In so doing you will enjoy the love of God himself and be able to soar above the ill winds that blow, above the sordid, above the self-defeating and the bitter. You have the promise that "your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." (D&C 88:67.)
