James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

2

Strengthening the Inner Self

Paul's wish for the Ephesians was that the Lord would grant unto them "to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man." (Ephesians 3:16.) The basic program of the Church, therefore, is to strengthen the inner person—to change lives—to have everyone feel the security, the love, and the warm embrace of the gospel, in accordance with the two great principles taught by the divine Redeemer: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. . . .

Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:37, 39.)

We seek to build inner moral strength and character in the members of the Church in complete harmony with the statement of President Heber J. Grant, in the early days of the welfare program: "The primary purpose is to establish independence, industry, thrift and self respect . . . thus rescuing all that is finest down deep inside of them and bring to flower and fruitage, the latent richness of the spirit, which, after all, is the mission, purpose and reason for the being of the Church." In order to build this inner strength, there might be some reordering of priorities in planning and activities by those involved in the programs of the Church. We will accomplish the Lord's business better if our guiding stars are revealed principles rather than specified activities.

As we plan to reach, involve, and serve the one, the principles to be kept before us on a panoramic screen in heroic size are the commandments of the Savior to all of his children in the two great injunctions, namely, of loving and serving God, and loving and serving our fellowman. The planning must begin to relate to the spiritual needs of the members, including opportunities for the members to be involved in meaningful service and by their choice in appropriate cultural, educational, recreational, and social activities as approved by priesthood leaders. It must constantly be borne in mind that the success of a given activity cannot always be judged by its size; rather, it must be judged by the effect on the lives of those participating. There must be a clear understanding that principles are more important than programs, and people are more important than organizations. We are trying to teach principles and guidelines more than programs as we seek to strengthen the inner person with the Spirit of God. Our effectiveness can be judged best by the way that inner strength is translated into action. What our religion really is can best be judged by our lives. Thomas Carlyle reminds us that "conviction is worthless unless it is converted into conduct."

To be strengthened by God, by his Spirit, President Harold B. Lee counseled: Membership "must mean more than just being a 'card carrying' member of the church with a tithing receipt, a membership card, a temple recommend, etc. It means to overcome the tendencies to criticize, and to strive continually to improve inward weaknesses and not merely the outward appearances." (Church Section, Deseret News, May 25, 1974, p. 2.)

It is well recognized that many of the adult singles of the Church may not have all the blessings that they desire at this time. They are, however, on equal footing with all the Saints in terms of their ability to keep the two great commandments and to be abundantly blessed and strengthened thereby. The quality of their spirituality and devotion to the Master can be as fulfilling for them as for anyone. The quality of their goodness to others can likewise be as meaningful and rewarding as can the service of anyone. Certainly spiritual understanding and testimony are available to all who earnestly seek them. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has said: "And because God is no respecter of persons, everyone in the Church who will get on his knees and ask the Lord for guidance and direction will receive identically that same knowledge, that same assurance, and that same understanding." (BYU Speeches of the Year, January 8, 1974, p. 27.)

The strengthening of the inner self must come about by the Saints' being strengthened spiritually. The admonition to the Galatians was: "For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." (Galatians 6:8.)

Problems will yield to a spiritual solution, for the higher laws involve the spiritual; the Lord said: "All things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal." (D&C 29:34.) But invoking these higher laws and then putting them into operation does not involve the claiming of higher rights; rather it requires the performance of higher duties.

Often we feel that we need help beyond our own natural gifts and abilities in finding our way in a complex, challenging, difficult world. Alma makes clear the source of his understanding of many matters: "They are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God." (Alma 5:46.)

Many in this world now walk in the streets and in the byways in fear of their lives, but if they have an inner strength and security there is no need for concern. The Savior said: "And fear not them which will kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul." (Matthew 10:28.)

The healing that we all so often need is the healing of our souls and spirits, which can come through a transfusion of the spiritual into our lives. This healing process was described by President Lee, who said: "The greatest miracles I see today are not necessarily the healing of sick bodies, but the greatest miracles I see are the healing of sick souls, those who are sick in soul and spirit and are downhearted and distraught, on the verge of nervous breakdowns. We are reaching out to all such, because they are precious in the sight of the Lord, and we want no one to feel that they are forgotten." (Ensign, July 1973, p. 123.)

If we are to further strengthen the inner person, the inner self must be purged and cleansed of transgression. Companionship with evil causes our whole being to die spiritually. The spiritual tap in our lives will not turn on until all transgressions involving moral turpitude are purged. I refer not only to sexual transgressions, but also to all forms of wrongdoing, including lying, cheating, stealing, and consciously or recklessly inflicting injury upon others.

An important part of the spiritual being of all of us is the quiet and sacred part from which we may feel a sanctification in our lives. It is that part of us wherein no other soul intrudes. It is that part of us that permits us to come close to the divine, both in and out of this world. This portion of our beings is reserved only for ourselves and our Creator; we open the portals thereof when we pray. It is here that we retreat and meditate. It is possible for the Holy Ghost to abide in this special part of us. It is a place of special communion. It is the master cell of our spiritual battery. But this great energizer becomes dead when transgression creeps with stealth into our lives. The Romans were reminded: "For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace." (Romans 8:6.)

As we undertake to strengthen the inner soul, we move beyond concern for things that we can hold and possess. A wise man said: "The wealth of a soul is measured by how much it can feel; its poverty, by how little." (William Rounseville Alger.)

The inner self is all that continues. A thoughtful author reminds us: "Everything here, but the soul of man, is a passing shadow. The only enduring substance is within." (William Ellery Channing.)

We are comforted by the knowledge that those who strengthen their inner selves shall see the face of God. "It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.) Edna St. Vincent Millay reminds us: "The soul can split the sky in two / And let the face of God shine through."

For the inner self to be strengthened, a great humility must come into the inner being. Gideon said of himself: "My family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house." (Judges 6:15.) The Old Testament says: "Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth." (Numbers 12:3.)

As we seek for inner strength, may I express my respect, appreciation, and gratitude for the example of the First Presidency and other General Authorities and a host of other good men and women of this church throughout the whole world who stand so steadfastly against the ill winds that blow the forces of insecurity, doubt, and destruction all about us. They, through the Spirit of God, recognize the falsity of the dulcet voices and the siren songs of deceit among us that advocate instant gratification with no lasting relationships in life, and little responsibility for wrongdoing. With steadfast hands and holy hearts, these stalwart souls stand as trumpeters upon the watchtowers of righteousness, hope, and inner peace.

The oppressive fog that beclouds the tortuous lanes and passages of our lives will disappear in the spiritual sunlight that comes only from God. This spiritual sunlight will not shine unless we diligently and humbly seek to enjoy his Spirit—for, "Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind." (D&C 64:34.)

The Spirit of the Lord can ever be with us in the overheated ovens of life into which we may be cast, so that those who behold us will always see us with a holy companion, like Nebuchadnezzar looking into the fiery furnace. "Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? . . . Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God." (Daniel 3:24-25.)

May there be found in our thoughts and actions the manifestation of an inward, spiritual peace and strength. May we have an absolute faith that all things are possible to God, and hold in our remembrance that through our obedience all things may be known to us by his Holy Spirit. "He that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." (Galatians 6:8.) And in sowing to the spirit, may we be strengthened in our inner selves with might by his Spirit. For spirituality is like sunlight: it passes into the unclean and is not tainted. May our lives be such, that the spiritual within us may ascend up through the common, the sordid, the evil, and sanctify our souls.
