James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

3

Build More Stately Mansions

Am I important? I hear some say, "I am not important because I do not have money or riches." I hear others say, "I am not important anymore because I am getting old." In the company that I keep, there are a lot of young spirits with gray hair. Brother Joseph Anderson swam many laps in the Deseret Gymnasium swimming pool at the age of eighty-eight. Elder LeGrand Richards is a young spirit in an older body.

I like the words of Oliver Wendell Holmes's "The Chambered Nautilus":

Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul, As the swift seasons roll! Leave thy low-vaulted past! Let each new temple, nobler than the last, Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast, Till thou at length art free, Leaving thine outworn shell by life's unresting sea!

And Zoroaster reminds us: "Nobody grows old merely by living a number of years. People grow old by deserting their ideals. Years wrinkle the skin, but giving up enthusiasm wrinkles the soul. Worry, doubt, self distrust, fear, and despair—these are the long years that bow the head and turn the growing spirit back to dust. You are as young as your faith and as old as your doubts; as young as your self-confidence, as old as your fear; as young as your hope, as old as your despair."

I hear some people say, "I am not important because I am not famous." Some years ago I was assigned by the Brethren to attend a stake conference in one of the most remote areas of Idaho. The stake president is a cattle rancher on a ranch high in the mountains. In this family was a mother who had had thirteen children and had had thirteen natural miscarriages. We arrived at their home after our evening meeting. It was not luxurious, but comfortable and warm from the heat of a wood stove. I was given a bed on the front porch and a curtain was hung up on safety pins to give me some privacy. In the morning I got up and went to breakfast. A little boy, who has a different kind of a spirit, came in, and the stake president said, "This is Johnny." A few minutes later we heard somebody sawing on the front door. The stake president, without raising his voice, simply said, "Johnny, come in." He came in and the evidence was in his hand—the saw. Apparently this was not an unusual occurrence. Then came little Mary. Mary had a hairlip. And they brought a little baby in, maybe six months old. This great woman was rearing this family.

That morning we called on her in stake conference. She said, "We heard about Mary and nobody wanted her. We need a new truck, but when we saw her, we knew we needed her more than we needed the new truck. And then we heard about Johnny, who kind of listens to a different voice. I needed a new range in the kitchen, but when we met Johnny we knew we needed him more than we needed a new range in the kitchen. And I wanted a new love seat, but then we heard about the baby, and we knew we needed the baby more than the love seat."

Then she went on to say, "The other evening I finished my work about midnight. My husband and all my children were asleep, and I was tired. I should have gone to bed, but I sat down in the rocker and thought about my childhood dreams. When I was a young girl I wanted to be rich and famous. And then I thought about all of my children asleep and about my husband and how hard he has to work to be a good father to all of these children and a good spiritual father to all of the people in the stake. And I thought about how his calling as a stake president doesn't take away from the family—it adds to it."

She concluded, "I realized that I married the finest man in all the world. And as I counted my children, I realized then that I wouldn't trade places with my childhood dreams of being rich and famous."

So the great lesson: Building more stately mansions means going the extra mile, doing a little bit more, having a little bit more faith, a little bit more energy—and all of us can change from stand-ins to stars.

I hear people say, "I am not important because I didn't graduate from college." I am reminded myself that those who blessed my life most did not graduate from college. Those who are to be the saints of God may do so without being college graduates. In Mosiah we read the greatest definition of what a saint ought to be. It doesn't say one word about graduating from college. "For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)

To whom am I most important? First of all, to myself. President Harold B. Lee taught us that our first obligation is to ourselves, because one can't give strength to another if he has no strength himself.

Elder Marvin J. Ashton taught the mission presidents in South America that after we meet our first obligation, our obligation becomes to be a good son or daughter, or, if we are parents, to become good parents. Then we must be faithful members of the Church, and finally, good citizens.

But overarching and overgirding all else is the obligation to be true to ourselves, because if we are true to ourselves, we will be good sons and daughters, and brothers and sisters, and parents, and friends, and faithful members of the Church, and good citizens.

How can we build more stately mansions? By developing an inner peace. This concept is demonstrated beautifully in the life of Anwar Sadat, president of Egypt. He spent eighteen months of his life in prison as a political prisoner, eight of them in Cell 54. In a Time magazine article titled "Reflections from Cell 54," he described those eight months as "the happiest period of my life." Let us learn why:

"Two places in this world make it possible for a man to escape from himself—a battlefield and a prison cell. In Cell 54 I could only be my own companion day and night. And it was only natural that I should come to know the 'self' of mine. I had never had such a chance before, pre-occupied as I had been with work in the army and politics and hurried along by the constant stream of daily life. Now in the complete solitude of Cell 54, when I had no links at all with the outside world, not even a newspaper or wireless, the only way in which I could break my loneliness was, paradoxically, to seek the companionship of that inner entity called 'self.' It was not easy. There were areas of suffering which kept that self in the dark, shadows which troubled my mind and accentuated the difficulty of self-confrontation. Nothing is more important than self-knowledge. Once I had come to know what I wanted and got rid of what I didn't, I was reconciled to myself to learn to live in peace. To return to my village became a lovely dream, and to work in any field simply charming. The future, both foreseeable and unforeseeable, was a joy to contemplate."

A final key to building more stately mansions involves engaging in daily communication with the Savior—not just knowing about the Savior, but coming to know him, and to receive the promises in the scriptures of feeling his presence and seeing his face.

Each one of us has an obligation to testify about three things: first, of Jesus as the Christ; second, of the divine mission of Jesus; and third, of the divinity of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Let us keep close to our priesthood leaders and to ourselves. Let us move out of the basements of our lives, and build more stately mansions.
