James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

8

Reaching the Single Person

Most single adult Latter-day Saints are well-adjusted to life and its problems, but they still need loving attention from the Church and its members to reaffirm their usefulness and the love that God has for each of them. They are not problem people, but sometimes they have problems, often not of their own making. A choice friend reminds us, "If you don't have any problems, just wait awhile."

It is deeply moving and sobering to hear a common strain running through the expressions of many single adults. Loneliness and discouragement are, for some, their most constant companions. One great soul who has a good bishop, good home teachers, a good position, and comfortable circumstances said, "I don't need more to do, I just need someone to do it with." This becomes a matter of great concern when we consider that approximately one-third of the adults in the United States are single.

The proper and rightful focus of the Church on the home and the family should not cause the single member who has no companion and family to feel left out.

The Lord has, in times past, directed his people to the one. Such was the case with Ananias, who was sent to the street called Straight to restore the sight of Saul of Tarsus, stricken blind at the time of his conversion. Ananias responded by reminding the Lord of how much evil Saul had done. But the Lord said, "Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me." (Acts 9:10-15.) Paul states that Ananias "came unto me, . . . and said unto me, Brother Saul." (Acts 22:13.)

Somehow, we must reach the one—every single one, for they are "chosen vessels" unto the Lord.

Speaking to the single members, President Harold B. Lee said, "In your ranks are some of the noblest members of the Church—faithful, valiant, striving to live the Lord's commandments, to help build up the Kingdom on earth and to serve your fellowmen."

As we undertake to reach the one, we should remember the counsel of the Lord to Samuel, who was sent to the house of Jesse to find the one who should reign over Israel. The Lord said, "Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature . . . for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart." (1 Samuel 16:7.)

There are limitless opportunities and possibilities for the adult single members. The vision can be summed up in the statement made by the Prophet Joseph Smith when he was asked how he governed his people: "I teach them correct principles, and they govern themselves."

I bear solemn witness to the divinity of this great and marvelous work and to the continuing inspiration that has come from the Lord through his chosen prophets. These great men teach us that somehow, some way, we must reach the one, every single one, for all are "chosen vessels" unto the Lord. President Harold B. Lee's message to the single members is sublime: "To you, the words of the Master have a special meaning: 'He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it.' " (Matthew 10:39.)
