James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

10

The Church Family

As we think about involving all of the adult singles in the Church in some meaningful phase of Church activity, we are reminded that we are concerned with about one-third of the adult population of the Church. Among those who do not have companions in their homes, we can include members of the General Authorities, Regional Representatives, and more than six hundred thousand others. The numbers seem to be growing. In the United States, one-third of the adult male population is single. Forty percent of the adult women are single or separated.

I do not attempt to understand all of the complex reasons why the number of adult singles is increasing. I know that one reason is because of increased divorce, but this is only part of the cause. It is a sociological fact that the percentage of people in the United States who have never been married has doubled since 1960. I feel that this has come about in a large measure because in the "new morality" there are many who do not wish to take upon themselves the obligations and burdens of marriage or to make lasting commitments. In contrast to the situation in the world, where many more are choosing to remain single, it must be recognized that most of the faithful adult singles of the Church readily accept the principle of marriage, fatherhood, and motherhood, even though their personal circumstances have been such as to not have this blessing realized. We must recognize the importance of making the divorced as well as those who have never married feel that they have a place in the Church.

In the more than two decades that I practiced law, I observed at close range that divorce is a personal tragedy for all concerned. It should be avoided at almost any cost. It is a tragedy of greatest proportion for all the parties involved. It would appear that neither of the parties is ever fully separated from the pain or the disappointment. Because of this tragedy and immense suffering, the Church must continue to speak out against the evils of divorce and to continue to urge our people to be responsible and mature in marriage—honest, chaste, and fully committed to the loyalties of that relationship and the vows they have taken to each other. In my experience, I do not recall a single person who was fully prepared to handle the problems of divorce. It produces feelings of guilt and inadequacy and, too often, extreme bitterness. Those who go through this tragedy are terribly alone.

One outstanding friend who shared her feelings with us reminded that there are no handbooks for divorced people. Having recently gone through a divorce, she said, "It has been my experience that I got good advice from my priesthood leaders, but the regular run-of-the-mill advice was very poor. My family had resentment and bitterness. They would hear out my outpourings and then they would say, 'do this, or do that.' The reason why most of the advice given divorced people is not good is because it has the wrong motivation. It is generally motivated by the desire to punish or get even or destroy, rather than the simple Christian duty of being helpful."

Our choice friend further states, "Often divorced people have a feeling that they want to shut the Church out and to resolve the problem with other methods of personal achievements. We had wonderful neighbors. When we separated, nobody wanted to come and visit us. It was as if we had a contagious disease and they might catch it. They never came by. Most of our friends were like that. They just didn't know what to do. I think people feel guilty because they are glad it is not them. They don't understand. People also think they must make a judgment. And they think that if they accept you, they must also accept the divorce."

As members of the Church of Jesus Christ, I would hope that we would be sufficiently mature to separate the people in the wreck from the wrecked car, particularly the children, who are innocent victims. They need home teachers who can see problems and then offer to help solve them. They need Relief Society presidents. They need bishops who are concerned.

It is extremely important that we keep single parents and their families in the mainstream of the Church and include them by activity and attitude, because they certainly do not want a separate, special existence for themselves or their children. Theirs is a most lonely and painful circumstance. Priesthood leaders should not try to make all decisions for troubled people; rather, they should assist them in making their own decisions.

One of our finest stake presidents is frank to admit that earlier in his life all he needed was some gentle encouragement from those who loved him to make him take the marriage step. The Lord is certainly not going to make a personal appearance and point out the one we should marry. They should also be told that perhaps all the bells in the world won't start ringing or all the sirens blowing when we find our eternal companion. They need to know that anxiety and concern are common feelings of those taking this great step, but that here, as in all other phases of human endeavor, we walk by faith. Concerns are quite natural in view of the transcending importance of the eternal step.

President Spencer W. Kimball recently said: "As we encourage marriage, we are not urging frantic, thoughtless marriages. Every boy reaching maturity should make proper marriage basic and major in his life. He need not choose between marriage and education. The very extra effort of finishing his education as a married man with increased financial responsibilities is likely to increase his power."

We must recognize that some may not have companions according to their own timetable. To these President Kimball has said: "I am aware of some . . . who seemingly have not been successful in total fulfillment. Some have been on missions; they have completed their education. And yet they have passed the period of their greatest opportunity for marriage. The time has passed, and while attractive and desirable and efficient, they find themselves alone.

"To the large group of young women in this category, we can only say, you are making a great contribution to the world as you serve your families and the Church and world. You must remember that the Lord loves you and the Church loves you. . . . We have no control over the heartbeats or the affections of men, but pray that you may find fulfillment. And in the meantime, we promise you that insofar as eternity is concerned, no soul will be deprived of rich and high and eternal blessings for anything which that person could not help, that the Lord never fails in his promises, and that every righteous person will receive eventually all to which the person is entitled and which he or she has not forfeited through any fault of his or her own." (Ensign, October 1979, p. 5.)

May the Lord bless each single adult in the Church—each one who has never married, or who has been widowed, or who has been divorced—to find joy and happiness in serving him and keeping his commandments. Rich promises are in store for those who remain valiant in this life, even though they may not have the family situation or circumstances they might wish. I bear my testimony that God is a just God, and he remembers each individual member of his Church who loves and serves him.
