James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

13

The Importance of the Women in Our Lives

There is no greater good in all the world than motherhood. The Church depends upon our beloved sisters to teach their husbands, their children, and their grandchildren. How important and necessary they are to the work of the Lord!

A colleague once stated, "Whatever there is good about Brother Faust is because of his mother and his wife." I acknowledge this to be true, for I have been blessed with the greatest mother and the most wonderful wife in all the world. In addition, my wife's special mother has influenced me greatly. My loving, tender grandmothers have blessed me with their love. I am also grateful beyond words for the influence in my life of my sweet daughters and daughters-in-law and granddaughters. So, I gratefully acknowledge that if I have done anything good in this world, it is because of the teachings and the influence of these great women in my life. I have been well taught by the teachings and example of the special women in my life. They have been perfect in their example for me.

Perhaps the greatest lesson that I have learned from these great women in my family has been in their complete love of others. I believe that a good woman has a direct connection with our Heavenly Father because of her capacity to love.

While my mother has been dead for a few years now, as are my wife's mother and my loving grandmothers, their influence is with me almost every minute. Even though we are now separated, I am still influenced by their teachings. I miss them. I miss their influence. I miss their daily guidance. I learned how deeply grandmothers can love when I was a very small boy. One of the girls my age in the neighborhood had a birthday party and invited all the other boys and girls except me. She probably did not invite me because of something I did that did not please her. I cannot remember what it was that offended her, but my grandmother felt so sorry for me that she took me on the streetcar down to the ice cream store and bought me all the ice cream I wished to eat. Many years later when I had long forgotten the incident, I was made a bishop in the Church. My grandmother was proud and pleased. She remembered the incident of the birthday party many years before and said, "Son, I am proud of you. I am sure all of your friends would like to have you at their birthday parties." I then realized that this little incident had hurt her far more deeply than it had hurt me, because shortly after it happened, I forgot completely about it. Although I was far from it, to my grandmothers my brothers and I were perfect. It is a wonderful feeling to know that to someone you are perfect.

Let me tell you something of my mother. Her favorite book in all the world was the Book of Mormon. She had great faith and spirituality. She was never impressed by worldly things. She never had a maid. She never bought expensive clothes. I do not recall that she ever felt that she had enough money to go to the beauty shop. Like Gideon, "I am the least in my father's house." (Judges 6:15.) But my mother did 8have five sons—and all five went on missions, all five were married in the temple, and four of the five today are high priests.

Just a few weeks before I was born, my mother went to the temple in Manti, Utah. After the hard journey, she did not feel well, and so she asked the temple president for a blessing. In the blessing, the temple president told Mother that the child she was carrying was a boy, and that he would be a comfort to her all her life. I hope and pray that I have been a comfort to her.

She never spoke ill of any person, and so if I follow her example, I cannot speak ill of any person either. She always taught us to sustain our bishop and our stake president and the General Authorities. She said that if we did not sustain our leaders, we were not sustaining our God, because they are the representatives of the Lord. She also taught us that when we criticize the leaders of the Church, we are on the road to apostasy. I have tried to follow my mother's teachings in this regard.

She also taught her sons to be honest and truthful, so if I follow the example and teachings of my mother, I must strive to be honest and truthful. She went to the temple frequently, so I learned from her example that going to the temple was important. She always encouraged me to honor my priesthood.

Let me tell you what a great woman my wife's mother was. I feel that she was almost as great a woman as my own mother. I am most grateful to my mother-in-law, because no woman had a greater influence on or was closer to my wife than she. I am grateful to her for all the excellent teachings she gave to my wife, and which have been passed down to my children.

When Ruth and I wanted to be married, I went to my mother-in-law and told her we were in love and wanted to be married. I had just returned from my mission to Brazil and was about to be drafted into the army during World War II. I had no money, and all I would be earning would be a soldier's pay. My education was not complete, and I had very little to offer my wife. In honesty I explained this to Ruth's mother. Ruth's sister was married to our stake president, William S. Erekson. President Erekson is a very great man. When I explained how little I had to offer her daughter, Ruth's mother replied, "I think as much of you as I do of Will Erekson, my other son-in-law."

You cannot imagine what that simple expression of confidence has meant to me in my life. For her to raise my image in some measure of equality with President Erekson was unbelievable to me. I still do not understand how she could have had that much confidence in me. It made me want to try harder to be a good husband, be faithful to my marriage covenants, be faithful in keeping the commandments. That confidence has been a great blessing in my life. I hold my mother-in-law in almost the same high regard and love as I do my own mother.

Now let me tell you about the most important woman in my life. She is my Ruth. No person has had a greater influence on me than she has. I have been closer to her in love and spirit than any other person in my life. I cannot love anyone as I love her. She has never failed me. She has been encouraging and supportive to me in my family life, in my professional life, and in my many callings in the Church. It has not been easy for her, because during most of our married life I have held some kind of calling in the Church. Therefore, the rearing of our children fell upon her shoulders because I was attending to my priesthood callings. I gratefully acknowledge her as the most precious person in my life.

I wish to acknowledge the importance of the influence of the organizations in the Church where women have great responsibilities. My father's home and my own home have been more spiritual and happy because of the influence of the Relief Society. While I was growing up, my mother was working in the Primary, where she served for some twenty-three years. The high and lofty teachings of my Primary teachers have been a special blessing, as have the teachings I received in Sunday School.

Now, my wonderful sisters, if you wish to be truly happy, respond to your natural feelings of love, kindness, and service. Be obedient to the priesthood. Accept the calls that come from your leaders. Those of you who are married should always place your responsibilities as a wife and mother ahead of all others. Some of our sisters do not yet have a companion. These are some of the most choice spirits who have ever come to earth. There is much for them to do. They can render service to their families, friends, and others. They will find joy in helping other women's children. If they keep the commandments and are faithful, no blessing will be denied them.

God bless the great women of the Church. May their influence for good grow and expand from generation to generation. We salute mothers as God's noblest creation.
