James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

16

"Who Shall Ascend into the Hill of the Lord?"

In the twenty-fourth Psalm is the query, "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?" (Psalm 24:3.) As we enter the magnificent temples of God, we find the beauty and sanctity of his holy place.

The temple building, magnificent and appropriate as it is in every way, inspires, but the building alone does not bless. The endowed blessings and divine functions, involving much that is not of this world, come through obedience and faithfulness to priesthood authority and covenants made.

As we feel and see the awesome beauty of each temple, we see in vision and hold in our remembrance the endless blessings that will come to so many through its being.

In our great joy we should not forget faithful leaders and Saints on continents the world over who have no hallowed sanctuary in which to receive the sanctifying and cleansing power of the Holy Ghost. They are members of stake presidencies, patriarchs, high councilors, bishoprics, and other priesthood leaders, and a host of faithful Saints, never endowed, who desire above all else to be sealed to their beloved parents, companions, and children. We have the blessing and the responsibility of helping them receive the same blessings we enjoy. Future temples will in a measure be a sanctification of our devotion and labors to build the kingdom of God in our time.

Well might we pause and reflect, in the magnificence and splendor of our modern temples, upon the laborers without shirts and shoes who built the Nauvoo and Kirtland temples. Each temple that stands today is a vindication of Joseph and Hyrum and all of our people who suffered the destruction, the beatings, and the murders at the hands of the cruel tyrants in the mobs who drove our people west.

There is triumph for little Sardius Smith, a lad of about nine years who, at the Haun's Mill massacre, crawled under the bellows in the blacksmith shop to seek safety and, when discovered, was shot dead. There is triumph for Bishop Edward Partridge, who was seized in his home and dragged to the town square by brutal and heartless men who proceeded to pour hot tar over his body and sprinkle it with feathers.

In the temples of the Lord, we learn obedience. We learn sacrifice. We make the vows of chastity and have our lives consecrated to holy purposes. It is possible for us to be purged and purified and to have our sins washed away, so that we may come before the Lord as clean, white, and spotless as the newfallen snow.

"Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord?" We can see in vision the almost endless hosts of the elect, the devout, the believing who shall come to God's holy sanctuary to seek its blessings. As they enter those hallowed halls, Nephi would remind all that "the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." (2 Nephi 9:41.)

As they come into the sacrosanct washing and anointing rooms and are washed, they will be spiritually cleansed. As they are anointed, they will be renewed and regenerated in soul and spirit.

We can see in vision the countless couples in their youth and beauty coming to be married. We see clearly the unspeakable joy on their countenances as they are sealed together, and as there is sealed upon them, through their faithfulness, the blessing of the holy resurrection with power to come forth in the morning of the first resurrection, clothed with glory, immortality, and eternal lives. We can see unnumbered families surrounding the altar, all clothed in white, with bowed heads and clasped hands, as they are sealed one to another, as though they were born in the new and everlasting covenant. We can see the army of angelic young children with the mirth and eagerness of youth, coming with awe and wonder to the house of the Lord to be baptized for the dead.

We see the vision of the heavenly hosts unnumbered, whose eternal odysseys have been suspended as they wait for their vicarious work to be done, including the purification of baptism, the hallowed blessings of the endowment, and the exalting beatitude of sealings. We can see families dancing, shouting, and crying with joy in their being united in another world.

We are grateful for the presence of the sealing power that binds and loosens in heaven that which is bound and loosed here on earth. We render thanks for and veneration to our great and humble prophet who holds these keys.

"Who shall stand in his holy place?" May there be extended a helping hand to those who have had trouble in faith or will, resulting in transgression, and who, having repented, have a special need for the redemptive portion of the endowment. May they know that their sins will no more be remembered.

As we recall the commandment to stand in holy places, we should remember that beyond the temple, the most sacred and holy places in all the world should be our own dwelling places. Our homes should be committed and dedicated only to holy purposes. In our homes all of the security, the strengthening love, and the sympathetic understanding that we all so desperately need should be found.

"Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully." (Psalm 24:3-4.) For "holiness becometh thine house, O Lord, for ever." (Psalm 93:5.)
