James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

Section 3

Reaching for Strength

17

The Blessings of Adversity

For several years of my life, I lived in countries where most of the people are far below the poverty level in the United States. Most recently, our family made our home in Sao Paulo, Brazil. During much of that time one of our neighbors was constructing a new home. The carpenters, tile setters, plumbers, and cabinet workers on that house received far below the minimum wage. In fact, some of them lived in a shack on the site. There was cold running water available from the end of a hose, but no warm or hot water. The working day of the men was from 6:00 A.M. till 5:30 P.M. This meant that by five in the morning they were up preparing their meals and getting ready for work. My college-age daughter, Lisa, could not help complaining that she was awakened almost every morning by their clarion-voiced singing. They sang, laughed, and chattered, only occasionally unpleasantly, the whole day through. When I explained to her how little money they made and how little they had, she made an interesting observation: "But Dad, they seem so happy." And happy they were. Not one owned an automobile, nor even a bicycle, nor anything much except the clothes on their backs, but they found life pleasant and fulfilling. We were reminded again how little some people need to make them happy.

Many years ago, when I was practicing law, I organized a company for one of the new car dealers in my area. I served as his legal counsel and a corporate officer for many years, and one of my sons has taken over my responsibilities as legal counsel. Recently we were both at his place of business. I noticed the rows and rows of beautiful, shiny, gleaming, expensive new cars. Out of concern I mentioned to the proprietor that if he didn't get the cars sold, financing charges would be exorbitant and eat up the profits. My son said, "Dad, don't look at it that way. Look at all the profit these cars will bring."

While I think he was more right than I, it suddenly came to my mind that my son had never been through a depression. We looked at the problem through different eyes because I am a child of the Depression. I cannot forget what a merciless taskmaster debt is.

For some years we lived near a very skilled mechanic. He and his wife resolved never to go in debt. This resolution was born of a bitter memory. When they were newly married and had their small family, the Depression came along, and, as skilled as he was, he could not find a job. Their home mortgage was foreclosed and they lived through the Depression in a chicken coop, which was made reasonably comfortable because of his mechanical skills.

Now we have a generation many of whom perhaps have not fully known nor appreciated the refining blessings of adversity. Many have never been hungry because of want. Yet I am persuaded that there can be a necessary refining process in adversity that increases our understanding, enhances our sensitivity, makes us more Christlike. Lord Byron said, "Adversity is the first path to truth." The life of the Savior and the lives of his prophets clearly and simply teach how necessary adversity is to achieve a measure of greatness.

Edmund Burke defined the role of adversity well when he said: "Adversity is a severe instructor, set over us by one who knows us better than we do ourselves, as he loves us better too. He that wrestles with us strengthens our nerves and sharpens our skill. Our antagonist is our helper. This conflict with difficulty makes us acquainted with our object, and compels us to consider it in all its relations. It will not suffer us to be superficial."

Many of the Saints are having a difficult time making ends meet; indeed, it may be very painful. From their standpoint it would be unkind to say that this experience may be good for them and may be remembered in more affluent times warmly and even with some fondness. One of my more successful cousins went through law school using much candlelight because he and his bride couldn't afford electricity to light the rooms.

The present general counsel of General Motors is a black man. Without question he holds one of the most lucrative and prestigious positions for a lawyer in all of the world. As a boy he was poor; he was required to obtain his education through efforts that were heroic and under circumstances that were difficult in the extreme. He was required to work one and even two menial, dirty jobs regularly, and if I am not mistaken, occasionally three. He was asked if he felt uncomfortable among the highest-paid executives in the world. His answer was no. He said that most of them had been poor boys, like him, who had worked their way up being tested, challenged, threatened, and discouraged. Adversity is the refiner's fire that bends iron but tempers steel.

It would appear that the shortage of energy will change our life-styles. The president of Texaco, John McKinley, some time ago explained that in the United States and even in the world there are abundant sources of energy. But it will all have to be harnessed and will be much more expensive because of the capital it takes to convert it into useable forms. This means that we will not be able in the future to be so profligate and wasteful with energy. This may not be such a terrible thought; indeed, the quality of life may improve. It may mean that to be happy we will have to learn to rely less upon physical comforts and upon satisfying our whims, trying instead to draw upon our inner strengths and resources. It will likely mean that we will find our entertainment and pleasure in simpler things, things that do not cost money and that are closer to home. It may help us to find ourselves and like ourselves better, to be more at peace with our surroundings, and to appreciate more our fellowman. We will become less sated with the material and the mechanical, and learn to cultivate a taste for bread and milk.

President David O. McKay said: "Today there are those who have met disaster, which almost seems defeat, who have become somewhat soured in their natures; but if they stop to think, even the adversity which has come to them may prove a means of spiritual uplift. Adversity itself may lead toward and not away from God and spiritual enlightenment; and privation may prove a source of strength if we can but keep the sweetness of mind and spirit." (Treasures of Life, Deseret Book, 1962, pp. 107-8.)

May I suggest a few things we might do to prepare ourselves for a time when we are less affluent and possibly happier:

In life we all have our Gethsemanes. A Gethsemane is a necessary experience. A Gethsemane is a growth experience. A Gethsemane is a time to draw near to God. A Gethsemane is a time of deep anguish and suffering. The Gethsemane of the Savior was without question the greatest suffering that has ever come to mankind, yet out of it came the greatest good in the promise of eternal life. One of the lessons learned by the Savior in his Gethsemane was declared by Paul to the Hebrews: "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him; Called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec." (Hebrews 5:8-10.)

The image of the Savior to many from a public relations standpoint was described by Isaiah: "He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not." (Isaiah 53:3.)

Perhaps in all literature, sacred or profane, there is nothing more eloquent than sections 121, 122, and 123 of the Doctrine and Covenants, received and written by Joseph Smith the Prophet while in the Liberty Jail in the spring of 1839:

"O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries? Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them?" (D&C 121:1-3.)

Then comes the promised relief: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes. Thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hall thee again with warm hearts and friendly hands. Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job." (D&C 121:7-10.)

Out of these circumstances also came this great promise: "God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, that has not been revealed since the world was until now." (D&C 121:26.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith was warned: "The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; While the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand. And thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors." (D&C 122:1-3.)

Why is adversity often such a good schoolmaster? Is it because it teaches so many things? Through difficult circumstances we are often forced to learn discipline and how to work. In often unpleasant circumstances we may also be subjected to a buffeting, a honing, and a polishing that can come no other way.

Most of the General Authorities are familiar with adversity; they have not been and are not exempt. May I illustrate by referring to three, selected only because of their great familiarity with difficulty.

Early in life, President Spencer W. Kimball learned the necessity of work. He had many painful experiences in his early years preparatory to his great ministry. As a young boy he nearly drowned. He suffered from Bell's palsy. His mother died when he was a youth, and while he was still a young man he lost his beloved sister Ruth. Shortly after marriage he contracted smallpox, and Sister Kimball counted over one hundred pustules on his face.

He learned early about financial reverses and lost some investments. Like Job, he suffered from boils, which continued for many years and on one occasion came on his nose and lips. On one occasion he suffered from twenty-four boils at one time; not long thereafter he began to suffer the excruciating pain of heart attacks, which continued for many years and finally resulted in open-heart surgery. He became bothered by a hoarseness of his voice, which was relieved through a blessing from the Brethren, only to return later along with the boils. A serious cancer in the vocal cords required surgery, and thereafter voice training and cobalt treatments. The Bell's palsy returned and skin cancers were removed.

The result of this refiner's fire was to be manifest in a refined spirit, sensitivity, an understanding heart, kindness, and humility that is unparalleled. President Kimball can be described in the words the Lord spoke concerning Job: "Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast to his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause." (Job 2:3.)

I have always been intensely interested in the background of President Nathan Eldon Tanner. Some years ago I heard him recall his humble and difficult beginnings. Speaking of his parents, he said, "When they arrived in Southern Alberta, Father had no money, and he had to sell his team in order to finance. But the thing I have always been pleased about was that Father never thought of calling on the government. He went and worked for his neighbor, and he broke horses so they would have horses to use. He lived in a dugout on a homestead where I lived the first part of my life. He often said, 'I bet ten dollars against a quarter section of land of the Dominion Government that I could make a go of it. I nearly succeeded.' He also said, 'You know, when I came to this country, I didn't have a rag to my back. Now I am all rags.' We lived after that in a little hamlet. I don't suppose this would be of interest to you, but in that little hamlet we didn't even have a telephone. We didn't have a daily paper; we didn't have a weekly paper—regularly. We had no running water, hot or cold water. So you can imagine other things we didn't have and some things we did have! We had no central heating, you can be sure of that. In fact, I often wondered if we had any heating in the house." ("My Experiences and Observations," BYU Speeches of the Year, May 17, 1966.)

From these difficult beginnings came the giant we know as Nathan Eldon Tanner. He was Speaker of the Alberta Legislature, Minister of Mines and Lands for the Province of Alberta, president of the Trans-Canadian Pipeline, branch president, bishop, stake president, Assistant to the Council of Twelve, apostle, and counselor to four presidents of the Church.

I share with you an incident or two from the early life of President Marion G. Romney, best told in his own words:

I'm a Mexican by birth. I was born in Colonia Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico. My parents happened to be down there at the time. I was raised there until I was about fifteen years old. During the last two or three of those years, the Madero Revolution was in progress. The rebels and the federalists were chasing each other through the country; each taking everything we colonists had, by way of arms and ammunition and by way of supplies. Finally we were forced to leave. I came out of Mexico with the Mormon refugees in 1912.

I remember I had a very thrilling experience on the way from where we lived to the railroad station about eight miles south of Colonia Juarez. We went in a wagon. . . . I was riding with my mother and her seven children and my uncle (her brother) and his family of about five or six children. . . . We had one trunk—that was all we were able to bring. I was seated on the trunk in the back of the wagon. . . . The Mexican rebel army was coming up the valley from the railroad station towards our town. They were not in formation. They were riding their saddle horses. Their guns were in the scabbards. Two of them stopped us and searched us. They said they were looking for guns. We didn't have any guns or ammunition. They did find $20 on my uncle—pesos, not dollars. . . . They took that and then waved us on. They went up the road about as far as from here to the back of this room, stopped, turned around, drew their guns from their scabbards, and pointed them down the road at me. As I looked up the barrels of those guns, they looked like cannons to me. They didn't pull their triggers, however, as evidenced by the fact that I am here to tell the story. That was a very thrilling experience! One of my maturing experiences.

The rebels blew up the railroad track after the train we were on passed over it. Later, Father and the rest of the men came out to El Paso, Texas, on horseback. We never returned nor did we recover any of our property while my father lived.

Father and I went to work to earn a living for his large family. There were no welfare programs then. We had a difficult time making a living. We had to "rout hog" or die. (Devotional, Salt Lake Institute of Religion, October 18, 1974.)

I had the opportunity to see how well President Romney handles a trowel as he laid the cornerstone for the Sao Paulo Temple.

After he was married and his family was started, President Romney worked full-time at the post office in order to provide for his family while he went through law school. In those difficult conditions his marks were so high and his scholarship so excellent that he was later admitted to the Order of the Coif, which admits only the most distinguished scholars. He practiced law and became a bishop, a stake president, one of the first Assistants to the Twelve, a member of the Council of the Twelve, and a member of the First Presidency. He demonstrated his great love and compassion for people through his many years of guidance in the welfare program of the Church.

Indeed, the difficult and adverse experiences of these three brethren could be repeated in the lives of many other leaders in the Church. I mention only the members of the First Presidency because their familiarity with adversities seems more than ample.

Thomas Payne wrote: "I love the man who can smile in trouble, who can gather strength in distress and grow brave by reaction. 'Tis the business of little minds to shrink, but he whose heart is firm, and whose conscience approves his conduct, will pursue his principles to the death."

Let us not presume that because the way is at times difficult and challenging, our Heavenly Father is not mindful of us. He is rubbing off the rough edges and sensitizing us for our great responsibilities ahead. May his blessings be upon us spiritually, that we may have a sweet companionship with the Holy Ghost, and that our footsteps might be guided along the paths of truth and righteousness. And may each of us follow the Lord's comforting counsel: "Be patient in afflictions, for thou shalt have many; but endure them, for, lo, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days." (D&C 24:8.)
