James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

19

Be Not Afraid

When I was a boy, I used to love to walk in the fields and in the meadows. It was very enjoyable to swim in the creeks and in the ponds. My father taught me to hunt and to fish. I enjoyed the great outdoors, mostly because it gave me a chance to be with loved ones and to admire the creations of God.

One summer our family went on an outing near Wanship, Utah. We camped in canvas tents among the trees that grew along the banks of the beautiful river that flowed down the valley from Kamas. A group of our parents' friends and their families went with us and pitched their tents close to ours.

My young friends and I spent happy, carefree hours just going through the meadows or hunting varmints, which were considered pests because they ate the tender feed the livestock men needed to have their sheep graze upon. We were hunting with 22-caliber rifles.

In the afternoon of one of these pleasant days, I was accidentally shot in the leg above the knee at close range. When the bullet passed through my leg, it felt like a hot poker was going through the flesh. Afterwards my leg became numb. Soon I felt the warm blood running down my leg from the hole where the bullet passed through it. I was helped the few hundred yards to where our tents were. I went into the tent alone and called my father in to show him what had happened. He and the other men administered first aid to control the bleeding, then helped me into our family car for the ride to Coalville, Utah, where the nearest doctor was.

We found the doctor and he took us to his office, which was upstairs in one of the buildings on the town's main street. After laying me on the operating table and examining the wound carefully, the doctor decided that he must first sterilize the hole in my leg through which the bullet had passed.

When I saw how he was going to sterilize, I was afraid of two things: I was afraid of the pain and I was also afraid that I would cry. I didn't want to cry, because I wanted my father to think I was no longer a child. In my heart, I said a silent prayer that Heavenly Father would help me so that no matter how badly it hurt, I wouldn't cry.

The doctor took a rod like the rods men use to run through their gun barrels in order to clean them. On the end of the rod was a hole through which a small piece of gauze was threaded and dipped into a sterilizing solution. The doctor then took the rod and pushed it into my leg. When it came out on the other side, he changed the gauze, put fresh antiseptic on it, and pulled it back through the hole, pushing it back and forth three times. It hurt quite a bit, especially when he got near the bone, but my father held my hand and I gritted my teeth and shut my eyes and tried to hold still.

Heavenly Father had heard my silent prayer, and I found out that it did not seem to hurt as much as I thought it would, because I didn't cry.

The wound healed quickly and completely. In three weeks I was back riding my horse again. I was never bothered again by this leg, even when I participated in sports in high school and college.

As problems and difficulties have come in my life since, I have tried to face them as best I could, relying more on the help of our Heavenly Father than the comfort from tears, because I learned the lesson that the pains of life's problems don't seem to be so great if we don't cry.

Many other experiences in my life have reinforced this lesson learned as a youth. As children of our Heavenly Father, we must learn to be happy, to trust in him, and not be afraid. Remember, the Lord has said, "The very hairs of your head are all numbered" unto the Father. "Fear ye not therefore." (Matthew 10:30-31.) He knows us, he loves us, and he knows our needs. He will comfort us if we will only trust in him and his goodness and wisdom.

Some years ago, we were traveling on a boat to an island in the state of Washington. As we walked around the boat, I looked down into the engine room and saw something quite remarkable. Everything in and about that engine room was spotless and shiny. There was no dirt or oil anywhere. I said to the engineer, who was in his work clothes, "My friend, your engine room is remarkably clean. Does this make the engine run better?" He replied, "This is my pride." Each of us should look upon our personal cleanliness in our thoughts, in our habits, and in our lives as being our pride.

True, there are disappointments in life. We all have problems. Problems and challenges are also opportunities. The Lord can determine how strong we are by how we handle these difficulties in our lives.

There are many things that we cannot change. We should be willing to accept our lot and play our part. We all have sadness and sorrow, and into every life some rain must fall. This makes us appreciate the sunshine.

Elder Hugh B. Brown of the Council of the Twelve told us a marvelous story about a currant bush. He lived on a farm. On this farm there were plants and trees and shrubbery, animals—many things, but there was one currant bush near the gate that had gone to wood. Elder Brown's father had taught him how to prune a tree so that it would bear fruit, and when Elder Brown looked at the currant bush he knew that it would never bear fruit because it had all gone to wood, so he got out his pruning hooks and began to trim and cut it back until there was nothing left but a few stumps. He said, "And I looked at these little stumps and saw what seemed to be a tear on each of them and being of a simple-minded nature, I started talking to that currant bush. I have a way of doing that—of talking to inanimate things and imagining their answer, and I said out loud: What are you crying about, little currant bush? And you know, I thought I heard that currant bush answer. It seemed to say to me, 'How could you do this to me? I was making such wonderful growth. I was almost as large as the fruit trees and the shade trees on either side here, and now you have cut me down, until I will have only the sympathy of all of the garden. How could you do it? I thought you were the gardener here.' That's what I thought I heard the currant bush say. It seemed so real that I answered it and I talked out loud to the currant bush and I said: Look, little currant bush, I am the gardener here and I know what I want you to be. I did not intend you to be a fruit tree, or a shade tree. I wanted you to be a currant bush, and that's the reason I have cut you down and hurt you, and some day, little currant bush, when you are laden with fruit, you are going to say, 'Thank you, Mr. Gardener, for loving me enough to hurt me, for cutting me down.' "

Ten years later Elder Brown was in the Canadian Army in World War I. He was being considered for promotion to the office of general. When he went in for his interview with the commanding general, he was told that another man would be appointed general. Elder Brown looked at the bottom of his personal history sheet and there were these words: "This man is a Mormon." Then Elder Brown understood why he would not become a general, but it did not soften the blow. He felt that he was a failure. When he arrived back at camp, he was so bitter that he went into his tent and clenched his fist and shook it at heaven and said, "God, how could you do it? How could you be so cruel?" Then, he said, "I was bitter and I heard a voice and it sounded like my own voice, and the voice said, 'I am the gardener here. I know what I want you to be. If I let you go the way you want to go, you will never amount to anything and some day when you are laden with fruit you are going to say, 'Thank you, Mr. Gardener, for cutting me down, for loving me enough to hurt me.' I heard this voice," said Elder Brown, "and recognized my voice speaking to the currant bush and it had become God's voice speaking to me, and I fell on my knees for I realized that he loved me enough to hurt me."

When I was a young man, President James H. Moyle, who was then a very old man, lived in our ward. Many times he told us of how when he graduated from law school in the eastern part of the United States, he went to see David Whitmer, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon, who was then eighty years of age. He said, "Sir, I am a young man. I am beginning my life's work and you are finishing yours. I have studied about witnesses and about testimony. I plead with you to tell me the truth—not permit me to go through life believing a falsehood. You are one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon. You said that an angel of God came down from heaven and showed you the golden plates. You further testified that the voice of the Lord commanded you to bear record of it. Now, I wish you to tell me by your own lips if that is true." You will remember that David Whitmer had left the Church by then, but he said, "Young man, what I testified to with respect to my testimony about the angel from God, the golden plates, and the voice of the Lord was true and I cannot deny it."

May we remember always to put our faith in God and live worthy for him to direct us and guide us. The Savior counseled, "Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid." (Matthew 14:27.) We are each entitled to receive personal inspiration to guide us and direct us. May we so live that our hearts are open at all times to the whisperings and comfort of the Spirit.
