James E. Faust, To Reach Even unto You ( 1990)

23

Stand Up and Be Counted

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints now has a worldwide identity. It stands for many things, including integrity, honesty, and high moral purpose. As an institution it stands for something different from the standards and morals of the day.

We as individual members of the Church also have an identity of our own. Each of us stands for something: either strong or not strong, either good or not so good. We must come to recognize the desirability and importance of every member standing up and being counted fully, completely, and openly for what the Church should represent in our lives.

In the book of Revelation there is a strong warning to the fence sitters: "I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth." (Revelation 3:15-16.)

In the fateful war year of 1942 I was inducted into the United States Air Force as a private. One cold night at Chanute Field, Illinois, I was given all-night guard duty. As I walked around my post shivering, and at the same time trying to stay awake, I meditated and pondered the whole miserable long night through. By morning I had come to some firm conclusions. I was engaged to be married and knew that I could not support a wife on a private's pay of fifty dollars per month. I felt I needed to become an officer. A day or two following my all-night vigil I filed my application for officers' school. Shortly thereafter, on the appointed day, I was summoned along with some others before the board of inquiry looking into my qualifications and aptitude. My qualifications were sparse, but I had had two years of college and had finished a mission for the Church in South America. I was twenty-two years of age and in good physical health. Possessing only these few qualifications, I was grateful to be able to put on my application that I had been a missionary for the Church.

The questions asked of me at the officers' board of inquiry took a very surprising turn. Practically none of the questions concerned my fitness as a soldier or the art of soldiering. Practically all of the questions turned upon my missionary service and my beliefs. "Do you smoke?" "Do you drink?" "What do you think of others who smoke and drink?" I had no trouble answering these questions. "Do you pray?" "Do you believe that an officer should pray?" The officer propounding the question was a hard-bitten career soldier. He did not look as if he had prayed very often. I pondered. Would I give him offense if I answered how I truly believed? Should I give a noncontroversial answer and simply say that prayer is a private matter? I wanted to be an officer very much so that I would not have to do all night guard duty and K.P., but mostly so my sweetheart and I could afford to be married.

I decided not to equivocate, so I responded that I did pray, and that I felt that officers might seek divine guidance as some truly great generals had done. I added that officers at appropriate times should be prepared to lead their men in all appropriate activities, if the occasion required, including prayer.

More interesting questions came from my examiners. "In times of war should not the moral code be relaxed?" one high-ranking officer asked. "Does not the stress of battle justify men in doing things that they would not do when at home with their families under normal situations?" he asked. Here was a chance to equivocate, to make some points and be really broad-minded. I knew perfectly well that the men who were asking me this question did not live by the standards that I tried to live by, had been taught, and myself had taught. I thought to myself, "Here go my chances to become an officer." The thought flashed in my mind that perhaps I could still be faithful to my beliefs, but that I might respond by saying that I had my own beliefs on the subject of morality but did not wish to impose my views on others. There seemed to flash in my mind the faces of the many people to whom I had taught the law of chastity as a missionary. I knew perfectly well what the scriptures say about fornication and adultery. I could not delay my answer any longer, so I responded to the question about the double standard of morality simply by saying, "I do not believe there is a double standard of morality."

A few more questions were asked, testing, I think, whether or not I was trying to live and behave as we of our faith represent to the world. I left the hearing resigned to the fact that these hard-bitten officers who had asked these questions concerning our beliefs would not like the answers I had given, and that surely they would score me very low. A few days later when the scores were posted, to my complete surprise and astonishment the score opposite my name read "95%." I was amazed. I was in the first group taken for officers' school, and I was to be promoted to corporal in order to get into the school. I graduated, became a second lieutenant, married my sweetheart, and we have lived happily ever after.

This was one of the most critical crossroads of my life, one of many times when I have had to stand up, search my soul, and be identified. Not all of the experiences in my life when I have had to Stand Up and be Counted be counted have turned out the way that I have wanted them to, but standing regardless of the consequences has always strengthened my faith and helped me adjust to those occasions when the results were different.

From that and many other experiences I learned that even though others do not share our beliefs—may, in fact, be hostile to them—they will respect us if we are willing to Stand Up and be Counted be counted.

There are those who are bystanders. They come to a certain persuasion in their hearts and minds, but for social, family, economic, or political fears they cannot hold the ring of truth. Festus accused Paul of having so much learning that "much learning doth make thee mad." Paul's response was, "For the king knoweth of these things, before whom also I speak freely: for I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from him; for this thing was not done in a corner. King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest. Then Agrippa said unto Paul [some of the saddest words in all recorded sacred history], Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian." (Acts 26:24-28.)

Almost. What a heartbreaking sound the word almost has. Almost some of our good members keep the Word of Wisdom; almost some go to priesthood meeting and sacrament meeting; almost some hold family home evening. Some of us almost, but not quite, pay our tithing.

Since the time of the Savior, there have been those who have believed, but who for social pressures have been fearful of standing up and being counted as believers. John speaks of the chief rulers who were afraid of the social stigma: "Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue: For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God." (John 12:42-43.)

Said Paul to the Corinthians, "Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord." (1 Corinthians 15:58.)

Some time ago Sister Faust and I were privileged to hear the testimony of Sister Fay Richardson, wife of Bishop Richard Richardson of the Nottingham England Stake. Sister Richardson said, "I learned not to be passive about my testimony quite a long time ago in a schoolroom during a religious knowledge lesson. I was fourteen years old, and after asking us all our religions, the teacher sprung a question on us, 'How many of you know God lives?' I felt myself go hot and my face turn red, and I thought, 'Oh no—time to stand and be counted.' I instinctively knew that no one else would raise their hand for they were far too sophisticated to believe in God, but I slowly raised mine. Then, feeling rather embarrassed and aware that all eyes were upon me, I said, 'Well, I suppose so.' How I wished I hadn't said that! I had added doubt to what could have been a firm testimony. In the years that followed I often dreamed of being able to stand boldly in front of that same class and bear firm testimony of the living God. I wished over and over again that I could relive the experience and be able to tell them just how much I loved my Heavenly Father. Fortunately, I learned from the experience, and I never since have said, 'I suppose so,' where the gospel is concerned."

Sister Richardson continued: "Some time ago the film Mormons, Fact and Fantasy was being shown in one of the rooms at the public library in Nottingham. My husband was going there straight from work, and I decided that I ought to be there too, so I caught the bus and went with our three children. About a half hour before the film was due to be shown, someone's voice rang out, 'Could we have volunteers to go out into the street and invite people in and hand out leaflets?' I thought, 'Yes, that's what I should be doing. That's what I've come for.' Then something inside me said, 'You don't really want to, do you? You're afraid of talking to all those strangers.' I thought, 'That's right, I am!' So I just stood there with a battle going on within me, and then I looked down. Three upturned faces were looking into mine. They belonged to the three little people who are very important to me. I thought, 'What kind of a mother would I be if I didn't show our children my faith by my works?' We have spent a lot of time teaching our children the gospel, and I knew that I could ruin much of that teaching if I didn't practice what I preached. I knew what I had to do. We took some leaflets. Our eldest little girl put on a sandwich board advertising the film, and we went down into the street below. I didn't know if any of the people we invited actually came to see the film, but I was happy that we were doing our part, and that I had the opportunity of showing our little ones that sharing the gospel is not just something we talk about occasionally in family home evening."

One of the ways that the Saints Stand Up and be Counted are counted is in the payment of their tithes and offerings. In so doing, they are blessed. They learn to manage and budget their affairs. They become better stewards of the balance of their means. They increase in faith.

One of the biggest surprises of my life came when I was a young bishop and first had access to the tithing rolls of my ward. It was the ward in which I had grown up. Many of the people had been my teachers; all were my friends. I had been taught by them; they were my heroes. I loved them and felt loved by them in turn. But it was a terrible shock to see many who stood on fast day and affirmed a strong and abiding faith in God and in his holy work upon the face of the earth, and then to find that when it came to paying tithing their faith faltered. Many of us backslide, many stumble, and I believe firmly in the gospel of the second chance. But the gospel of the second chance means that having once been found weak, as was Peter when he denied that he knew the Savior, thereafter we become steadfast like the few Lamanites spoken of in 3 Nephi: "They were firm, and steadfast, and immovable, willing with all diligence to keep the commandments of the Lord." (3 Nephi 6:14.)
