For the information of the members of the Church, the First Presidency has issued the following statistical report concerning the growth and status of the Church as of December 31, 1977:

Number of stakes of Zion

Number of full-time missions

Number of independent branches in stakes

Number of mission branches

These statistics reflect an increase of 541 wards and branches during 1977.

Number of countries with organized wards or branches

Total membership reported by stakes, missions, and Church offices at the close of 1977

At the current rate of growth since the end of the year, it is estimated that the Church membership is now in excess of four million.

Children of record baptized

Birthrate per thousand

Number of persons married per thousand

Death rate per thousand

This represents an increase of 45,000 priesthood bearers during 1977.

Full-time Missionaries

Persons assisted with cash or commodities

Persons assisted by LDS Social Services

Persons placed in gainful employment

Man-days of labor donated to Welfare Services

Commodities distributed from storehouses (in pounds)

Names cleared in 1977 for temple ordinances

The Genealogical Department is acquiring records in 36 countries and has a total of 949,000 one-hundred-foot rolls of microfilm, equivalent to 4,517,000 volumes of 300 pages each.

Number of endowments performed during 1977:

Temples in operation

Temples planned or under construction

Temples undergoing remodeling

There were 180,362 more endowments performed in 1977 than in 1976, even though two of the temples were not in operation.

Total enrollment during the 1976–77 school year:

Seminaries and institutes, including special programs

Church schools and colleges, and continuing education

Elder Alma Sonne, member of the First Quorum of the Seventy; Sister Ina J. Ashton Richards, wife of Elder LeGrand Richards of the Council of the Twelve; Sister Jeanne N. Smith, wife of Elder Eldred G. Smith, Patriarch to the Church; President John Harold Mullen of the El Paso Texas Stake; President Ollie Richard Crichton of the Apia Samoa Stake; Dr. Sidney B. Sperry, author and educator; Edward Oliver Anderson, architect of the Los Angeles, London, Swiss, and New Zealand temples; Marriner S. Eccles, former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board; and Dr. Florence J. Madsen, composer, educator, and director of all Singing Mothers activities for the Church.
