(Scripture Reading Exercise.)

SPECIAL LESSON.

THE PAGANIZATION OF THE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE OF DEITY: WHAT PARTICULAR
TENDENCIES IN HUMAN NATURE LED TO THIS RESULT?

(AN EXPOSITORY--ARGUMENTATIVE DISCOURSE)

NOTES.

1. Character of the Proposed Discourse: For suggestion in relation to expository and argumentative discourses, see Lesson XXV, note 2, and the references there given to Seventy's Year Books Nos. I and II.

2. Sources of Information: For the Christian Doctrine of God, see, of course, New Testament, especially the Fourth Gospel. Seventy's Year Book No. II, Lesson XXXIV; notes 4, 5 and 6 (pp. 190-193). All of Lesson 37; also Year Book III, Lesson XXV. Mormon Doctrine of Deity (pp. 114-119); Also chs. 4 and 5 Orson Pratt's works, "The Kingdom of God," Subdivision, "The Nature and Character of the King." Outlines of Ecclesiastical History (Roberts), Part II, Section 5.

3. Suggestions to the Speaker: In previous lessons under this topic we have dealt with the "First Moments of Speech" and the "Introduction." Having done with these, we come now to the main part of the work--to the discussion of the subject. This can only be considered in part in this lesson. I quote from Pittenger: "The passage from the introduction to the discussion should be made smoothly and gradually. To accomplish this, and to strike the subject at just the right angle, continuing all the interest previously excited, is a most important achievement. A definite object is a great assistance in this part of the work. If the object is clearly in view, we go right up to it with no wasted words, and the people follow our guidance because they see that we are not proceeding at random. But with no strong purpose, we are apt to steer about our subject without ever being quite ready to enter upon it. The more brilliant the introduction, the more difficult this transition will be. But all these difficulties may be overcome with the aid of a well-constructed plan."

4. Must be a Controlling Purpose in Discourse: "The whole discourse must be animated with some controlling purpose, and in its general character, tend upward, until its close. The law of climax ought to be carefully considered by the speaker. There may be more than one culmination of interest in an address, separated by an interval less absorbing and powerful, but this decline should only be allowed in order to prepare a second or third climax, grander than all before. To violate this rule and have a speech 'flatten out' toward its close, is a fearful error. Better reduce the length of the whole by one-half or three-fourths, and maintain interest and attention to the end."

5. Of Diffuseness: "Diffuseness is often supposed to be a necessary quality of extemporaneous speech. Many speakers do fall into it, but they need not. They are diffuse because they are unwilling or unable to say exactly what they mean, but come near it, and continue their efforts until they are satisfied. They furnish no clear view of any idea, but only a kind of twilight illumination. This serious fault may be overcome in spontaneous speech as readily as in writing. He who thinks clearly and forcibly will talk in the same manner. Exquisite finish and elaborate verbal arrangement are not to be looked for in off-hand speech, but each idea may be expressed with great force, vigor, and accuracy of shading.

"This ability to say precisely what we mean in few words, and at the first effort, constitutes one of the great beauties of a spoken style. The hearer is filled with grateful surprise when some new and living idea is suddenly placed before him, clothed in a single word or sentence. A diffuse speaker gives so many premonitions of his thought that the audience have guessed it, and may even come to believe that they have always known it, before he has made his formal presentment. Of course, they are wearied, and never give him credit for an original conception.

"If troubled with this fault, frequently forecast what to say; drive it into the smallest number of vivid, expressive words; then, without memorizing the language, reproduce the same briefly in the hurry of speech. If not successful in making it as brief as before, repeat the effort. This exercise will, in time, give the ability to condense. But to exercise it, the temptation to fine language must be overcome. No sentence should be introduced for mere glitter or sparkle; a single unnecessary word may require others to justify or explain it, and thus may ruin a whole discourse. The danger of showy language in speech is far greater than in writing, for if the writer be drawn too far away from his subject, he can strike out the offending sentences and begin again, while the speaker has but one trial. If beauty lies in his way, well; but if not, he should never abandon his course to seek it."

Concluding the Speech: "There are three principal ways of concluding a speech. (1). One of the most graceful is to condense a clear view of the whole argument and tendency of the address into a few words, and leave the summing up thus made to produce its own effect. Discourses aiming principally to produce conviction may very well be concluded in this manner.

(2). "Another and very common mode is to close with an application or with practical remarks. When the address is a sermon, this form of closing is frequently termed an exhortation, and the whole speech is made to bear upon the duty of the moment.

(3). "A third method of closing is to simply break off when the last item is finished. The full development of the discourse is thus made its ending, care being taken that the last item discussed shall be of weight and dignity. This is by no means the easiest form of conclusion but rightly managed it is one of the most effective.

(4). "A conclusion should always be short and contain no new matter. Few things are more disastrous than the practice of drawing toward an end and then launching out into a new discussion. All good things that have been said, all previous favorable impressions, are obliterated by this capital fault." (Extempore Speech, Pittenger, ch 8).

4. Strength: We have already considered three means of promoting strength of expression. The third suggestion was, that care be taken to have the last word of a sentence a forcible one. The same holds good as to the members of a sentence: "Strength requires that, when the members of a sentence differ in length, the shorter should have precedence of the longer; and, when they are of unequal force, that the weaker be placed before the stronger. Both of these principles are violated in the following sentence:

Example: "In this state of mind, every employment of life becomes an oppressive burden, and every object appears gloomy."

Corrected: How much more forcible does it become when the shorter and weaker member is placed first: "In this state of mind, every object appears gloomy, and every employment of life becomes an oppressive burden."

This arrangement of the members of a sentence constitutes what is defined among the rhetorical figures as Climax. What is most emphatic is brought last, in order that a strong impression may be left on the reader's mind.

"This principle, also, requires us to avoid terminating a sentence with a succession of unaccented words; such as, 'with', 'it', 'in it', 'on it', etc.

Example: "This is a proposition which I did not expect; and I must ask time for privilege of reflecting on it."

Corrected: The last member would be more forcible thus: "This is a proposition which I did not expect; and I must ask time for reflection." (Quackenbos' Rhetoric.)

PART III.

The True Doctrine of Deity.
