Alexander B. Morrison, Dawning of a Brighter Day: The Church in Black Africa ( 1990)

CHAPTER ONE

The Giant Behind the Veil

No part of the world has been so little understood as Africa. Most people in the United States, Canada, and other Western countries know that vast continent only through the distorted—or at least myopic—lens of television: hollow-eyed nomads fleeing their ancient enemies of drought and famine; vast fleets of zebra or wildebeest adrift on the grassy seas of the East African savanna; the exuberance of native dancers caught in a blur of motion and color. The reality of modern Africa is but little known to them. Few could name more than a handful of the several dozen countries found in Africa, and fewer still are aware of the complex constellation of historical, political, economic, and technological issues shaping Africa's future, Africa remains largely unknown to the West, a sleeping giant veiled in mystery and indifference.

Perhaps this is not too surprising. Until recently much of Black Africa was visited only by a handful of white traders and missionaries, whose stories about the "dark continent" largely were dismissed as romantic nonsense, tall tales too fantastic to be true. Furthermore, Africa is so huge and diverse that to know it well is extremely difficult. Its immense landmass is unexcelled in geographic diversity—ranging from trackless arid desert to dense tropical rain forest—and in the vast profusion of its plant and animal life. Occupying 20 percent of the earth's land surface, it is four times larger than the United States and has twice as many people, divided into 2,000 tribes and ethnic groups, with hundreds of mutually unintelligible languages or dialects. It spans several time zones from east to west.

Communication across the continent, whether by air or telephone, is difficult at best. It is, for example, easier to fly from Monrovia, Liberia, to Nairobi, Kenya, by way of London than to go directly from one Africa city to the other, and telephone operators in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, simply refuse to book calls to Accra, Ghana, only a few hundred miles away, Road transport is both difficult and dangerous in most countries.

The name of the continent may come from the Latin word Aprica ("sunny") or the Greek word Aphrike ("without cold"), and its blazing heat in midsummer can sear the brain and blister the skin. Yet the cold of the Ethiopian highlands can leave one shivering and aching, with numb fingers and toes.

Africa is a continent of violent contrasts, with few constants and many contradictions, simultaneously repelling and enticing, presenting a myriad of discomforts and sorrows, both natural and man-made, along with great natural beauty. The peoples of Africa reflect the contradictions of the land itself. Stoic and long-suffering, they can be volatile and unpredictable. They are at once peaceful and truculent, wise and ignorant, friendly and suspicious, compassionate and indifferent.

The rusted bones of a burned-out bus lying by the side of the road between Accra and Cape Coast, Ghana, tell something of the volatility of the African villager, of how quickly his tranquillity can be drowned in a blood lust that sweeps all before it. A couple of years ago the bus, empty save for its driver and the ticket collector, ploughed into a procession of people marching along the road from one village to another to celebrate the birthday of a local chief. Several dozen people were killed or injured. The bus driver fled for his life, finally escaping from the irate survivors, but his unfortunate ticket collector, who went back to collect the fare box from the wrecked vehicle, was decapitated and thrown into the bus, which was then set on fire. Rough justice indeed!

Yet with it all, Africa has an ability to take hold of human hearts and minds. "It lays its hands upon you, and having once felt its compelling touch, you can never forget it," wrote an English admirer in the early years of this century. (Quoted in Basil Davidson, The Story of Africa, London: Mitchell Beazley International Ltd., 1984, p. 11.)

This is a book about one of the most spectacular events in the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; the beginning of missionary work in Black Africa during the decade between 1978 and 1988.

In some ways, at least, I believe that establishing the gospel in Africa represents the most difficult challenge the Church has ever had to face. It goes without saying that our Father in heaven longs for our success there, as elsewhere. But even He has difficulty in inspiring us if we fail to do our homework. We will succeed in Africa only as we learn and come to understand the oftentimes confusing social, political, historical, and economic realities of that vast continent and base what we do on real knowledge. I am firmly convinced of the application to the work in Africa of the Lord's admonition to learn "of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—that [we] may be prepared in all things." (D&C 88:79-80.)

In the end, of course, after "all that we can do," we will succeed in Africa and elsewhere only to the extent we call upon the powers of heaven. This work cannot be accomplished without the Lord's help.

Before the story of the Church in Africa can be told, we must deal with—and, it is hoped, dispose of—some commonly held myths and misconceptions about Africa, and learn about some of the real problems its people face.

Ancient African Origins

After centuries of dismissing Africa as "the dark continent," devoid of history or technology, its people backward, ignorant, and savage children of field and forest, Western society has at long last begun to appreciate something of the rich diversity and complexity of African history. This newfound understanding of the nature of Africa and its peoples reflects an older view. The ancient Greeks, for example, considered the black peoples of Africa to be different from them, but equal and at times even superior. Much of their knowledge of Africa related to Egypt, the "gift of the Nile," and its majestic civilization founded on the water and silt provided by the great river.

Current evidence suggests that Egypt was populated by black-skinned wanderers who came to the Nile Valley out of the Sahara, fleeing the drought that changed its green pastures and sweet rivers into a desiccated, barren wasteland roughly five thousand years ago. By the time of Sennacherib, king of Assyria (eighth century B.C.), Egypt was ruled by fierce warriors from the south, from the land of Kush. (See 2 Kings 19:9.) The capital city, Meroe, was founded near the current Sudanese capital of Khartoum, where the Blue Nile embraces its sister, the White Nile. The Kushites were farmers and herdsmen, men of the flock and field, who lived along the Nile and in the surrounding grasslands. Their civilization integrated local culture with that of the Egyptians; because they traded along the Red Sea and across the Indian Ocean, it included other more distant influences as well. Kush developed an important ironsmelting industry, and hence had iron tools and weapons, unlike the Egyptians, who used bronze. The Kushites also were one of the earliest peoples to develop an alphabetic script for writing purposes. Those who think that African history is in large measure devoid of technological advancements should be reminded that the Kushite script was as effective as that developed independently by the Greeks.

Kush remained a powerful factor in the development of Africa for three centuries after Christ. Philip the evangelist (Acts 8:26-29) met a high official of the Queen of Kush "on the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza," explained the meaning of Isaiah 53:7-8 to him, "preached unto him Jesus," and baptized him. We do not know whether this trusted official took the gospel of Christ to his people, but Christian missionaries began to preach the gospel in modern Sudan in the fifth and sixth centuries A.D.

By about A.D. 350 Christian missionaries came to another part of eastern Africa, to the kingdom of Axum, which we know today as Ethiopia. Parenthetically, it is important to note that the biblical use of the term Ethiopia does not imply the modern country of Ethiopia. Biblical references to Ethiopia for the most part apparently relate to modern northern Sudan, the land of Kush. (See Isaiah 18:1.) By the fourth century the rulers of Axum began issuing coins of gold, bearing a Christian cross. Thus Christianity has been the official religion of Ethiopia for at least fourteen hundred years. When James Bruce of Scotland returned to Britain from his epic exploration of Ethiopia in the 1770s, he told of a kingdom with pomp and power, one whose king commanded an army of 30,000 men and who lived in lavish, luxurious splendor. Bruce was a proud and prickly man, and almost nobody believed him. After all, old boy, Africans couldn't be as advanced as Europeans, could they? We now know his accounts were generally accurate, and that Bruce was not only a very brave man, but an explorer possessed of unusual integrity and insight.

Black kingdoms flourished elsewhere in Africa, as well. Portuguese sailors, including Vasco da Gama and others who followed him around the southern tip of Africa and northward along the East African coast, soon heard of a great empire in central Africa that was previously unknown to medieval Europe. This kingdom centered around the king's palace, or zimbabwe. In the Shona language, zimbabwe means royal court. At least two hundred palaces or courts were scattered around the countryside of present-day Zimbabwe and Mozambique. The largest was known as Great Zimbabwe. Its ruins reveal a massive enclosure with thirty-foot-high walls built of stones without cement. Many structures, also made of stone, were found within the walls, and a large number of mud and thatch huts were apparently located outside them, clinging like bedraggled children to their mother's skirts. It is generally agreed that Great Zimbabwe was built around A.D. 1200 by local Africans who possessed great skills as stonemasons. The wealth of the kingdom came primarily from long-distance trade of gold and ivory across the Indian Ocean, in return for cottons from India, silks and pottery from China, and glass from Arabia.

When Great Zimbabwe was excavated at intermittent intervals during the first half of the twentieth century, people were incredulous at the conclusions of the experts as to its origin. The idea that it might have been built by Africans boggled the minds of those who believed that Africans, intrinsically inferior children of nature, were incapable of major constructive effort. Surely, they said, Great Zimbabwe must have been built by the Arabs, or the Phoenicians, or the Queen of Sheba. Not so. All of the evidence indicates it was Africans who built the great stone city.

Far away from Great Zimbabwe, on the west coast of Africa, a series of splendid kingdoms developed, largely unknown to their contemporaries in medieval Europe. One of the greatest of these was the kingdom of Benin, described for a European audience by a Dutchman, Dierick Ruiters, who went there as a merchant shortly before A.D. 1600. He reported that the city of Benin in the kingdom of Benin (in which, incidentally, we now have several branches of the Church) was "very big," with a "big broad street, not paved, which seems to be seven or eight times broader than the Warmoes Street in Amsterdam. This street goes along straight without a bend; and where I was lodged . . . it was at least a quarter of an hour's distance from the gate, and yet I could still not see to the other end of the street. . . . The houses in this town stand in good order, one close and even with the other, as the houses stand in Holland. Those belonging to men of quality (which are gentlemen) have two or three steps to go up, and in front of each there is a kind of gallery where a man may sit dry. The palace of the king is very large, having within it many square courtyards with galleries around them, where sentries always stand." (Davidson, The Story of Africa, p. 77.)

Ruiters apparently concluded that the Africa city compared favorably with major European cities of the time.

Benin reached the height of its power in the fifteenth century, a hundred years or so before European traders and merchants began to visit that part of West Africa. At its zenith, the kingdom of Benin controlled a band of present-day Nigeria about 125 miles inland from the southern coast, and about 250 miles westward from the Niger River. The king, or oba (the office is still found in modern Nigeria), was believed to have divine sanction, though he was not considered divine himself, nor was he an absolute ruler. His authority came primarily from the prestige, awe, and mystery surrounding the office.

Europeans who visited Benin were favorably impressed by the civic order and general stability found there. A Dutch report from the early seventeenth century noted that the citizens of Benin "are people who have good laws and a well-organized police; who live on good terms with the Dutch and other foreigners who come to trade among them, and who show them a thousand marks of friendship." (Davidson, The Story of Africa, p. 82.) Portuguese traders and missionaries arrived in Benin before the Dutch, and Benin and Portugal even exchanged ambassadors in 1486.

Trade and Government

Another misconception about Africa is that until the last century or so, no commercial relationships existed between its kingdoms and those of Europe or elsewhere, and thus that Africa was isolated from the rest of the world in commercial terms. On the contrary, there is plenty of evidence that gold from Africa was being traded in Europe from very early historical times. The Phoenicians who founded Carthage in North Africa obtained gold from West Africa four centuries before Christ. Although the records of how this was accomplished are not extensive, it is apparent that trans-Saharan trade routes were used. By A.D. 1000, gold from West Africa provided the key to the economic success of powerful Muslim rulers who controlled a vast trading empire throughout the whole Mediterranean world and beyond. From Norman England throughout all of continental Europe, from Spain to India and even beyond to China, African gold fueled the fires of commerce. Gold, along with ivory and kola nuts (one of the few stimulants permitted by Islam), was exchanged for Indian cottons, Chinese musk (a substance obtained from the scent glands of the musk deer and used in making perfumes), swords of Damascus steel, English metalware, cloth, copper, and salt. A businessman in Cairo, for example, might use West African gold to buy copper or silk for sale in Timbuktu or another West African city.

The gold left West Africa from the great trading centers along the southern shores of the Sahara—Timbuktu, Gao, and Kano, among others—and arrived in Tunis, Tripoli, Alexandria, or Cairo after many weeks of portage by camel across the sea of sand. Stimulated by the gold trade, the economic activity in West Africa gave rise to a number of African kingdoms during the period from about A.D. 500 to A.D. 1500. A Moorish historian, al-Bakri, published in Cordoba in A.D. 1068 his Book of the Roads and Kingdoms, which drew upon travelers' and traders' reports to provide the following description of West Africa at that time:

"Ghana . . . is a title given to their kings; the region is Awkar, and their present king . . . rules an enormous kingdom, and has great power. . . . When he calls up his army he can put 200,000 men in the field, more than 40,000 of them archers. . . . When the king gives audience, or hears grievances against officials, he sits in a domed pavilion around which stand ten horses covered with gold-embroidered cloths. Behind the king stand ten pages holding shields and swords decorated with gold; and on his right are the sons of the vassal kings of his country, wearing splendid garments with gold plaited into their hair. At the door of the pavilion are dogs of an excellent breed. . . . Round their necks they wear collars of gold and silver." (Davidson, The Story of Africa, p. 90.)

The kings of Ghana taxed imports coming into or leaving their realm, operating a complex, sophisticated network of internal revenue collection. (Note: The kingdom of Ghana was not located in the country currently known by that name, but lay five hundred miles to the northwest, in the valleys of the upper Niger River.)

Over time one West African kingdom replaced another. In the thirteenth century Ghana was succeeded by the empire of Mali, one of the largest states, being "four or more months' journey in length and as much in width." (Davidson, The Story of Africa, p. 91.) Mali had one of the richest systems of tax and tribute in the world outside of China and India. Soon after A.D. 1450, control over the trade routes passed to yet another group, the Songhay, who came from the region around the Niger River. Each of these succeeding dynasties was diverse in its composition, making room for all manner of local beliefs and loyalties and demanding little more for its rulers than tax, tribute, and ritualistic displays of submission.

Africa was the last of the continents to experience the full impact of European ideas and technology that dominated much of world history from the sixteenth to the early twentieth centuries. At the beginning of that period, Africa was far from being the most backward and primitive region on earth. Many African peoples were organized into states powerful enough to exploit their own resources, control their own trade, and deter invaders from Europe or elsewhere. It must, however, be admitted that before the later part of the eighteenth century most of Black Africa was little affected, at least directly, by the technological and scientific revolutions that transformed Western society. Whatever the causes—and there certainly were several, including accessibility, hostile climate, and the blight and burdens of disease in Africa—by the time of serious European exploration and colonization of Africa in the nineteenth century, Africa had fallen behind Europe and other Western countries in terms of technology.

Myths and Realities

From the foregoing it is apparent, however, that far from being ignorant primitives incapable of technological achievement or even of an ability to learn, Africans are as intelligent, capable, and talented as any other peoples around the world. We should not be surprised, therefore, by African investigators who are eager to learn and quick to understand, nor by the ease and speed with which members of the Church in Africa learn Church procedures and operations.

Westerners tend to think of Africa as a continent of mud and thatch villages. Indeed, there are thousands of them. Village life revolves around its life-support systems—the drawing of water, the portage of food and firewood, cooking, washing, and petty trading. On market day hundreds of people converge on the square, like ants attracted to a sugar cube. Most are women, many bearing heavy burdens of firewood, bananas, and plantain or yams on their heads, but each walking with grace, beauty, and the dignity so characteristic of the women of Africa, young and old.

The overall impression of an African market is of a great jumble of noise, color, and confusion, overlaid with the rich and pungent odors of unwashed humanity, butchered goats and sheep, ripe fruits, and woodsmoke. There one finds people sleeping on or under tables cluttered with articles to sell; women with babies on their backs sewing cloth on handcranked sewing machines; food arranged in carefully constructed piles on the ground; the chatter of neighbors visiting and of vendors advertising their wares; the laughter of children at play—a small community with all of the color, gaiety, confusion, laughter, noise, and tears associated with everyday African life.

Most markets offer a wide variety of goods for sale, including locally made cloth in a profusion of colors and prints, yams, bananas, pineapples, garri (processed cassava), eggs and other foods, shirts and old shoes, secondhand automobile parts, tires, kerosene lanterns, a few canned goods—you name it and you can probably find it, at least on some days.

But Africa also is a continent of great cities. Over a dozen cities in Nigeria alone have a million or more inhabitants each, for example. In each, opulence and direst poverty live in close proximity, and Cambridge graduates rub shoulders with illiterate tribesmen. Each African city bulges at the seams, its numbers swollen by a constant migration of newcomers, predominantly young men. By the thousands each year they flee the farms and villages of rural Africa, looking for jobs in the cities. Too often, jobs are not available, and newcomers end up in squalid shanty towns hoping, where there is no hope, that tomorrow will be better. As a result of such chaotic growth, public services in African cities often are stretched beyond the breaking point, and street crime may be a major problem, although perhaps not much more so than in the inner cores of many American cities.

Most Africans are poor beyond the wildest nightmares of the vast majority of inhabitants of developed countries. Yet some have great wealth, the privileged few who control government and industry, who live in luxurious splendor and who send their children to North America or Europe to be educated. An educated and relatively affluent middle class of merchants and professionals is beginning to emerge in some African countries. Such is the flexibility, ingenuity, and mutual interdependence of Africans that even the poor manage to get by somehow, most of the time.

Yet Africa has the resources to be prosperous. It has 40 percent of the world's potential hydroelectric power supply and nearly 10 percent of its known petroleum reserves and natural gas. Sub-Saharan Africa is a mineral bonanza of unexcelled abundance and diversity, rich in copper, cobalt, diamonds, manganese, chromium, and many other minerals. Geologically, Africa's potential for production of minerals is equal to, if not greater than, that of other continents. Nor do its people have to starve: properly utilized, Africa's millions of acres of untilled farmland could provide all of the food needed by her burgeoning population, and to spare. Corruption, mismanagement, ignorance, and indifference deny millions of Africans their right to basic necessities taken for granted in developed countries.

I believe that the needed catalyst for change is now at hand. The restored gospel of Christ, with its unparalleled power to lift and leaven, to sanctify and cause men and women to reach their full potential as human beings, can bring needed change to Africa. Indeed, I am convinced that only the gospel of Christ can save Africa. The schemes of men, no matter how well-intentioned, will not do so. Science and technology, despite their power to do good, will not suffice. Africa's salvation, like that of the rest of the world, lies not with the arm of flesh, but in the sweet fruits of the gospel.

Its benign, beneficent influence can already be seen in the lives of thousands of converts to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Black Africa. That influence will roll on, inexorably, undeterred, inevitable, until God's children in Africa can "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him." (Moroni 10:32.)
