Alexander B. Morrison, Dawning of a Brighter Day: The Church in Black Africa ( 1990)

CHAPTER TWO

African Society: Tradition and Change

Many factors in African life influence the growth of the Church there. These include tribalism, the undervaluing of women, the power of the extended family unit, the hunger for education, the African zest for business, and a natural spirituality and love of religion. It is not possible in a work such as this to go into great detail concerning these factors, but an overview should help give some perspective to the challenges we face.

Tribalism

Tribalism is one of the most potent forces in African life. It pervades every aspect of African society, is a major factor in wars and power struggles, and at the day-to-day level determines who is hired or fired, who receives government largesse, who goes to university, who "looks down" on whom. Publicly, it is deplored by African politicians, but all of them, from top to bottom, practice it.

To most Africans, loyalty to the extended family—making sure that you and yours are looked after first—is far more important than any nebulous loyalty to the nation. That primary loyalty is expressed in a myriad of ways. Given the antipathy—often hatred—between tribes located within national boundaries, it is no wonder, for example, that national leaders choose their close advisers and trusted confidants from their own tribes, and make certain that those from other groups are deliberately kept away from the levers of power.

The contempt with which African tribesmen hold those who are "strangers and foreigners" is elegantly summed up in the creed of the Maasai herdsmen of Kenya and Tanzania. Their legends say they came from the north where, writes author Dino Sassi, "the earth is sand over which a great river flows, and no-one knows where this river ends. There was no grass for the cattle in that land, and no food for the people, so the Maasai had to look for another place, further south." (Dino Sassi, Maasai, Keasta, Nairobi, 1979, p. 4.) In the sixteenth century they found their home in the plateaus of the Rift Valley between Lake Victoria and Mount Kilimanjaro, which they revere as the home of the gods. There they warred against their farmer neighbors, despised creatures who owned no cattle, and thus, to Maasai eyes, beings beyond contempt. The Maasai enjoy the certain assurance that they are favored above all others. "God has entrusted the cattle of the earth to us because the Maasai are the best and the strongest people. Only the Maasai can live off cattle, which is the greatest form of wealth, and the others must content themselves with the fruits of the earth, because they do not know how to raise cattle like the Maasai. It is a sin to cultivate the earth and an offence to God." (Ibid., p. 7.)

Mistrust and suspicion between neighbors in Africa is not limited to competing black tribes. If anything, the antipathy across racial groups is even greater, as illustrated by the troubled relationships between blacks and Asians in East Africa.

The Asians in Africa live, and have lived for many years, in a sort of no-man's land. They first came to East Africa in the 1700s as traders, often the first contact the African villagers had with foreigners. Their relationship with their black neighbors has always been an uneasy one. Many Asians have thought the Africans to be lazy and ignorant, and the Africans in turn have considered the Asians manipulative and cunning. Asians were brought by the thousands to eastern and southern Africa as indentured servants, after slavery was abolished in the nineteenth century. They worked in the sugar plantations of South Africa, built the railway from Mombasa (Kenya) to Uganda and from Beira (Mozambique) to southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), and labored as agricultural workers all over East Africa. Many arrived after the two world wars, seeking a better standard of living and a better future for themselves and their children than they would have had in Karachi or Bombay. They were segregated residentially and commercially by colonial governments, supposedly for "sanitary" reasons, but probably because to do so made it easier to keep them under close supervision and control.

But the Asians possessed several advantages that soon resulted in their controlling much of the economy of East Africa. They were industrious, shrewd, and aggressive traders and merchants, individuals who did not hesitate to exploit the ignorance of their black neighbors. They put considerable stress on educating their children. Of equal importance, they learned quickly to circumvent the barriers imposed by a whitedominated society and, in the process of mastering "the system," emerged as the money brokers and rich merchants of East Africa.

The blacks have resented the success of the Asians and have been angered by their unwillingness to force changes by embracing black nationalist movements. In 1972, Idi Amin of Uganda expelled all Asians from Uganda on ninety days' notice. Although the national economy soon collapsed, some Africans turned a blind eye to the human rights implications of what was happening and cheerfully applauded Amin's efforts.

Elsewhere in the 1970s other African governments acted in similar ways to drive out the Asians or curtail their economic power. In the past few years, pressure on the Asians has quietly lessened, as governments have belatedly realized that continued participation of the Asians in their economies is essential, but few Asians have any illusions of being loved by their black neighbors.

Tribalism involves far more than doing minor favors for your family and friends, or even of seeking protection for them. The essence of tribalism is power—the power to determine someone else's place in life, to offer employment, to provide favorable terms or conditions, to control another's future. Those who are powerless and who depend upon the favors of a dispenser of power become unable to exercise their own moral agency, unable to think for themselves, afraid to make decisions on their own. The average African man, caught in the terrible heritage of tribalism, is little used to making his own decisions and depends upon others to make them for him.

To some extent, the weak sense of nationhood and continued strength of tribalism in Africa is related to the colonial era of African history, when European diplomats and bureaucrats arbitrarily carved out nations by drawing lines on a map of Africa without reference to the ethnic homogeneity of the peoples involved. The callous disregard of the colonial powers for the wishes of the African people is well illustrated by events of October 1884, when delegates from fourteen countries (pointedly not including any Africans) met in Berlin at the Conference of Great Powers to decide the fate of Africa. Four months later, in February 1885, they signed the General Act of the Berlin Conference, which effectively partitioned Africa among the European governments concerned by establishing spheres of influence. Although this reduced direct rivalries between the European powers, the resultant mishmash of tribal groups, often containing those who were hereditary enemies, made nation building a difficult task indeed.

The national boundaries established were illogical and artificial, designed for the benefit or convenience of the Europeans and totally indifferent to the cultural heritage of centuries that had held African peoples of similar ethnic background together through the ties of language, common history, and shared culture. For example, the Maasai, those great warriors of the East African grasslands, were divided arbitrarily between British-ruled Kenya and German-ruled Tanganyika. The Shona tribe of southern Rhodesia had no natural affinity for their Ndebele neighbors, with whom they were forced to become reluctant partners in an artificial nation.

Under such circumstances it is no wonder that people continued to give their first loyalties to the tribe rather than the nation.

The dark and bloody side of tribalism is well illustrated by the periodic slaughter of Hutu peasants in Burundi, a tiny, landlocked, impoverished state located in East-Central Africa. Four centuries ago, the Hutu, small, thick-set chocolate brown farmers who make up 85 percent of the population of Burundi, were conquered by the tall, slim, haughty cattle herders of the Tutsi tribe. Since then the Tutsi have treated the Hutu majority as serfs, ruling them with an iron hand and contemptuous disdain. An abortive Hutu uprising was drowned in a river of blood in 1972, when approximately 100,000 Hutus were massacred by their fellow countrymen. In 1988, a petty quarrel led to the killing of two Hutu, and in revenge the Hutus tried once more to rise against their Tutsi masters. The Burundi army, composed almost totally of Tutsi, slaughtered thousands of helpless Hutu, and at least 35,000 refugees fled to neighboring Rwanda in fear of their feudal overlords.

Given the pervasive influence of tribalism in Africa, it is not surprising that the Church's activities have been affected by it, both positively and negatively. Indeed, failure to come to grips with tribalism would doom our efforts, as it has those of so many others in the past. For example, one of our chapels in a West African country was defaced by vandals. The mission president turned the matter over to the state police, and one of their officers eventually received a confession from two individuals. Said he to the mission president, "I can't arrest these two, even though they have confessed, until I receive permission from the chief." The chief, in turn, indicated that he would personally question the men, who were members of his own tribe. Having done so, he reported to the police officer that the men were innocent! In reporting the matter to the mission president, the police officer simply said, "I can do nothing." Case closed.

It is not uncommon for a chief to say to our missionaries, "Come to my village. All of my people will join your church." Under such circumstances it can be taken for granted that the villagers are prepared to join the Church because of pressure from the chief, rather than because of individual conversion. Parenthetically, in Africa, as elsewhere, true conversions occur when individual souls, one by one, make personal decisions and then come to Christ with broken hearts and contrite spirits. Without putting too fine a point on it, an offer by a chief to have all of his village join the Church must always be viewed with a certain amount of skepticism. It may be related to his desire to sell the Church land for a building, enhance his personal political prestige, or some other less-than-holy reason.

The other side of the coin also is not uncommonly encountered—a chief who doesn't want us in his village, who says, "My people will not attend your church. I have told them not to." Perhaps a chief who acts in this way does so out of a sense of pique, because we have refused to accept his offer of a "bargain" price on land, or have turned down some other proposal he considers too good for Church leaders to refuse. In one instance, a branch president had been chosen in the usual way and sustained unanimously by the congregation. The chief, who was not a member of the Church, objected, and within days the branch began to disintegrate, with those who had sustained the branch president refusing to do as he asked in righteousness, under pressure from the chief. The chief even wrote to the mission president demanding that the branch president be removed from office. In doing so, the chief was simply fulfilling his perceived role and right to control everything of any importance in his village.

In yet another episode, a local branch president, with great courage, publicly defied the chief and refused to go along with his attempts to subvert and undermine the local priesthood leadership. The branch president was attacked verbally and physically by the chief's supporters. The mission president wisely and courageously closed the branch, refusing to be bullied. After several weeks, the chief backed down, and the entire congregation came back to church!

The point is not that it is better to have the chief for us rather than against us. Whether the chief is pleasant or otherwise is not the issue. Problems are bound to arise if he perceives he has a right to interfere with the operations of the Church. Of course, not all the chiefs do so. Many are fully supportive of the purposes of the Church and, even if not convinced of the value of the Church on spiritual grounds, can see the practical benefits for their people often associated with membership in it.

Over the years our mission presidents in Africa have wisely and successfully challenged and defeated the power of tribalism. They do so primarily in two ways. First, they adamantly refuse to bow to unrighteous demands of local chiefs. They do not let others set our agendas or determine our priorities, and they maintain independence from others at all costs, including shutting down a local branch, if need be. This takes courage and resolution, but there can be no substitute for it. How blessed we are that our mission presidents possess the needed strength and determination.

The second key to dealing with tribalism is to build strength in the cities rather than in the villages where tribalism is most powerful and where there is little movement of people in or out, educational standards tend to be lower, and the traditions of centuries are maintained. In the large cities, the power of tribalism in inherently weaker. Those who have the courage to move to the cities and leave the security of the village have, to some extent at least, indicated a willingness to break with the traditions of the past. The melting-pot nature of the cities, which brings together people of various ethnic-tribal backgrounds, and in which people are required to think more for themselves in order to survive, is less conducive to maintaining the power of tribalism. As we concentrate our proselyting in the cities of Africa, we encounter much less tribalism, which one wise African leader, President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya has termed "the cancer that threatens to eat out the very fabric of our nation."

The Role of Women

The women of Africa are the great unsung heroines. Noble, undervalued, and unappreciated, they are the most important factor in food production, the mainstay of the economies of rural communities, the hewers of wood and the drawers of water. Long hours of labor and few comforts are their daily lot. Yet the women are those above all who hold the family together, who nurture and sustain. They bear and raise the children, make most of the family decisions, grow, harvest, market, and cook most of the food, and in a myriad of ways serve as the hubs around which families revolve and as the cement that glues African society together.

To say that the African woman is undervalued is putting it mildly. She is unlikely to inherit anything if her husband dies, and indeed in such circumstances may well end up, along with her children, being displaced from the family home. She is considered not as a companion of her husband, but as a chattel. Her daughters are bought and sold in marriage, as she was. She often is mistreated by her husband, who usually feels no compunction about beating her. She is in every sense a second-class citizen, whose primary responsibility is to produce babies and to work.

I think of two African women who typify the lot of their sisters across the continent. I met one of them a few years ago in Ivory Coast, near a village 250 miles up-country from Abidjan, the capital. I was there as a consultant with the World Health Organization, visiting an area where there had been a dangerous flare-up of African sleeping sickness. She was crossing the Bandama River, wading half-way up to her knees in the water, which was shallow because it was the dry season. She was five months pregnant, carried a baby on her back, cradled a toddler on one hip, and had two preschoolers tagging on behind. Her free hand grasped a rusty machete, and a battered basket of bananas was balanced on her head. She was hot, dusty, sweating, and tired—but smiling and happy as she shook hands with me.

Also in Ivory Coast, I recall a village woman—she could have been twenty or forty—pounding the hulls from rice with a wooden mortar and pestle almost as tall as she was. It was midday in June, hot and humid. She was covered with dust from the grain and her face was streaked with sweat, the muscles of her arms and shoulders glistening and rippling as she rhythmically put all of her strength into each stroke of the pestle. She looked so tired and hot that my heart went out to her. In the shade of the trees nearby sat the men of the village, smoking their pipes or ruminating over the state of the crops or the latest village gossip, none of them lifting a hand to help her. In Africa, as in many other places, it's a man's world!

As they investigate The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the men of Africa are taught to treat their wives "even as Christ . . . loved the Church." (Ephesians 5:25.) Sometimes they need to be reminded of their duties, but they learn fast. One of our mission presidents noticed, just a few minutes before a district conference was to start, that all of the men were seated inside in the shade, while all of the women and children were outside in the broiling sun. "Brethren," he announced, "we won't start conference until you're seated with your families." It took only a few minutes for the changes to be made and for an important lesson to be learned, not to be forgotten.

A fine man joined the Church in Nigeria and shortly thereafter pledged to his wife, for the first time in his life, that he would be faithful and true to her, that he would no longer get drunk and mistreat her, and that he would stop wasting family funds by irresponsible spending. He was true to his word. Said she to me a few months later, "Now I have a real man!" Of course, not all African men behave badly toward women. How thrilling it is to see the great love many African men have for their wives. A classical love story is that of Ike and Patience Ikeme, recounted in Chapter Six.

The Extended Family

If there is one area in which we in the West can learn from Africa, it is in caring for each other within the family unit. The Africans excel at looking after family members. If one person works, a dozen eat. The concern spreads beyond parents and siblings, to include cousins, uncles, nieces, and nephews. The young, the old, the sick—all receive love and care, food and shelter, as long as there is a family member who can provide aid by sharing and giving.

I recall the night watchman (the "watchee-night") at our mission home in Lagos, Nigeria, a few years ago. He was a Hausa, from the north of Nigeria, a tribe well known for its martial prowess and warrior status. Armed with a machete and a whip, he patrolled the mission compound after dark, and I for one wouldn't have wanted to quarrel with him. Each night, about nine o'clock, he built a fire just outside the compound gate and cooked his simple evening meal. Soon, drifting like wraiths out of the darkness, coming from I know not where, there arrived a good half-dozen members of his extended family, young and old, male and female, to share a common meal and experience anew the powerful emotions of love and family solidarity.

African children are deeply loved. Strapped on their mothers' backs from their earliest days, they accompany them as they collect firewood, carry water, work in the fields, or travel to the market. The bond between mother and child is very close, and physical development of African children during the first year of life is precocious compared to that of American or British children. By the end of the second year, however, the mother usually has had another baby, and the first is left to fend for itself, with the aid of older siblings who pack the younger ones around on their backs, keep them away from the cooking fires, and help them to scrounge for tidbits and scraps as best they can. Small wonder that toddlers are most vulnerable to the malnutrition, parasites, and diarrhea that plague African families and cause the deaths of so many millions of African children each year.

African children are very respectful of their elders and would never dare to question their authority. Perhaps that is one reason why African sacrament meetings are so quiet. Everyone, children and adults alike, watches the speaker with intense, rapt concentration. There is no squirming on the benches, no wandering in and out for drinks of water, no visits to the restroom. Under such circumstances the level of spirituality in sacrament meetings is high.

Perhaps another reason why Africans listen so intently in sacrament meetings is that theirs is an oral rather than an archival, or written, tradition. Many African societies have had written records only during the last century. The emphasis on remembering what has been said perhaps helps explain why our native African missionaries memorize scriptures much more readily than do most missionaries.

The weakness of the African archival tradition is linked to the weakness of its calendar tradition. Many Africans do not know how old they are or even in what year they were born. This causes significant problems for the Church's record-keeping system, requiring great efforts from branch clerks and others to maintain records in proper form and content.

Education

The great dream of African parents is that their children get an education, so they can at least read and write and do simple arithmetic. With education, they hope, will come better opportunities for jobs and enhanced security, perhaps even a job with the government, considered by many to be the ultimate prize. Tragically, unemployment levels are so high in most African countries that many of those with a good education still cannot find work. Yet they hunger to learn, undergo great sacrifices to stay in school, and haunt the few bookstores in the cities.

I think of an elementary school in a rural community a few miles from Harare, Zimbabwe, which I visited one rainy morning with Joseph Hamstead, our mission president in Zimbabwe, and his wife, Margaret. We left the road and bumped along a farm track, the wheels of the car slipping and sliding in the mud from the overnight rains. The school building was an abandoned beer hall, made of mud-brown homemade concrete blocks and fitted with a rusted roof of corrugated iron. There were no windows, so the doors at each end of the building had to be kept open to allow some light in. Of course, the rain came in as well, running in brown rivulets across the dusty floor. There were about twenty-five children in each of two classrooms, separated by a partition of used flour sacks sewn together and strung from a wire stretching across the room. The children were of mixed ages—between six and twelve, I would guess. All of them were barefoot, the boys in short trousers and faded T-shirts, the girls in worn dresses. All were thin and ragged looking. Many had walked three to five miles to school that morning, across the farmland and along the forest paths, probably without breakfast. There were no desks. To write, each child knelt on the wet, cracked concrete floor and used the seating bench for a desk. Each pupil had the stub of a pencil and one sheet of paper, but no textbooks or readers. They watched us with grave solemnity but smiled when we asked them to sing for us. Many were Latter-day Saints, and it was thrilling to listen to them sing "I Am a Child of God." Then they sang, with touching sincerity, the "national hymn" of Africa—"Lord, Bless Africa." [^1] I thought to myself, Yes, God bless Africa, and God bless you too, my dear little ones whom He loves so much. You are His children. You are the hope of the future. You will help shape and guide your great country. You have so little and need so much. God bless you.

An outstanding characteristic of the growth of the Church in Black Africa is that it is attracting large numbers of educated potential leaders. It is as though the Lord has led us to those of His elect who will serve as the seedstock for future growth of the Church in Africa. To illustrate, in mid-1988, of the district presidents in Ghana and Nigeria and the members of the presidency of the newly formed Aba Nigeria Stake, all but two were university graduates. That is not to say, of course, that God places inordinate emphasis on worldly education. Indeed, as Paul noted: "God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty." (1 Corinthians 1:27.) Nevertheless, at this stage of our work in Africa, when development of priesthood and sister leadership is so important, it is significant that so many converts are already partially prepared to accept leadership responsibilities. It is, I believe, a great miracle. Unlike many educated people in Western countries, educated Africans do not turn from God, but rather seek to learn more of Him.

Dealing and Trading

Africans are born traders and deal makers. They love to negotiate and haggle over prices and know to the last penny how much an item is worth. The dickering involved is all done in great good spirits. It is seen as a game to be played, a challenge of wills to be won, a respite from boredom. On a recent visit to Nigeria I recorded the dialogue in one such transaction. It went as follows:

"Oh Mastah, buy this from me. I give you good price."

"How much do you want?"

"Twenty-five nairas [about $3]."

"Too much. I will not pay."

"Oh Mastah, tell me your best price. I give best price, cheap, cheap."

"Ten nairas."

"Oh Mastah, that is too little. You are not serious. I give it to you for twenty-four."

"Sorry, forget it. Too much. I will buy from someone else."

"Oh Mastah, take it now, from my hand. Buy it from me. I give you fifty-year guarantee. Buy it from my hand."

"I will give you twelve nairas, top price—no more."

"Oh Mastah, I cannot do it. I must feed my family."

"Sorry. Good-bye."

"Mastah, come back; I give it to you for sixteen nairas. I like you."

"Make it fifteen."

"Bring money, Mastah."

In this transaction, have no fears that the seller was hood-winked by the buyer. If anything, the reverse is true: African traders know to the farthing what they must sell at in order to make a profit and will not be coerced or persuaded into selling for less. They just do not make bad deals, at least from their point of view.

All of this trading and negotiating, which reveals the great potential of Africans to conduct successful businesses, given the opportunity, has its greatest importance for the Church in issues of principle. In a desperately poor society, principles may seem to some to be luxuries people cannot afford, but Church leaders must refuse to negotiate on issues of principle. Any evidence that they are unsure of their position, or any indication that their views can be changed, will generate persistent attempts to "strike a deal." If Africans sense they can negotiate—on tithing, the Word of Wisdom, marriage patterns, or a host of other issues—they, like most other people, will attempt to do so. Leaders thus have a great responsibility to teach correct principles and to set personal examples of unfaltering integrity.

Religion

Africans are by nature spiritual. Perhaps their innate spirituality is enhanced and reinforced by closeness to the eternal rhythms of nature with which most of them live their lives. Africans see God's handiwork around them every day, in the workings of nature, the stars in their places, the seasons, planting and harvesting. All remind them that "the heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork." (Psalm 19:1.) It is difficult indeed to find an African who is an atheist. I for one have never known such a creature.

To Africans, the existence of God—in whatever form belief in Him may be expressed—is a self-evident truth. Religious discussions are thus as common as those about the weather or yesterday's football game.

Because Africans are not ashamed of or embarrassed by discussions about religion, it is perhaps not surprising that many decorate their trucks, taxis, or automobiles with religious slogans or use religious motifs in naming their businesses. Some examples noticed during a recent visit to Nigeria include the following:

"God of Mercy Truck" on a giant transport truck.

"Immeasurable Grace" on a taxi.

"God Is All" on the back bumper of an auto.

"Mother of God Maternity Hospital" over the front door of a building.

"Son of Man Motors" on the front window of an automobile dealer's establishment.

Three great religious traditions are found in Black Africa, existing together, often in the same community. The first is animism, a form of pantheism indigenous to Africa, which attributes a soul to natural objects, such as a tree, a river, a rock, or a mountain, all of which may be worshipped. Many millions of Africans, particularly those in villages and rural areas, still practice this ancient native religion.

Islam, the second great religious tradition in Africa, came to West Africa with caravans of Arab merchants during the eighth or ninth century A.D. It took root slowly, but during the eleventh century it became accepted by West African kings, who found it could accommodate a wide variety of local loyalties and customs. Other than requiring acknowledgment of a single God and the unique role of the prophet Mohammed, Islam demanded relatively little of the people. Islam has continued to spread throughout Black Africa, particularly in West Africa. Today, for example, estimates of Nigeria's Islamic population range from 30 to 50 percent of the total. Indeed, of the three largest tribes in Nigeria, at least half of the Yoruba and almost all of the Hausa are Muslims. Similarly, black nations such as Mali, Niger, Sierra Leone, the Gambia, and Senegal are predominantly Muslim. Christian-Muslim antagonisms simmer close to the surface in many of these countries. As our membership base broadens and deepens in Black Africa, we will inevitably be required to expand our interaction with our Muslim brothers and sisters, reaching out to them in love, sensitivity, and mutual respect.

As already indicated, Christianity came to East Africa—to Ethiopia and the Sudan—some fifteen centuries ago. Elsewhere in Black Africa, Christian missionaries arrived on the heels of the first white explorers. Roman Catholic missionaries from Portugal and Spain came to Africa in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but as the secular power of Portugal and Spain declined, so too did their ecclesiastical energies in Africa. French Catholic missionaries, notably the White Fathers and the Congregation of the Holy Ghost, and other missionaries from Germany and Britain brought various versions of Christianity to Africa in the nineteenth century. David Livingstone, the great Scottish explorer of Africa, was a missionary whose account of his travels, published under the title Missionary Travels and Researches, aroused the zeal of Victorian England for the opening up of West Africa to Christianity and commerce—not necessarily in that order, I might add. Today, thousands of Christian groups of all persuasions are in Africa. Many are in reality a mixture of traditional Christian beliefs with native African religions.

We owe a debt of gratitude to other Christians who came to Black Africa before members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints did. They prepared the soil for us, helping to assure that the fullness of the gospel message that we bear would fall on receptive ears. We can and must learn from their experiences. It is significant that essentially all of our converts in Black Africa are coming to us from other Christian churches. They often know their Bible well. They love Christ, insofar as they know Him; and having received part of the truth, they are eager to embrace all of it. They quickly come to love the Book of Mormon and the other Restoration scriptures. They have but to hear the fullness of the gospel to believe it.

Throughout the history of the Church, it has been common for converts to feel they were led to it by divine influences. Many have had premonitions they would receive a great message at some time in the future—information of transcendental importance that would lead them to Christ and His salvation. That feeling of premonition, of anticipated blessings, is extremely common among African converts, many of whom have dreamed they would someday hear a glorious message that would change their lives forever. One of our earliest converts in Nigeria, Brother Anthony Obinna, for example, was not surprised when he first saw a picture of the Salt Lake Temple. He had seen it, he said, in a dream several years before.

The experience of Sister Mishika Dbinga, an African woman living in Ivory Coast, further underlines the great spirituality of the African people and their susceptibility to spiritual influences. Seeking a church that she could attend and to which she could give her heart, Mishika visited various Pentecostal churches in the area of Abidjan where she lives. Though others around her were exuberant and ecstatic in their religious fervor, she felt only an empty and dark feeling in those sectarian meetings. Her former husband had been a Muslim and so she attended Muslim services, still trying to find a faith in which she could believe. Though she appreciated the piety and sincere belief of many who attended those meetings, she could not share their fervor and, in fact, felt only an emptiness.

A friend introduced her to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and as soon as she began to take the missionary lessons, the feelings of darkness and depression that had haunted her left at once. Fears she had had of staying alone in her house at night also went away, and she now sleeps soundly.

Sister Dbinga became committed to baptism, and just prior to the last missionary lesson, she had a vivid dream that profoundly affected her. In the dream the Savior appeared to her three times in a single night. On each occasion He said, speaking in French, "Mishika, will you come unto Me?" She answered, "Oui"—Yes.

She came to her baptism exhilarated and radiant with the memory of the dream uppermost in her mind. The African member who attempted to baptize her was relatively inexperienced and failed on three occasions to conduct the ordinance properly. Brother Scott Taggart, an expatriate missionary working in Abidjan, actually baptized Sister Dbinga. She was thrilled that he baptized her. She had prayed, she said, that Brother Taggart would be the one to carry out that sacred ordinance on her behalf, and she felt certain that God had intervened to answer her prayers. She is a fine and very devoted sister who has a deep testimony of the gospel of Christ.

To most Africans, the veil between this world and the next is extremely porous. The belief that spirits from the next world can be conjured up readily to enter this one, with good or bad results for the health and well-being of those affected, is taken for granted. It is the basis for the power of native healers and of charismatic native preachers, who invoke the spirits—both good and bad—of the dead at will, or so the people at least believe. Charismatic religious leaders, known and regarded as prophets, who are able to bring forth the spirits and converse with them and who regularly have so-called visions and visitations, garner immense followings, numbered in the millions. Such persons tend almost inevitably to invoke their own charismatic powers, rather than those of an institutional church, in dealing with their flock. Thus, mainline Christian churches have experienced great difficulties in maintaining discipline in some of their African leaders and members, whose religious orientation reverts readily to Africanism and away from Christianity.

The African belief that the departed can and do communicate with the living strikes a familiar chord with members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Indeed, we believe that the salvation of the dead is necessary for our own salvation (see D&C 128:15), and communication with dead family members, while not an everyday occurrence, is not viewed as impossible or even improbable. Thus parents report that dead children have appeared to them with messages of reassurance about their well-being, and departed spouses may counsel the living wife or husband.

Speaking on this topic, President Joseph F. Smith said on one occasion: "We begin to realize more and more fully, as we become acquainted with the principles of the gospel, as they have been revealed anew in this dispensation, that we are closely related to our kindred, to our ancestors, to our friends and associates and co-laborers who have preceded us into the spirit world. We cannot forget them; we do not cease to love them; we always hold them in our hearts, in memory, and thus we are associated and united to them by ties that we cannot break, that we cannot dissolve or free ourselves from. . . . [They] can see us better than we can see them—. . . they know us better than we know them. . . . I claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever." (Gospel Doctrine, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1966, pp. 430-31.)

Africa, then, is a hotbed from which spring new religions of every belief and orientation. Into this pulsating blend of some truth mingled with error, superstition, and apostasy, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has come to Black Africa. It brings the fullness of the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ, restored to the earth for the last time. Its message falls upon receptive ears. Praise be to God, there are millions of our Heavenly Father's children in Black Africa who are anxious to hear the truth.

Elder Robert E. Sackley, a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy, has said: "I have noticed that the intellectual African is searching for God. By contrast, the intellectual North American often tends to become interested in something other than God. Nigerians read their Bibles continually. They are deep believers in the Lord. . . . I would say if Africa has any message for us, it is that education ought to bring us closer to God and not further away from Him. It has done so here [in Africa]. The educated blacks of Western Africa are inclined to reach for the spiritual things. They do not separate their intellectual studies from their spiritual lives. As they study, they become more deeply aware of the expanse of the universe and all that the Almighty God has created." (Church News, May 21, 1988, p. 7.)

Under the inspired direction of our prophet-leaders, the Church will continue to grow in Black Africa, and it will be in the Lord's way, not man's way. Despite all of its problems and traditions, Africa is now ready to hear and accept the gospel message in its purity and fullness.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Bight of Benin includes that portion of the Atlantic Ocean stretching eastward from Takoradi in Ghana to the mouth of the Niger River in eastern Nigeria.
