Alexander B. Morrison, Dawning of a Brighter Day: The Church in Black Africa ( 1990)

CHAPTER THREE

In the Furnace of Affliction

It has been said that Africa is shown as green on many maps because the verdant foliage has been watered by the tears of its people. Many millions of Africans are trapped in the furnace of affliction, the victims of problems that directly or indirectly influence the ability of the gospel message to take root in African soil. These problems include the following.

Health and Disease

In addition to the diseases of temperate climates, inhabitants of tropical African countries bear the added burdens of such tropical diseases as malaria, river-blindness, and schistosomiasis. Such diseases frequently lead to early death but invariably result in debilitation and intense chronic suffering. Though their victims most frequently are children, they affect people of every age. They can disable an entire population, cause the abandonment of fertile and productive land, and prevent the planting or harvesting of crops.

For example, the rainy season, when African farmers must work their land, coincides with the peak of malaria transmission. If a farmer is sick from malaria, he cannot work, and he and his family may starve. Since antimalarial medication costs too much for routine use, many sufferers are caught in a deadly cycle: they are sick because they are poor, and poor because they are sick.

In addition to their effects on health, tropical diseases have a marked inhibiting effect on social and economic development. Healthy people are required for development, and development is needed to provide the financial and other resources on which improved health is based.

Many tropical diseases play important roles in the cycle linking infection with malnutrition. They contribute to malnutrition, which in turn decreases resistance to the diseases themselves. Malnutrition saps energy and motivation and reduces performance in school and at work. In the developing countries of Africa, as many as 25 percent of the people have food intakes below the critical minimal levels. The burden of malnutrition, of course, falls most heavily on the poor.

Diarrheal diseases, transmitted by fecal contamination of water, food, and soil, are estimated to kill over two million African children each year. Perhaps the single action leading to greatest improvement in public health in Africa would be to provide a safe, regular water supply to inhabitants of all countries. At present, only about 65 percent of city dwellers in Africa have dependable access to reasonably safe, clean water and adequate sanitary facilities. In rural areas, fully 80 percent of the people lack ready access to clean, safe water.

In its humanitarian services work in Black Africa, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has placed major emphasis on providing clean water for the people. In central Kenya, for example, a community water system, bringing clean water to some 10,000 people, has been completed recently at Ngorika, with extensive financial assistance from the Church. The project involved the laying of nearly fifteen miles of four-inch steel pipe, construction of water tanks, and providing hook-ups from the main lines to individual homes. Much of the work was done by the local inhabitants, who have formed a cooperative society to operate what is in effect a municipal utility company. The Church has also sponsored clean-water projects in Nigeria, where we have had extensive well-drilling operations, and in Ghana and Zimbabwe.

The heaviest burdens of disease in Africa fall on the children. Malaria is estimated to kill one million African children under the age of twelve each year. The common infectious diseases of childhood, which have, in the main, been reduced to relatively minor problems in developed countries, continue to exact heavy tolls in Africa. Mortality from measles, for example, may reach 20 to 30 percent in a malnourished population of African children, whereas measles only rarely causes serious problems in well-nourished American children. Despite herculean efforts by many governments, only about one-half of African children born each year are immunized against the common diseases of childhood.

The Church has contributed significantly to immunization programs for children in Africa. In Kenya, for example, in cooperation with Rotary International, one million doses of polio vaccine are being provided for use in the government's immunization program, and in Ivory Coast 600,000 doses of the vital vaccine have been donated for use by the government.

The specter of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) broods over Africa and threatens the future. Current information on the epidemiology of the disease in Africa has been summarized by Dr. Jonathan Mann, former director of the Global AIDS Program of the World Health Organization (WHO), and his associates. (See "The International Epidemiology of AIDS," Scientific American, October 1988, pp. 82-89.) They report that the best and the brightest individuals—in short supply in any country, but especially so in the emerging nations of Black Africa—seem most at risk from AIDS. Although only some 15,000 AIDS cases were reported to WHO from Black Africa during 1987, the actual total was acknowledged to be much higher. The cumulative total of AIDS cases in Africa to mid-1988 was estimated at more than 100,000, and WHO estimated that more than a million Africans had been infected by the AIDS virus, and that 30 percent of these will develop the disease within a few years. The situation since 1988 has only gotten worse in Africa. Tragically, there is no real hope of a cure in the next decade, if ever.

In Africa, as elsewhere, AIDS is primarily a sexually transmitted disease. In addition, however, no Black African country can assure the quality of the national blood supply, and Africans who accept blood transfusions run a real risk of infection with AIDS virus.

In many of the cities of central African countries, including Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, and Tanzania, from 5 to 20 percent of the sexually active age group has already been infected by AIDS virus. Close to half of all patients hospitalized in such cities are infected with the virus, and 25 percent of hospital deaths are AIDS-related. Child mortality rates can be expected to increase by as much as 50 percent over the next few years, effectively wiping out hard-won gains made in child survival over the past twenty years. By the early 1990s, adult mortality rates in African cities will have doubled or trebled as a result of AIDS. At least 400,000 new cases can be expected in the next five years in urban centers of Africa, and if the disease spreads to rural areas, where 80 to 90 percent of the total population lives, that figure could skyrocket. Even 400,000 new cases will simply overwhelm the health care systems in developing African countries. A disaster of gigantic proportions is possible in the future.

Most African governments are extremely reluctant to talk about AIDS among their citizens. Their reluctance is a compound of fear, anger, and shame: They fear the loss of tourist dollars and of foreign aid, they are angry at what many Africans see as a conspiracy by Western countries to blame Africa for a worldwide plague, and in traditionally modest African societies they are ashamed to talk about the sexual connotations of AIDS. Indeed, in the Swahili language AIDS is said to stand for aibu imeingia duninani sasa, meaning "shame has fallen on the earth." It is, of course, impossible to predict what the long-term effects of AIDS will be in Black Africa, but there is reason to fear it will ravage a continent already heavily burdened with more than its share of problems.

Health problems in Black Africa are exacerbated by the fact that in most countries health workers are in extremely short supply. Burundi, for example, has approximately 45,000 people per physician, and Senegal over 15,000, as compared to approximately 500 people per physician in most Western countries. Other health care professionals are also in extremely short supply.

A few statistics illustrate the effects of all of this misery. The average life expectancy at birth is about seventy-two years in developed countries such as the United States or Western Europe, but in Africa it is only about fifty years. Of every 1,000 children born into poverty in Africa, 125 die within a year, another 100 die before the age of five, and only 500 survive to the age of forty. Infant mortality rates are ten to twenty times higher in Black African countries than in Western countries such as the United States. The World Health Organization has estimated that about one-tenth of the life of an average person in a developing country in Africa is seriously disrupted by disease.

The combined effects of disease, malnutrition, and poverty on the peoples of Black Africa are well illustrated in several small villages I visited a few years ago in Burkina Faso, a small, dry, and very poor country north of Ivory Coast and west of Niger. Unlike their neighbors in Niger, where much Arab influence is found, the inhabitants of Burkina culturally are much like those in the northern portions of Ivory Coast, although the major ethnic group, the Mosi, have more of an Arab cast to their features and fewer negroid characteristics than their forest-dwelling neighbors to the south. The land is typical African savanna-patchy grasslands with a few thorn bushes and the ubiquitous baobab trees, which, with their characteristic squat, thick trunks and sparse leaves, are well adapted to a region of little rainfall. The further north one goes in the country, the drier it becomes, as the searing heat of the Sahara presses ever closer.

At the time of my visit in June 1985, the farmers of Burkina were in serious trouble. The crops had largely failed the previous year, the granaries were empty, and the children were thin and listless. No harvest could be expected until December at the earliest. At one village, Wyen, there had been a rain shower three days previously, and the farmers, gambling that serious rains would follow, had sown their treasured and irreplaceable hoard of seed grain. If more rain didn't arrive in the next two or three weeks, the seeds would be lost and the farmers would be in terrible trouble. Yet with the fatalism of the African peasant, they had made a decision and would literally live or die by its consequences.

How I admired their courage. I thought, How quickly "civilized" Western man has become separated from the roots that bind him to the soil of mother earth. How quickly we forget our dependence on the beneficence of nature. How artificial our lives have become. These simple, illiterate peasants make life-and-death decisions each year without the sophisticated, computer-assisted technology we in the West think so necessary. Are we, after all, so clever, or have we lost something of importance as we move ever further away from the land and the sky and the rhythms of nature?

The villagers were very poor, dressed in rags, and everyone looked tired and apathetic. As usual the children were beautiful, with beautiful brown eyes and lovely smiles. I thought of how their beauty would soon shrivel and wither under the merciless pressure of poverty and illness, and my heart ached for them. A small boy had the enlarged liver and spleen of malaria, and there were, I was told, blind persons in the village, though not people who were both old and blind. Those who are both blind and old tend to die off quickly in a subsistence economy where all hands are needed constantly just to keep body and spirit together.

A very old and pathetically frail man tottered up on stick-like legs to peer at me. His leathery, lined face, thatched conical hat, and one-piece garment that looked like a butcher's smock made him appear like a figure out of another world. His legs were like pipe-stems, not more than two inches in diameter at the ankle, and I noticed he had the "tiger shanks"—areas of whitish depigmentation on his legs—characteristic of onchocerciasis (river blindness). He was not totally blind, though I had the definite impression his vision was impaired. Not that there was much worth looking at around the village. Indeed, the village itself was hard to see from a distance, the driedmud huts blending into the drab monotony of the landscape. There was not a living plant, not a blade of grass or tree or shrub for at least a mile or more in any direction from the village.

Wyen is a village that ten years ago was full of riverblindness victims, many of them blind. Thanks to a major international effort to control the blackflies that spread river blindness, none of the children are now affected clinically, though at least some of the adults who were infected a decade ago still carry the parasitic worms that cause the disease.

To those who are shocked by the terrible infant mortality in Africa, who weep at the loss of millions of lovely children each year, it is, I believe, natural to ask heart-wrenching questions: What good does it do to help? If through herculean efforts we are successful in decreasing infant mortality in Black Africa through proper nutrition, diarrheal disease control, and immunization, have we simply postponed disaster? Will the children die anyway in a few years from starvation or infectious disease?

Before considering that specific question, it is important to consider a more generic issue. Why, as a church and as individuals, should we be concerned with temporal problems in developing nations such as those in Africa? After all, our resources, both temporal and otherwise, are already claimed at home, and even if we applied all that we have to Africa's problems, we, as a church and people, still couldn't meet all of its needs. Yet even asking the question outrages our hearts. What kind of people would we be if we failed to respond to suffering and want? Of course we must help. We cannot do otherwise if we are to lay claim to being our brother's keeper and disciples of the Master.

Aggregate needs may indeed be overwhelming, but hunger and pain are experienced individual by individual. In the same way, we can relieve some needs individual by individual. To help one person is better than helping no one. To refuse to help one person because we cannot help one hundred is, in some respects, self-indulgence, a refusal to acknowledge our own limitations and to grieve for them even as we attempt to reduce them. In this regard, I think of Mother Teresa, holding the hand of a dying man and giving him the only gift she had, the gift of dying "within the sight of a loving face." She did not have the medical resources necessary to reclaim his life nor the food to reverse the debilitating malnutrition that had sapped his strength before disease came; but she did not, for that reason, think that what she had was not enough. "We ourselves feel that what we are doing is just a drop in the ocean," she conceded, "but if that drop was not in the ocean I think the ocean would be less because of that missing drop." (Malcolm Muggeridge, Something Beautiful for God: Mother Teresa of Calcutta, Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc./Image Books, 1977, pp. 31, 92.)

The fundamental reason why we must help in Africa lies in the charge Christ has given to us to love and care for each other—the divine injunction to "love one another, as I have loved you." (John 15:12.) We simply cannot claim to fulfill that commandment if we, as the apostle James gently points out, see "a brother or sister . . . naked, and destitute of daily food, and . . . say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body. . . . Faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone." (James 2:15-17.)

Our responsibility as a church and people is great, not only to contribute to the Christian work of service, but also to make our own unique contribution. Elder Neal A. Maxwell pointed out that distinctive contribution at a gathering in 1976 to discuss our international expansion. Said he, "The Church constitutes a distinct alternative to the world. We are a counter-culture. . . . And our whole assumption is that we change the world by changing individuals. Ours is the original gospel of hope." At the same conference, Noel B. Reynolds, then chairman of BYU's Philosophy Department, went further and said, "As the gospel comes to men, it presents them with a radical alternative to the world views to which they have previously been exposed. . . . The gospel does have its own world view, teaching men that everything in this world was created by God, that men themselves are . . . spirit children of their Father in heaven, and that obedience to his commandments as received through personal revelation takes priority over any requirements of a traditional culture." ("Selected Remarks: Excerpts from "The Expanding Church' Symposium," Ensign, December 1976, pp. 14-16.) As Latter-day Saints we must manifest that difference, not by excluding Christian charity from our legitimate field of interests, but by making it a focus of our gospel teaching.

Now to return to the specific question: Are babies in Africa, if they don't die in infancy, doomed to die anyway within a few years from starvation or disease? There are many reasons why such need not occur, and all argue for a multidisciplinary approach to improving health. First of all, it is literally true that "the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare." (D&C 104:17.) The maximum capacity to produce food in Black Africa has by no means been reached. At household or community levels, production of nutritious foods necessary for health can be increased significantly if the people are shown what to do and given the proper incentives. Similarly, much can be done to teach families to adjust patterns of food intake and reduce food losses from pests and inadequate storage facilities. There is, of course, a finite maximum capacity of Africa—or the entire world, for that matter—to produce food, but that is far from being reached at present.

Second, the impact of infectious disease can be reduced markedly. Appropriate use of currently available immunization technology would do much to reduce the incidence of infectious diseases of childhood, and clean water and improved sanitation would significantly reduce the overall burden of disease in both children and adults. Finally, in many poor areas, where large percentages of children die before reaching a productive age, uncertainty about who will care for parents in their old age and the overcompensation it induces have been found to be significant factors in determining family size. Thus, if fewer children die, family size can be expected to show moderate spontaneous decreases.

The health problems described above certainly apply to vast numbers of people in Black Africa, most of whom are poor and uneducated. But what about expatriate Westerners, such as missionaries who go to Africa for relatively short periods of time? Is their health also at risk?

Black Africa 150 years ago aptly was termed "the white man's graveyard." The average life expectancy of explorers, missionaries, military men, and traders who went to Africa from Britain and other European countries in the mid-nineteenth century was probably less than twelve months. In the main they died from malaria, yellow fever, and other insect-borne tropical infections. The mordant humor of an old scrap of English doggerel verse crystallized the fears of the whites: "Beware and take care of the Bight of Benin; [^1]

For one that goes out there are forty go in."

Today, however, thanks to advances in medical and public health knowledge, Westerners, including our missionaries, who go to Black Africa need not be concerned inordinately about their health. Precautions must still be taken. Yellow fever immunization is essential in most countries of West and Central Africa, and antimalaria tablets must be taken faithfully. Drinking water must be boiled or treated chemically, and care must be taken to ensure that all food is safely prepared, cooked, and refrigerated. Cleanliness in personal hygiene and sanitation is essential. But if these sensible, simple precautions are taken, our missionaries need not worry about their health. They will be as healthy in Africa as at home.

Nor need our missionaries feel for a moment that they will not get enough good quality food to eat. African fruits and vegetables are unexcelled in quality and variety. Local fish and meat, if properly cooked and refrigerated, are both safe and tasty. Bread and other cereal products are of high quality. A broad variety of canned food products from many countries is available—certainly not in the same profusion and assured supply as in Western supermarkets, but available nonetheless. Since supplies are variable, experienced shoppers soon learn to stock up on canned foods and other household products when they are available—a practice fully compatible, by the way, with the admonition of Church leaders to store a supply of food and other essentials for "a rainy day."

Literacy

In the absence of literacy, it is extremely difficult to preach the gospel, read the sacred scriptures, raise the standard of health, or help people to help themselves by improving their economic status, living standards, sanitary standards, and so on. An ability to read and write enables people to understand their temporal and spiritual problems and ways to solve them. Furthermore, it helps them to solve practical, everyday problems at the household and community level.

The adult literacy rate is, for practical purposes, nearly 100 percent in developed countries, but is only approximately 25 percent in African countries. Given the important role women play in education within the home, it is particularly tragic to note that only approximately 13 percent of women in Black Africa are literate. Only four out of every ten children in Africa complete more than three years of primary school.

Poverty

Perhaps the root cause of most of the problems just described is poverty. Although the gross domestic product (GDP) is by no means an ideal economic indicator, in general, citizens of countries with a high GDP have high life expectancy and low infant mortality rates. The reverse is true for countries with a low GDP. In developed countries such as the United States, the GDP is approximately twenty thousand dollars per person per year. In Black Africa, by contrast, the GDP hovers around the equivalent of three hundred to eight hundred dollars per year. A recent publication by the World Bank underlines the dire economic straits in which Africans find themselves. In 1987 the total gross domestic product of 450 million people in Black Africa was approximately equal to that of the 10 million who live in Belgium. (Sub-Saharan Africa: From Crisis to Sustained Growth, Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1989, p. 2.) In many countries in Black Africa per capita income is actually expected to decrease over the next few years.

Population Growth

In the developing countries of Black Africa, nearly half of the people are under fifteen years of age, and thus largely economically unproductive, as compared to approximately 23 percent in the same age group in developed countries.

There is a continuing trend toward urbanization, as thousands of people each year leave rural areas and flood into cities. Lagos, the capital of Nigeria, for example, has grown from 300,000 to more than three million inhabitants in the last decade. Continuing urbanization in Africa has important socio-economic and health effects. As people crowd into the cities, disease patterns change. Heavy additional burdens are placed on physical and social infrastructures, food production and distribution systems, housing, sanitation, water supplies, and health care.

Famine

As one of the Horsemen of the Apocalypse, famine has been our almost constant companion throughout history. One of the earliest recorded famines occurred in Africa. The Old Testament (Genesis 41) records that Joseph, falsely imprisoned in Pharaoh's dungeon, was able to interpret Pharaoh's dreams and predict that after seven years of plenty a terrible famine would sweep over Egypt. He proposed a grain storage program ("and Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea"), which protected the people of Egypt when the famine "waxed sore." It appears others were not as provident as Joseph, since it is recorded that "all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in all lands." (Genesis 41:57.)

The biblical story of famine in Egypt underlines some important facts about famines. They have occurred throughout all of recorded history. They are often associated with war. Although they are exacerbated by acute natural disasters, such as drought or floods, they tend to be chronic in areas where the normal margin between plenty and scarcity is precariously in the balance, in lands with limited carrying capacity and best suited for pastoral agriculture, such as in much of sub-Saharan Africa. They may smolder on for years, with little attention being paid to them either by the national governments involved or by the West, until sensational television coverage arouses acute interest. Under such circumstances, public concern in Western countries is likely to be faddish in nature and can be expected to fade away at least partially after a few weeks or months.

The African famine that has caused such terrible suffering over the last decade has affected a band of nearly thirty countries stretching across the continent from West to East. The drought that underlay the famine has resulted from a number of factors, including the widespread phenomenon of desertification—the southward movement of the Sahara desert. The spread of the desert in turn has resulted from a profound change in Africa's climate that appears to be related to the destruction of the rain forests through carelessness, greed, or ignorance. In 1983, for example, the Ivory Coast had its first recorded drought, with many fires in cocoa and coffee plantations resulting from the tinder-dry conditions. Careless and greedy exploitation of the forests in that country have nearly destroyed an irreplaceable natural resource. Coupled with this is the fact that grazing lands in sub-Saharan Africa suited only for low-intensity pastoral agriculture can be readily denuded of their grass cover by overgrazing.

Famines are much more complex in origin than a simple shortage of food. In almost every recorded famine, there has been food, often lots of it, in or near the famine area. In the Biafran famine in Nigeria in the late 1960s, landlords deliberately held back grain from the market in order to drive up prices. Thus it is invariably the poor who suffer most during a famine. In famine situations the very young, the infirm, and the very old are most vulnerable. They are unable to compete successfully for scanty supplies and get less than their share.

Deaths from starvation in Africa, as elsewhere, are almost invariably associated with social disruption and epidemics of infectious diseases. In famine situations, most people usually die from infectious disease rather than from starvation.

Famine relief efforts in Africa, if they are to get to the root of the problem, must be seen as long-term commitments. It will take many years to reestablish agricultural production and community life in the drought-scarred lands of Ethiopia, for example, even after the rains come back.

The major responses to a food crisis in Africa originate with the African people themselves. Western media and governments tend to view food crises in Africa as dramatic, catastrophic events that spring full-blown on ignorant, unsuspecting people. Africans know better; they understand that a food crisis develops over an extended period of time and is not a single discrete event. For them, droughts and food shortages are chronic, long-term problems.

Far from being caught helplessly by the surprise of an unsuspected food shortage, African farmers and villagers have well-developed early-warning systems that alert them to the fact that a crisis is on its way. These include observations of natural phenomena and human behavior. The people concerned promptly bring into play a series of well-developed defense mechanisms, all designed to buffer or dampen the effects of the drought. Once the signs of an impending drought appear, rural families prepare for hard times by building up reserves of food stocks. Although African pastoralists are devoted to their flocks and herds, animals are sold for cash to buy food. The women play a crucial role in managing and conserving family food supplies. Cash, food, and hospitality are exchanged between village dwellers, usually the hardest hit in a drought, and their extended families in the cities. These exchanges represent an expression of deeply held African beliefs in interdependence. Only when all else fails do large numbers of people migrate in search of food, either to the cities or across national boundaries.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has played a significant role in famine relief in Ethiopia. Church members in the United States and Canada held two special fasts for African relief at the request of the First Presidency in 1984-85 and contributed several millions of dollars to relief efforts. Over five million dollars were spent on food and on trucks to convey it. In addition, the Church has sponsored construction of a major irrigation project in northern Ethiopia, near the village of Goddobar, about 325 miles north of Addis Ababa, the capital.

Since this project represents a major attempt to carry out famine relief in the Lord's way by enhancing self-reliance, it is perhaps worthwhile to discuss it in some detail. The project involves a diversion weir on the Gambora River. The river is springfed and did not dry up even during the height of the 1981-84 drought. The weir, 28 meters long and 1.4 meters high, is constructed of concrete, with an apron of concrete about 35 meters deep in front of it. The weir, of course, does not stop the flow of all the water; it is not a dam. It checks the flow, which is diverted on either side into concrete pipes and then into twenty-four kilometers (fifteen miles) of irrigation canals. When fully completed, the project will provide irrigation water for about 400 hectares (960 acres) of land in a beautiful mountain valley. Involved are 1,640 farming families, numbering nearly 10,000 people. When I visited the site in December 1987, thirty to forty acres were already being irrigated as the project progressed, and bananas, guava, and some vegetables (onions, peppers, tomatoes) were being grown.

The project is exciting for a number of reasons. It incorporates basic gospel principles in its design and execution. First, it permits the farmers to be self-reliant—to grow all the food they need, every year, regardless of whether it rains or not. Second, it is owned and will be operated by the farmers themselves. Their enthusiasm for it obviously is high. The operation and maintenance of the system involves very low-level technology. In the main, all that is needed is periodic dredging of the canals with a shovel to ensure they don't get clogged with silt. Finally, the farmers have built it themselves, under supervision of Africare [^2] and Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture engineers. All of the labor has been supplied locally. All twenty-four kilometers of irrigation canals have been dug by hand, with picks and shovels. The total work involved amounts to about 125,000 man days. Those who worked were paid with food—approximately one pound of grain per family member daily. Many of the men involved, who live in villages high in the mountains surrounding the valley farmland, left home at 5:30 A.M., walked two-and-a-half hours to the project site, worked ten-and-a-half hours, and then walked home again. The few skilled laborers, such as the concrete masons and the man operating the cement mixer, were paid in cash—approximately one dollar a day. They are all local residents who learned on the job. Workmanship is excellent.

In essence, what the project does is ensure the future, insofar as food is concerned, for 10,000 people in three villages. They and their children and their children's children will have the means, come what may in the way of rain, to grow the food they need and in greater amount and variety than ever before. There will be surplus food to sell. Furthermore, the Ethiopian government plans to establish a dairy cooperative in the valley next to the project, since irrigated pastures will be available for cattle to graze. A small dairy herd has already been established.

The project has been lauded by the Ethiopian government as perhaps the best development project in the whole country. Fikre Silassie, the prime minister, has visited it, as have three vice ministers, the chief of the Relief and Reconstruction Commission, and assorted senior bureaucrats. All have praised it highly. "Why can we not get others to carry out similar projects, rather than spending vast amounts on that which does not bring self-reliance?" Mr. Silassie asked. The project has been featured three times on national TV in Ethiopia and has been visited by numerous international aid agencies. The government is using it as the model for other groups to follow.

In summary, Africans face temporal problems so serious that in the aggregate they suffer more than any other people on earth. Recently, Drs. Sharon L. Camp and J. Joseph Spiedel compiled the International Human Suffering Index, which was created to measure differences in living conditions between countries. (Population Crisis Committee, Washington, D.C., 1987.) Each individual country index is compiled by adding ten measures of human welfare: income, inflation, demands for new jobs, urban population pressures, infant mortality, nutrition, clean water, energy use, adult literacy, and personal freedom. Each of the ten measures of well-being was ranked from zero to ten, with the most distressful being ten. The values for each of the measures were then added together to give an overall human suffering index. Significantly, of the thirteen countries with the highest human suffering index, twelve were in Africa: Mozambique (the worst), Angola, Chad, Mali, Ghana, Somalia, Niger, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Zaire, Benin, and Malawi. Only one non-African country, Afghanistan, was found in the sixteen countries with the highest human suffering indices. There is no question about it: if the price of spiritual blessings be suffering and travail, our African brothers and sisters are well prepared to receive all that God hath prepared to bless His children.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] To proclaim the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, to prepare them to receive the ordinances of baptism and confirmation as members of the Church.
[^2] To perfect the Saints by preparing them to receive the ordinances of the gospel and by instruction and discipline to gain exaltation.
