Alexander B. Morrison, Dawning of a Brighter Day: The Church in Black Africa ( 1990)

CHAPTER FOUR

The Revelation on the Priesthood

The golden key that unlocked the door to bringing the fullness of the gospel to Black Africa was the revelation on priesthood, received in June 1978. That marvelous manifestation of God's love for all of His children in all ages and nations, of His Fatherhood over all the myriad of kindreds, tongues, and peoples on the earth, was in fulfillment of prophetic utterances long since delivered.

Nephi, son of Lehi, speaking of Jesus the Lord Omnipotent declared: "He doeth that which is good among the children of men; and he doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile." (2 Nephi 26:33.)

Paul of Tarsus boldly affirmed on Mars Hill in Athens that "God that made the world and all things therein . . . hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." (Acts 17:24, 26.)

Later, writing to the Galatian saints, Paul reemphasized the great central truth that we are all God's children. Said he: "For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise." (Galatians 3:26-29.)

The revelation on priesthood must be seen against the background of the eternal mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—to assist the Father and Son in their divine task of bringing to pass the "immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) The three aspects of that eternal mission may be expressed in a somewhat shorthand form as follows: to preach the gospel, to perfect the Saints, and to redeem the dead. The divine commandment to preach the gospel to all nations, given to us by the Savior Himself, was of course facilitated in Black Africa by the revelation. But the impact of the revelation is much more profound than that. To understand it fully, one must consider in somewhat greater detail the mission of the Church as articulated by the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve. That mission is as follows:

In these three aspects of the mission of the Church, note the importance placed on sacred ordinances and the holy covenants associated with them. Preaching the gospel and perfecting the Saints achieve purpose and direction only as we understand the central nature, the supernal importance, of ordinances and covenants. They prepare us in all things to be qualified to enter into the presence of the Lord. Those who administer the ordinances and covenants must be legal administrators, bearers of God's holy priesthood, who act with authority with the power to bless and bind—a power that extends beyond the veil of death into the eternities of time. (See Matthew 16:19.) Males who receive the ordinances of exaltation must have been ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood—the holy priesthood that carries with it the power to govern with authority in the affairs of the kingdom of God.

Thus, the consummate cosmic significance of the revelation on priesthood to the peoples of Black Africa is that it provides the way for men, "called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to . . . administer in the ordinances of the Gospel." (Article of Faith 5.) It permits the fullness of the gospel to be received and practiced with joy by our African brothers and sisters. It allows them to receive the supernal blessings of God's holy temple, with the sacred ordinances and associated covenants given only in the House of the Lord, including celestial marriage. Now our African brothers can preach and teach the gospel with authority, baptize with authority, bless their families with authority, administer in the ordinances of the gospel with authority, receive the blessings of the holy temple, and be prepared in all things to qualify them to return to the presence of the Lord. Because they are His authorized servants, they can receive divine assurance that their efforts to do the Lord's work are acknowledged and ratified by Him. Our African sisters likewise can partake in all of the blessings associated with the fullness of the glorious gospel of Christ.

A Glorious Experience

How was the revelation received? Out of a proper sense of propriety, a godly reluctance to speak too freely of sacred things, an unwillingness to expose sacred treasures to the vulgar gaze of sensation seekers, those who know the details have wisely declined to speak extensively about them. We do, however, know something of the general aspects of the process involved from the central earthly participant, President Spencer W. Kimball. In a talk at the institute of religion adjacent to the University of Utah, he explained:

We had the glorious experience of having the Lord indicate clearly that the time had come when all worthy men and women everywhere can be fellowheirs and partakers of the full blessings of the gospel. I want you to know, as a special witness of the Savior, how close I have felt to him and to our Heavenly Father as I have made numerous visits to the upper rooms in the temple, going on some days several times by myself. The Lord made it very clear to me what was to be done. We do not expect the people of the world to understand such things, for they will always be quick to assign their own reasons or to discount the divine process of revelation. (New Era, April 1980, p. 36.)

In a newspaper interview, President Kimball reemphasized the searching and reaching and striving to understand the will of the Lord involved in the receipt of the revelation. "I went to the temple alone, day after day," he said, "and especially on Sundays and Saturdays when there were no organizations in the temple, when I could have it alone. This went on for some time as I was searching, because I wanted to be sure." (Quoted by Edward L. Kimball in This People, Summer 1988, p. 22.)

President Kimball's statements tell us much about the process involved in receiving revelation. A spiritual price must be paid. Deep, sustained spiritual effort is involved. Great faith and devotion are needed. Pleading, prayer, fasting, importuning, meditating, pondering, all may be required. Heaven knows how to place a proper price on her treasures, and yields them only to trusted servants.

Having taken the matter repeatedly to the Lord, the Prophet then took the final, momentous step in the Salt Lake Temple on June 1, 1978: "After we began to think of it seriously, we held a meeting of the Council of the Twelve in the temple on the regular day and we considered this very seriously and thoughtfully and prayerfully. I offered the final prayer there and I told the Lord if it wasn't right, if He didn't want this change to come into the Church, that I would be true to it all the rest of my life and I'd fight the world against it. I would be loyal and true to the program if that's what He wanted. Then, as we had a special prayer circle, I knew that the time had come." (Ibid.)

It is apparent that President Kimball had not discussed with his family the intense spiritual struggle involved with receipt of the revelation. It was so sacred it demanded absolute privacy. Undoubtedly, if asked he would have reiterated the words of one of his noble counselors, President Marion G. Romney, who on one occasion said: "I do not tell all I know. I have not told my wife all I know. I have found that if I tell everything I know and explain every experience that I have had, the Lord will not trust me." (Quoted by Boyd K. Packer, Church Employees Lecture Series, January 18, 1980.)

Reference has been made to the pleading, importuning, faith, and humble supplication involved in receipt of the revelation on the priesthood. Another factor was also involved. God clearly has a divine timetable according to which nations and peoples and races are to be offered the saving, exalting truths of the gospel. It has always been so. Christ Himself took His gospel only to the house of Israel. Said He to the Twelve: "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, . . . but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." (Matthew 10:5-6.) It was only later, when the time was propitious, that the resurrected Lord commanded that the gospel should be preached "to every creature." (Mark 16:15.)

It is apparent from Paul's great sermon on Mars Hill (Acts 17) that he too understood there is a divine timetable, an appointed time, for peoples, races, and societies to be offered the full fruits of the gospel. There can be little doubt, therefore, that President Kimball's humble, pleading supplication came at that moment in history when the God of Heaven in His wisdom knew the time had come to offer the fullness of the glorious gospel, with all of its blessings and obligations, to His African children. In response to the pleading of the Prophet, God was prepared to open the celestial gates. The time had come for the dawning of a new day over Africa.

Other participants in the revelation have recorded some of their impressions of the process involved.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie bore his testimony of that sacred occasion as follows:

The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon us all; we felt something akin to what happened on the day of Pentecost and at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. From the midst of eternity, the voice of God, conveyed by the power of the Spirit, spoke to his prophet. The message was that the time had now come to offer the fulness of the everlasting gospel, including celestial marriage, and the priesthood, and the blessings of the temple, to all men, without reference to race or color, solely on the basis of personal worthiness. And we all heard the same voice, received the same message, and became personal witnesses that the word received was the mind and will and voice of the Lord. . . .

In the days that followed the receipt of the new revelation, President Kimball and President Ezra Taft Benson—the senior and most spiritually experienced ones among us—both said, expressing the feelings of us all, that neither of them had ever experienced anything of such spiritual magnitude and power as was poured out upon the Presidency and the Twelve that day in the upper room in the house of the Lord. And of it I say: It is true; I was there; I heard the voice; and the Lord be praised that it has come to pass in our day. ("The New Revelation on Priesthood," in Priesthood, Salt Lake City, Deseret Book, 1981, p. 128.)

President Gordon B. Hinckley also was present that glorious day. In a talk given May 15, 1988, in a Churchwide fireside commemorating the restoration of the priesthood, he spoke movingly about the experience. Said he:

The Spirit of God was there. And by the power of the Holy Ghost there came to [President Kimball] an assurance that the thing for which he prayed was right, that the time had come, and that now the wondrous blessings of the priesthood should be extended to worthy men everywhere regardless of lineage. Every man in that circle, by the power of the Holy Ghost, knew the same thing. It was a quiet and sublime occasion. There was not the sound "as of a rushing mighty wind," there were not "cloven tongues like as of fire" (Acts 2:2-3) as there had been on the Day of Pentecost. But there was a Pentecostal spirit, for the Holy Ghost was present. No voice audible to our physical ears was heard. But the voice of the Spirit whispered with certainty into our minds and our very souls. (Ensign, October 1988, p. 70.)

From a careful reading of these accounts, it is apparent that the voice heard that day was the voice of the Spirit, inaudible to physical ears but indelibly imprinted in the minds and souls of those present. It was with them as with the Nephite prophet Enos, who recorded: "And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, behold, the voice of the Lord came into my mind." (Enos 1:10.) It is also clear that the event had a profound, lasting effect on all those involved. Said President Hinckley: "Not one of us who was present on that occasion was ever quite the same after that."

Reaction to the Revelation

Announcement of the revelation burst like a bombshell, not only on the Church but also on the world. Many of us can remember exactly where we were and what we were doing the day we first heard the announcement. It ranks in our memories with events such as the assassination of President John F. Kennedy; June 6, 1944, "D-Day" in Europe; or the explosion of the Challenger spacecraft.

For my part, I heard the announcement over the telephone from my stake president, and I recall being first incredulous and then weeping with joy and wonderment at the Lord's love for His children. That feeling of intense joy was widespread among Latter-day Saints worldwide, who, with few exceptions, accepted the revelation at once, in gratitude and thanksgiving.

The world, as could be expected, was more cynical about the revelation, although it received front-page coverage and lead-story prominence. Completely missing the point of it all, the New York Times termed the revelation "another example of the adaptation of Mormon beliefs to American culture." This erroneous view was echoed in many other media reports. Commenting on that view, Dr. Jan Shipps, associate professor of history and religious studies at Indiana University-Purdue University, and an influential and very knowledgeable observer of the Mormon scene, stated as follows:

Despite the seductive persuasiveness of this interpretation, the June 9 revelation will never be fully understood if it is regarded simply as a pragmatic doctrinal shift ultimately designed to bring Latter-day Saints into congruence with mainstream America. The timing and context, and even the wording of the revelation itself, indicate that the change has to do not with America so much as with the world. . . . The inspiration which led President Kimball and his counselors to spend many hours in the Upper Room of the Temple pleading long and earnestly for divine guidance did not stem from a messy situation with blacks picketing the Church's annual conference in Salt Lake City, but was "the expansion of the work of the Lord over the earth." Predicting the impact of the June 9 revelation on the growth pattern of the Church would be risky. But the fact that this revelation came in the context of worldwide evangelism rather than domestic politics or American social and cultural circumstances is yet another indication that Mormonism can no longer be regarded as a 19th century religio-cultural artifact and dismissed as a footnote to the story of American religion. Mormonism is here to stay. (Jan Shipps, "The Mormons: Looking Forward and Outward," The Christian Century, August 16-23, 1978, pp. 761-66.)

Professor Shipps, though not a Latter-day Saint, understands much about us, seeing in the Church the rise of a new world faith. In my view she consistently strives to treat the Church and its doctrines with fairness and respect. Her interpretation of the importance of the revelation is, I think, substantially correct. The revelation must be seen against the background of God's love for all of His children, for all are alike unto Him, and of the divine mission of the Church to bring the fullness of the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. At this Saturday night of the world's history, God has "given the blessings of the gospel to the last group of laborers in the vineyard," to quote Elder McConkie. In one sense, then, the revelation marks the end of the beginning of the Restoration and the setting in place of all necessary prerequisites for the last great surge forward of the latter-day work preparatory to the Second Coming of the Savior. All is now in place for the stone "cut out of the mountain without hands" to roll forth and cover the whole earth as the waters cover the mighty deep. (See Daniel 2.)

The revelation certainly forced us to look again at the doctrines and practices of the Church and to reconsider them under the lens of new light and knowledge. With the sweet and gentle humility and meekness so characteristic of him, President Kimball—that great spiritual giant—explained: "I had a great deal to fight, of course, myself largely, because I had grown up with the thought that Negroes should not have the priesthood, and I was prepared to go all the rest of my life till my death and defend it as it was. But this revelation and assurance came to me so clearly that there was no question about it." (Quoted in This People, Summer 1988, p. 22.)

Elder McConkie put the doctrinal issues in context in the following words:

There are statements in our literature by the early brethren that we have interpreted to mean that the Negroes would not receive the priesthood in mortality. I have said the same things, and people write me letters and say, "You said such and such, and how is it now that we do such and such?" And all I can say to that is that it is time disbelieving people repented and got in line and believed in a living, modern prophet. Forget everything that I have said, or what President Brigham Young or President George Q. Cannon or whosoever has said in days past, that is contrary to the present revelation. We spoke with a limited understanding and without the light and knowledge that now has come into the world.

We get our truth and our light line upon line and precept upon precept. We have now had added a new flood of intelligence and light on this particular subject, and it erases all the darkness and all the views and all the thoughts of the past. They don't matter any more.

It doesn't make a particle of difference what anybody ever said about the Negro matter before the first day of June 1978. It is a new day and a new arrangement, and the Lord has now given the revelation that sheds light out into the world on this subject. (Priesthood, pp. 131-32.)

Praise be to God that the heavens are not closed; that new light and knowledge can burst forth from celestial realms; and that the light of the fullness of the gospel of Christ, like a beam of transcendent clarity and effulgent beauty, now shines majestic upon all of God's children, in every land.
