Alexander B. Morrison, Dawning of a Brighter Day: The Church in Black Africa ( 1990)

CHAPTER FIVE

Dedicating Three Lands in West Africa

Elder Marvin J. Ashton, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and I set off on August 29, 1987, for West Africa. Elder Ashton's assignment from the First Presidency was to dedicate Zaire, Liberia, and the Ivory Coast for the preaching of the gospel. I was privileged to accompany him. It was a great thrill for me, loving Africa as I have for much of my adult life, to see the power of the priesthood mobilized to call blessings down on those countries. On a more personal level, it was a wonderful opportunity to get to know Elder Ashton, who has long been a hero of mine, and from whom I learned a great deal every day of our association.

Our first stop was in Kinshasa, the capital city of Zaire. It sprawls over dusty hills, with untold thousands of flowering bougainvilleas and flamboyants splashing their colors against a squalid background of tin roofs, open sewers, and deeply rutted roads. It was night when we arrived, and as we left the airport my senses were once again assailed by the pulsating melange of sounds, smells, and sights of African cities: roadside vendors huddled under the velvet blanket of darkness around a single, dim streetlight, laughter, music, voices crying in pain or ecstasy, dark figures drifting by like disembodied souls or standing solemnly by the roadside; and hanging over it all the pungent odors of sweat, heat, wood smoke, and dust.

Elder Ashton asked me to conduct the dedication ceremony, held early in the morning of August 30 in the garden of the home of a local member, Michael Bowcutt, president of the Binza Branch and an American employee at the U.S. Embassy. I was thrilled to do so; it was a historic moment of great spiritual significance. At Elder Ashton's request, I gave a few introductory remarks as follows:

This is a sacred and glorious occasion, as we meet under the protecting and sheltering canopy of the trees in this gentle garden, to carry out the Lord's business in this choice land. We meet in near obscurity, in the very infancy of the Church in Zaire, little noticed by the world but perfectly secure in the knowledge of who we are and in whose cause we serve. We are here on the Lord's errand. This action ushers in a new era in the history of the Church in Zaire. It is the dawning of a new day—a day whose beneficent influence will be felt through all generations of time. We who are mortal see countries and borders, tribes and peoples, but He who sees all knows only one people—one flock—all of whom are His children.

My thoughts have turned this morning to the great hymn of the restoration composed by Parley P. Pratt, an early apostle of the Lord who was martyred for his beliefs. Wrote he: "The morning breaks, the shadows flee; lo, Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day majestic rises on the world."

How fitting those words are for this occasion, as we meet early in the morning of a majestic day. They tell us much about why we are here. They convey a sense of the great and glorious cause in which we all labor. They portray in poetic language the most important truth in the world—that the gospel of Christ has again been restored to the earth in all of its fullness; that it has burst upon the scene like a light of transcendent brightness, dispelling the long night of spiritual darkness which covered the world for so many years; causing the shadows of error to flee and the dawn of a new and glorious day to break resplendent upon all countries and peoples.

Ours is the responsibility, as the bearers of God's priesthood and His authority, to bring that glorious message to all the world. The message we bring is one of joy and hope. It speaks of prophets and revelation. It proclaims that the heavens are not closed. Its central figure is the Christ. It tells of His atoning sacrifice which opens the way for each of us to return to our Father's house, on condition of faithfulness.

This is our message to the world, and we will not rest until it has penetrated every continent, been preached in every clime, and sounded in every ear. Come, we say to all of God's children. Come sup at the table of the Lord. Come learn of Him. Come and partake of sacred ordinances and covenants which will enable you, if you remain faithful, to taste the sweet joys of your Heavenly Father's kingdom. Come listen to a prophet's voice and hear the words of God.

The dedicatory prayer offered by Elder Ashton was short, quiet, and spiritually powerful, delivered with great eloquence and sincerity. Here are some excerpts from his remarks:

O God, our Eternal and Heavenly Father, unitedly on this beautiful morning we assemble with bowed heads and thankful hearts. By appointment of the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles, I now humbly exercise the authority of the holy apostleship and dedicate and bless this great land of Zaire to Thee and Thy purposes for the sharing of the gospel of Jesus Christ in its fullness. May The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints now roll forward according to Thy will and eternal plans with rapidity and permanence.

Heavenly Father, we thank Thee for this historical situation. We express sincere appreciation for friendly government officials for signing a document giving the Church legal authority to continue our missionary efforts among these choice people. We are also grateful to full-time missionaries whose labors and commitment have been an important element in this day's significant recognition.

May those who live, labor, and lead in this choice country, which is ripe for the gospel, find joy in their labors. May all of us who relate to and serve in this country proclaim with excitement and anxiousness the reality that the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored in its fullness through the Prophet Joseph Smith and is now available to all of God's children. Almighty God, inspire and lead our missionaries to teach and baptize individuals and families—not groups or tribes during this season of time.

Heavenly Father, we thank Thee for this great nation and these God-fearing and spiritually sensitive people. We pray that in the days to come great multitudes will enjoy the priceless gifts available to those who embrace and live the true gospel of Thy Son, Jesus Christ. May Thy earthly kingdom roll forward now in Zaire with stability, love, and eternal purpose.

Our next stop was Monrovia, the capital of Liberia. Elder Ashton's prayer as he dedicated that country thrilled all who heard it, with its rich eloquence and deep spirituality. As I listened, choked with emotion, it seemed to me that the God of Heaven must have been pleased indeed as He looked down upon His apostle-son. I sensed that the humble yet authoritative use of priesthood power was fully acceptable to our Heavenly Father.

Excerpts from the text of Elder Ashton's prayer include the following:

Our Eternal Heavenly Father, we are humbly grateful this day to meet and be about Thy business. Joy is in our hearts as we contemplate the privilege of going into this part of the world for sacred and eternal purposes. By appointment from the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles, we dedicate this land of Liberia to Thee and Thy purposes. May The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints grow steadily under Thy influence and power from this important date onward. May those here today and others who will follow proclaim the gospel with anxiousness and commitment. May they and those they lead be perfected by sharing and living the truths of the gospel.

Heavenly Father, we bless this land of Liberia. May peace and stability reign so Thy work will prosper. We thank those who have labored and cooperated to give the Church legal authority to continue our missionary efforts. Help us to live and labor in the spirit of love with all mankind. Keep Thy servants free of contention and pride. Impress us to be understanding and patient under all circumstances. Frustrate those who would impede or slander our effort.

Bless the honest in heart in this country. Bless Thy children, to be responsive to Thy truths and the glorious messages of Thy Son, Jesus Christ. May the fields be ripe and ready for the harvest. Help us to thrust in our sickles with friendly and strong arms. We thank Thee for the knowledge we share that souls brought unto Thee will bring joy.

That evening we attended a meeting of local members of the New Cru Town Branch in an old ramshackle building that had at one time served as a cinema. Through its cracked and crumbling walls came the steady beat of African street sounds—the chatter of vendors, the blare of a radio, a child's strident cry, a raucous laugh. Yet the Spirit was there in its richness, and hearts were lifted and edified by Elder Ashton's message of hope and faith. At the end of the meeting both Elder Ashton and I were presented with Liberian native costumes, richly decorated gowns and hats in vivid colors. When we modeled them for the crowd, they clapped and cheered in great good humor. Given the poverty of the members, we appreciated that we had received royal gifts.

The final leg of our journey took us to Abidjan, the capital city of Ivory Coast and aptly named the Paris of Africa. As had been our custom, we met to dedicate the land in the quiet garden of a local member family. Elder Ashton, with the eloquence and power to which I had become accustomed, again poured out his heart to his Heavenly Father. Said he:

Heavenly Father, humbly we approach Thy heavenly throne with joyous hearts. This is a day of great importance for this land, its people, and the future. Hear our prayers and accept our gratitude as we share the feelings of our hearts. We dedicate this land of Ivory Coast for the preaching of the gospel and for all of Thy purposes. Hasten the day, our Father, when Thy work will go forward as a powerful stone rolling forward on Thy decreed course. Bless those who have prayed and labored for this day and its significance. We pray for the leaders of this nation. Bless them with Thy spirit as they lead, serve, and plan. May peace and love form a proper foundation for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to grow, prosper, and lift lives unto Thee. This nation, soil, and people are Thine. We pray for Thy assistance as we now labor to share the truth in Thine own way.

The Lord's errand was complete. Three great lands had been dedicated to Him, that His glorious work might roll forth with power and majesty to bless the lives of millions. On a more personal basis it was thrilling to sit at the feet of an apostle, to feel his mighty faith and marvel at his humble prayers of dedication. Elder Ashton is one of the Lord's great sons. He doesn't take himself too seriously, but he is in no doubt at all about who called him nor whose authority he bears. He will ever be one of my role models, and I shall never forget those glorious days when I was privileged to assist him "on the Lord's errand."
