Alexander B. Morrison, Dawning of a Brighter Day: The Church in Black Africa ( 1990)

CHAPTER SIX

Nigeria: The Black Giant of Africa

Each time I thread my way through the chaos, inefficiency, heat, and bedlam of the airport at Lagos, Nigeria, I find myself wondering if I'll ever make it in one piece and asking myself why I ever left home. Nonetheless, after each visit to Nigeria I feel a warm glow of satisfaction and intense exhilaration. I realize I've been in the most exciting country in Black Africa—a country that pulsates with a beat louder and faster than that of any other on the continent, populated by a people who are exuberant, boisterous, argumentative, and in a hurry. They push, shove, and bicker on the streets, refusing to queue up quietly as do their less combative neighbors in other African countries. Line-ups of motorists at a gasoline station in Lagos not uncommonly degenerate into fisticuffs, as some impatient soul tries to push to the head of the line and is immediately challenged by those already there.

Perhaps one reason why Nigerians are so self-assertive and boisterous is that the country has a long and distinguished history and culture and much to be proud of. Its northern cities, such as Kano, were sophisticated southern anchors on the trans-Saharan caravan routes one thousand years ago. As mentioned previously, when Europeans visited Benin in the fifteenth century, they found a highly organized and advanced people whose artisans produced in ivory, bronze, terra-cotta, and brass works that are recognized today throughout the world as masterpieces.

By all counts, Nigeria is the most important country in Black Africa. Probably one-quarter of all Africans are Nigerian. Although no one knows for certain, since a full census of the country has not been taken since independence in 1960, there are somewhere between 90 million and 110 million inhabitants, more than any country in Western Europe. Nor is Nigeria an economic pygmy. The gross domestic product exceeds that of South Africa, with all of its gold and diamonds, and is more than 50 percent that of all other forty-five sub-Saharan countries of Africa combined.

The country is a melange of over two hundred ethnic groups and many dozens of different languages, but there are three major tribes, which are actually small nations. They include the Hausa and Fulani of northern Nigeria, Islamic people with Arab ties who are great horsemen and whose tribal kings built crenellated palaces of baked mud; the self-confident and entrepreneurial Yoruba in the West; and the Ibos of eastern Nigeria, who under the patronage of the British colonial government became the administrators, educators, and businessmen—the backbone of bureaucracy and commerce in the country. The three major tribes live together in an uneasy union made more complicated and tentative by religious tension between the Muslim north and the Christian-animist south.

Geographically, Nigeria also presents a vast panorama of contrasts. The size of Arizona, Utah, and California combined, its landmass is approximately one-tenth that of the United States. The southern coast, along the Gulf of Guinea, is dominated by mangrove swamps, which give way to rain forest farther inland, with trees reaching as high as 200 feet. The central plateau is characterized by wooded savanna, with the vegetation becoming increasingly sparse as one travels farther north. The northern part of the country is barren, desolate desert, its arid surface swept by the harmattan, the hot, dry wind from the Sahara.

Lagos, the capital, is a sprawling, lusty giant of a place. Its streets are dirty, though less so than a decade ago when they were just plain filthy. In those days uncollected and rotting garbage lay in heaps on every street, and the air from the airport to the city was filled with the acrid smoke from burning tires and smoldering heaps of rancid refuse. To be caught in a traffic jam in Lagos, called a "go-slow" by the locals, is still an exercise in patience and forbearance that at times can be well nigh intolerable. Traveling the thirteen miles from the Lagos airport to the city can take as long as several hours. What redeems the place, in spite of the open sewers, congestion, and squalid slums, is the feeling of excitement in the air—the sense that what happens there really matters, not only in Nigeria, but far beyond its borders; a realization that this is a country that sets the pace for the rest of Black Africa.

The major problem with Lagos is that it simply has grown too fast, from 300,000 to well over three million inhabitants in just a decade, as people from all over the country have crowded into its festering slums seeking a better life than that to be found in subsistence agriculture in rural areas. Indeed, greater Lagos probably has a population exceeding ten million people. The physical infrastructures needed for life support—water, sewerage, electricity, street services—have been overwhelmed, as the city and its environs sink under their own weight.

Other smaller cities in the country are far less congested and the pace there is far less hectic. One of my favorites is Enugu, the old British capital of eastern Nigeria. There one finds broad, tree-lined boulevards, neat whitewashed houses, a good hotel, flowers, and grass. The air is crisp and cool on the eastern plateau, and darkness comes softly and gently, drawing a velvet blanket over the sleeping city. It is a lovely place.

Traveling on Nigerian roads can be a devastating experience, particularly for uninitiated Americans or Europeans used to high standards of road safety and relatively courteous drivers. According to an article in the highly respected magazine West Africa (August 22, 1988), in the past decade more than 400,000 serious road accidents were recorded in Nigeria, and more than 100,000 people died on the roads. These grim statistics have earned Nigeria the dubious reputation of having the worst road-accident record in the world.

There are many reasons for the carnage on Nigerian highways. For one thing, most roads are in terrible states of repair, and road maintenance is practically nonexistent. At times, many sections of the highway linking Lagos with the eastern parts of the country look as though the road had been strafed from the air. The road surface is pitted and broken, with gaping potholes that can rupture tires and rip off fuel tanks of cars with unwary drivers. In mid-1988, a long segment of the road was washed away by floods and became, in the words of an editorial in one of the Nigerian newspapers, "a veritable deathtrap."

Apart from lack of adequate road infrastructure and road maintenance, bad driving causes many accidents. Nigerian drivers, almost all of whom are men, use the automobile to express publicly their machismo tendencies. Speeding, cutting in on other drivers, and a general lack of care and caution, coupled with get-out-of-my-way aggressiveness, characterize the driving habits of the majority. A common scene on a Nigerian highway is a long line of automobiles creeping along at a snail's pace behind a long-distance heavy transport truck, which plods along, taking its half of the road down the middle. Sooner or later one of the frustrated motorists, perhaps a taxi driver with a dilapidated, grossly overloaded car, pulls out to pass, right into the path of an oncoming vehicle. Multiple injuries and often multiple deaths ensue. A dozen or more passengers often are packed like sardines into a minivan, some even hanging onto the outside of the vehicle. Under such circumstances, a crash can only result in disaster.

After a road accident, corpses often lay on or at the side of the road for several days before being identified. In November 1988 I passed a corpse that had lain unclaimed for over a week on the road between Ibadan and Benin City, a gruesome reminder of one of the harsh realities of African life.

Bodies may be taken to mortuaries in different hospitals, and the injured may be admitted to hospitals or clinics scattered over a wide area. Since records are not kept, or are sketchy and inaccurate at best, finding a patient or receiving the body of a victim becomes a nightmare.

What does all of this mean for missionaries and other expatriates living in Nigeria? The answer is: be alert, drive defensively but boldly, stay cool (don't duel with another driver for the right to be first), and be certain your vehicle is in top mechanical condition at all times. If these precautions are taken, one need not be unduly concerned about driving in Nigeria.

Another of the frustrations endemic to life in Nigeria is frequent interruptions in electric power, which have led to the Nigerian Electric Power Authority (NEPA) acquiring for its acronym the novel translation of Never Expect Power Always. Cynics proclaim that NEPA treats both high and low equally, supplying all with darkness more than light. As reported in the magazine West Africa (September 22, 1988), during a state banquet for the Ghanaian leader Jerry Rawlings in the northern Nigerian city of Kano in early 1988, NEPA broke down on two occasions, to the intense embarrassment of the Nigerian officials present. NEPA offers numerous excuses for its poor performance, ranging from the low level of power generation and inadequate staff discipline and training to the novel explanation of snakes taking over its transformers.

The same issue of West Africa reported on another of the problems faced by Nigerians as they try to move the country into the modern world. As of the end of September 1988, the waiting list of people wishing to have a telephone installed by the national telephone agency, Nitel, stretched to over 200,000, but only 33,000 will be lucky enough to get connected. Many attempt to override the list by bribing Nitel officials, and cries of corruption are heard on all sides. Among other problems, Nitel has to contend with the theft of telephone cables, the metal from which is used in making jewelry. In January 1988, 2,000 lines worth 3 million Naira (then about 400,000 U.S. dollars) were stolen in Lagos, and on one occasion Lagos Island was temporarily cut off from the world when thieves stole six cables located under a bridge.

British Rule and Independence

Nigeria fell under British influence late in the nineteenth century, and the British government assumed control of the country from the Royal Niger Company in 1900. (The company took its name from the mighty Niger, or "black," river that divides the country roughly from north to south.) In an attempt to develop a truly black colony, the British would not allow a white man to enter Nigeria, much less stay there, unless he could show good reason why he needed to do so.

In the early days, life for the British colonial administrators in Nigeria was very difficult. Not without reason was West Africa known as the white man's graveyard. The story of Sylvia Leith-Ross, a young Englishwoman who went to Nigeria with her husband and three other Britons in the late summer of 1907, illustrates some of the problems involved. Her husband was a government official, assigned to the British headquarters of northern Nigeria at that time, at a place called Zungeru. Said she, "I remember that we had to take absolutely everything with us, all clothing . . . all food and almost all furniture. But the bulk of our luggage consisted I suppose of the . . . boxes containing food for eighteen months. Mosquito nets, of course, had to be used everywhere and it was quite fatal not to do so."

Mrs. Leith-Ross and her husband had been in Zungeru for only a year when tragedy struck. She wrote:

My husband had had blackwater [probably tertiary, or malignant, malaria] once before and had somehow survived, although he'd been completely alone. The second time it happened in Zungeru; one doesn't know why, it was just an infection, but at the time there was no known cure. He was at once taken to the small hospital and two doctors stayed with him day and night for two days, but he grew weaker and weaker and died within three days.

Of course, death was accepted as part of the day's work, but he had been so much liked that the whole of his colleagues and even the black clerks and the transport boys were all shocked deeply and were, in a way, not so sorry for me as sorry for themselves in that they'd lost a friend and an example. Everybody was kindness itself to me but the only thing to do was for me to go home. And when I left I found that of the five of us who had started for Northern Nigeria, I was the only one to return to England. The others were all dead. (In Charles Allen, editor, Tales from the Dark Continent, London: Futura Publications, 1980, p. 38.)

Interestingly enough, Sylvia Leith-Ross went back to Nigeria, "for it was only when she [Nigeria] had done her worst that I realized how much I loved her." She became one of the early pioneers in the study of the Fulani language and culture and Nigeria's first female superintendent of education.

By the end of World War II, Nigeria was well on the way to independence, with a small but growing middle class, an elected parliament, an active and at times outspoken press, and a healthy agricultural sector that produced sufficient food to feed the people. At independence in 1960, the future of the country looked promising indeed, particularly in light of the discovery of oil in the Niger delta. Since then, however, there have been a terrible civil war and several coups d'etats, as yesterday's promises have foundered on the rocks of corruption and inefficiency. At least some of the problem can be traced to the discovery and exploitation of oil, which in the view of many Nigerians has provided as many curses as blessings to the people. Get-rich-quick schemes, profiteering, massive corruption, and unrealistic pipe dreams of never-ending wealth have combined to shatter the hopes for a better tomorrow for millions of Nigerians. Despite it all, however, the country is struggling upward.

Perhaps the most promising sign that Nigeria can succeed in a modern world is the continued growth of the middle class. Students of history will no doubt recall that it was the birth of the middle class four centuries ago that enabled Britain and other European powers to develop the managerial infrastructures necessary for them to emerge as stable and powerful modern nations. The middle class provides the professional persons—physicians, lawyers, business leaders, bureaucrats, educators, and so forth—necessary to run a modern state. Its taxes fuel the machinery of government and its efforts generate the economic power needed for a modern country to run. Perhaps more importantly, it is from the middle class that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is finding the leadership seedstock that represents a precious resource essential for the future growth of the Church in Nigeria.

Early Church Efforts

For two decades or more before the revelation on the priesthood was received in 1978, letters had come to Church headquarters in Salt Lake City from Christian Africans asking for "holy books" and information about the Church. Many of the letters came from Nigeria. Most of those who wrote knew little about the Church, but, impelled by the Spirit, they knew somehow that they needed to know more. Missionary pamphlets and tracts, which found their way into Africa by various means, were read and reread. Many who read them were touched by the Spirit and recognized that they had come across a great treasure, a pearl of great price. Others heard of the Church by word of mouth, from a brother, cousin, or friend who had studied in the United States or elsewhere. They too pondered, prayed, and believed.

Slowly, spontaneously, a miracle began to unfold. Independent of one another and without knowledge of the others' actions, several groups of humble African truth seekers in Nigeria began to organize themselves into churches. They built small meetinghouses and patterned their meetings, doctrine, organization, and even names after The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as best they knew it. Since they lacked priesthood authority for what they were doing, there inevitably were errors and omissions in their actions, and they were Latter-day Saints in name only. Yet they sought the truth, were for the most part humble and sincere, and prayed for the day when missionaries would come among them with full authority to preach and baptize.

The Church was not unaware of what was happening in Nigeria and elsewhere in West Africa. On more than one occasion representatives were sent to appraise the situation and report to the First Presidency. On his way home from serving as president of the South African Mission, Glen G. Fisher of Cardston, Alberta, Canada, was asked by Church authorities in 1960 to stop in Lagos and investigate matters there. His unpublished account of that visit includes the following:

On arrival [in Lagos] I found it most difficult to locate the people I wanted to see. The postmaster directed me to three churches, where he said I might find the man I was seeking. [At] the first church I visited I found four men seated on a verandah in front of the building. They were deep in discussion and did not see me until I stepped from the sidewalk onto the verandah. They immediately arose and came over to where I was standing. I introduced myself as a Mormon missionary and they immediately reached out and took both my hands. Never have I received a more sincere and enthusiastic welcome. They led me to a chair and for three hours we sat and discussed the teachings of the Church.

A visit to their churches convinced me that members of the congregation were living in extreme poverty. In one church particularly I noted there were no seats, no musical instruments, and no pulpit. The leader of the group carried his supplies in a wooden box which he used as a pulpit. Supplies consisted of a few Bibles, some missionary pamphlets, the Articles of Faith by James E. Talmage, and A Marvelous Work and a Wonder by LeGrand Richards. This same literature I found in all of the churches I visited. There was also a copy of the Book of Mormon in one of the churches. From this literature a church organization had been effected, patterned after the Mormon church.

I discovered that for a number of years past they had been preparing their congregation for baptism into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Their president told me that they had two congregations with a total membership of over a thousand people, and with some pride he declared that not a single one either smoked or used alcoholic beverages. The members also paid tithing and they had been able to accumulate sufficient funds to erect two small chapels. (Letter from Glen G. Fisher to S. C. Brewerton, M. D., dated July 16, 1984; copy in possession of the author.)

President N. Eldon Tanner, first counselor in the First Presidency, LaMar Williams, who had served as secretary to the Missionary Department, and Ralph Walker of Calgary, Alberta, visited Nigeria on separate occasions a few years later for firsthand examinations of the situation, but problems in securing visas prevented representatives being sent to officially establish the Church there. The civil war in Nigeria (the so-called Biafra war) also made the situation more complex.

In August 1978, however, Edwin Q. ("Ted") Cannon, Jr., and Merrill Bateman of the Brigham Young University faculty were sent by the Church on a fact-finding tour of the groups in Nigeria and Ghana. They returned with the recommendation that the Church move ahead in West Africa. Within months action was taken by Church officials. On November 8, 1978, two couples—Elder Rendell N. Mabey and his wife, Rachel, and Elder Cannon and his wife, Janath—were assigned to Nigeria as special representatives of the International Mission. With their arrival, the restored gospel of Christ began to take root in Nigeria.

During the year they labored in Nigeria and Ghana, the Cannons and Mabeys had much to do. Practices not in accordance with Church standards, including use of collection plates, and dancing, drumming, and pentecostal hallelujahs in church meetings had to be stopped and replaced with those which are fully acceptable to the Lord. The principles behind the practices had to be taught. The gospel had to be preached in power and purity. Baptisms had to be conducted by one who held the authority from God to do so. Yet the people were teachable and humble, and the Church grew. Brother Mabey has recorded the experiences of that great opening year in his book Brother to Brother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982).

What a great debt we owe to those early stalwart pioneers who went forth boldly encountering situations and solving problems for which we as a church had no previous experience to guide them. They were led by the Spirit in their pioneering efforts and laid the groundwork for a mighty work.

The West Africa Mission, comprising the countries of Nigeria and Ghana, was formally created on April 1, 1980, under the direction of President Bryan Espenschied of Salt Lake City. He was succeeded in 1982 by President Sylvester Cooper of Rexburg, Idaho, who labored hard to strengthen the priesthood base. All members baptized earlier were laboriously retaught the discussions in their own language by specially trained Nigerian district missionaries. The need to modulate growth was recognized by bringing new members into the Church only as trained local priesthood leadership was available to assimilate and look after them properly. Several meetinghouses were built and other sites selected. The need to build the Church in Nigeria on solid gospel principles was reemphasized by succeeding mission presidents J. Duffy Palmer (1984-86), a retired Utah judge, and Robert E. Sackley (1986-88), now a General Authority.

In the early days of the Church in Nigeria most Church membership was concentrated in the southeastern part of the country, primarily in Cross River and Imo states. Many members were villagers engaged in subsistence agriculture, and more than a few were illiterate. Particularly under President Sackley's direction, the Church began to spread north and west, to open up missionary work among the inhabitants of the large cities of central and western Nigeria. Experience had taught us that large numbers of educated and employed people were to be found there, and that many were anxious to hear the gospel message. Furthermore, the weakening of the shackles of tribalism in the cities enables the gospel message to fall on more receptive ground therein.

Leadership and Growth in 1989

By late 1989 there were nearly 13,000 members of the Church in Nigeria in nine districts—three districts in the Lagos Mission and six districts in the Aba Mission—and the Aba Nigeria Stake. Here is a brief rundown of the type of leadership found in the districts and branches at the time this book is being written, in 1989.

The Lagos District is headed by George Afful, an architect, who is an Ghanaian, baptized in Nigeria. Like President Afful, many Church members in Lagos are not Nigerians but have come from other African countries, principally Ghana, to seek work.

The Ibadan District president, Olisogon Akanbi, is a professor of engineering at the University of Ibadan. He is the first member of the Yoruba tribe to join the Church. His wife, also a Church member, was in the United Kingdom in late 1988, completing a graduate degree in business. At the end of 1989 there were several hundred members in Ibadan, in branches formed only a few months previously.

The Benin District, with approximately one thousand members in late 1989, had at that time several rented buildings and a recently constructed district center. The district president, John Ehanire, is the chief medical officer at the University of Benin. He has a charming English wife and three sons, two of whom are attending a university in Nigeria.

In the Aba Mission, a new district was recently established in Onitsha, the great port on the Niger River. President of the district, which has several hundred members, is Patrick Ojaidi, an accountant.

The president of the Enugu District is Dr. Ike Ikeme, formerly a professor of food science at the University of Nigeria at Nsukka and currently employed by the Church Educational System. This district was formed in mid-1988, and by September of that year, it had over two hundred members, many of whom were associated with the university.

The Owerri District contains the Aboh Mbaise Branch, one of the first branches in the country. The district president, Judo Impney, a man of great stature and dignity, is a retired Nigerian public servant, now employed by the Church. He and his wife have nine children.

Chris Chukwurah, president of the Uyo District, has graduate degrees from two universities in the United States and is a professional educator employed by the Church as regional director of temporal affairs in Nigeria. Sister Chukwurah has a nursing degree and teaches nursing in a local college. I recall with pleasure being in their home a few days before Christmas in 1987 and listening to their tape recorder, with Bing Crosby singing "I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas." Since the temperature at the time was nearly 100 degrees F, it could only be a dream! President Chukwurah is a member of the Ibo tribe, presiding over a district of the Church containing a very high proportion of members from the Efik tribe.

The Etinan District, with nine units (six of which are housed in Church-owned buildings), is headed by Mbong Ifah Mbong, a school principal and university graduate. The majority of members in the district are farmers.

The Ikot Ikong District had approximately two thousand members in late 1989. Four of the buildings in the district are owned by the Church. The president, Donatus W. Ekwere, is a farmer, as are most Church members in the area.

The Calabar District is headed by Dr. Sunday Okore, a Brigham Young University graduate, who is a professor at the University of Calabar.

A Stake in Nigeria

Just as June 9, 1978, the day the revelation on the priesthood was announced, is a red-letter day in the history of the Church in Black Africa, so too must the date of May 15, 1988, stand as a milestone for all time. On that day, Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Quorum of the Twelve, assisted by Elder Robert E. Sackley of the Second Quorum of the Seventy, created the Aba Nigeria Stake. This stake is not only the first in West Africa, but also the first in the history of the Church in which all leaders are blacks. In fact, all members of the stake are Africans.

Musing about the historic occasion, Elder Sackley spoke words that undoubtedly were in the hearts of many that day; "I have a feeling a great prophet is looking down upon us and smiling. The Lord obviously made it known to President Kimball that the day had come."

More than a thousand of the stake's 2,300 members crowded into the Aba meetinghouse to listen to one of the Savior's special witnesses speak of divinely inspired timing and planning that had culminated in the formation of a stake. As reported in Church News, May 21, 1988, Elder Maxwell quoted Alma 29:8: "For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have." With the creation of the Aba Stake, he noted, "for this nation there now comes more of the gospel's fullness in the unfolding plan of the Lord."

Tears were shed as Elder Maxwell recounted how he had been present in the upper room of the temple that early June day in 1978 when the General Authorities gathered to receive the revelation and decision from President Spencer W. Kimball. "I wept with joy that day," Elder Maxwell said. "The handkerchief I wiped my tears with I took home and told my wife not to wash it. I put it in my book of remembrance, still bearing the marks of my tears of joy. On this Sunday, I have a second handkerchief that has wiped tears of joy. I will take it home and place it in my book of remembrance next to the other handkerchief."

Three outstanding young priesthood holders were sustained as the presidency of the new stake. David W. Eka, the stake president, has a master's degree in petroleum engineering from a British university and works for a large multinational oil company. His wife, Ekaete, also has a master's degree from a British university, in business administration. Ephraim S. Etete, the first counselor, is deputy superintendent of police in River State and will soon be the youngest police superintendent in Nigeria. Lazarus Onitchi, the second counselor, is an insurance company executive. On October 25, 1988, I had the privilege of witnessing the sealing of David and Ekaete Eka in the London Temple. They were amazed, when they came into the sealing room, to encounter many friends there to witness that glorious event. As they knelt at the sacred altar, with Elder Neal A. Maxwell conducting the sealing ceremony, in my mind's eye I saw not only a beautiful young couple but a whole people, rising up in truth and righteousness to accept the fullness of the gospel of Christ. I saw them coming, now in a trickle, but soon in a flood, to receive the supernal blessings of the temple. And I saw the birth of a continent into the kingdom of God.

At its formation the new Aba Stake had six wards and three branches. Seven of the units met in Church-owned buildings. Of those, all but one were built by the Church, using a standard plan developed for use in Nigeria and admirably suited to the needs and conditions in the country.

At the time of its organization, the Aba Stake had more than three hundred Melchizedek Priesthood bearers, almost all of whom were active. Statistics for sacrament meeting attendance, home and visiting teaching, and other activities were fully comparable to those in stakes elsewhere in the world. Elder Sackley's remarks concerning Nigerian members in general certainly apply to those in the Aba Stake: "These are an intelligent people; many members are educated. I see some of the most capable leadership in Nigeria that could be found almost anywhere in the Church. Some of our members here are medical doctors, university professors and businessmen, as well as farmers and laborers. Some members not only have attended colleges but also have more than one degree. Many women in the Church have bachelor's and master's degrees."

In December 1988, I was privileged to attend the first semiannual conference of the Aba Stake. More than four hundred Melchizedek Priesthood bearers were present, and an additional 131 men were advanced to the Melchizedek Priesthood. Said President David Eka, "I prayed over each one of the names, to ensure God's approval before proceeding." The talks, prayers, and singing at all sessions of the conference were excellent, and the Spirit was felt in rich abundance by all who attended.

Six weeks after the formation of the new stake, on July 1, 1988, the First Presidency announced creation of a second mission in Nigeria, formed by a division of the Nigeria Lagos Mission. Within the new mission, called the Nigeria Aba Mission, are approximately forty million people in eastern Nigeria. Arthur W. Elrey, a retired mental health center administrator from Tucson, Arizona, was called as the first president of the mission. At the time of his call, he and his wife, Glena, were serving as missionaries in Nigeria. Unfortunately, in late 1988 Sister Elrey contracted a serious case of drug-resistant malaria, and she and her husband had to leave Nigeria. Joseph Grigg, an insurance executive from California, was called to succeed President Elrey, with his wife, Joan, serving by his side.

Richard D. Mathews of Logan, Utah, was called to replace Robert E. Sackley as president of the Nigeria Lagos Mission. He and his wife, Fay, had recently been released as temple missionaries in the Manila Philippines Temple. President Mathews, a retired oil company exploration manager, had previously lived in Nigeria with his family in connection with his employment.

Finding a "Lost Lamb"

In Nigeria, as elsewhere in developing countries, mission presidents are constantly on the alert for individuals who have been baptized elsewhere and have moved to remote locations far away from organized units of the Church. When these "lost lambs" eventually are located, they often know little about the Church, having forgotten much of what once was dear to them. Sad to say, a few perhaps do not really want to be found. Having lost their grip on the iron rod, they fall away into the dark abyss of sin and rebellion. Not infrequently, however, a noble soul is found—one who is anxious to enjoy the sweet fruits of fellowship with the Saints and who welcomes our emissaries with open heart and open arms. The following story is about one such noble soul.

In late 1987, Robert E. Sackley, then president of the Nigeria Lagos Mission, felt that the time had come to move the Church north and west from its center of strength in the eastern states of Imo and Cross River. One of the cities he decided to open was Enugu, the former British capital of eastern Nigeria. He felt certain that among the inhabitants of that lovely place were the elect of God, waiting to be taught the gospel.

About forty miles north of Enugu is the city of Nsukka, where the home campus of the University of Nigeria is located. President Sackley had heard that a professor at the university had been affiliated with the Church in America. He even had the man's name: Dr. Ike Ikeme, a Nigerian who had received a doctorate in food science in 1981 at Purdue University in Indiana. One of the great shepherds of the Church, President Sackley resolved to try to locate Professor Ikeme. He had a strange feeling about the man, a feeling that impelled him and Sister Sackley to make the 140-mile journey from Aba to try to find him. When they arrived at the university, President Sackley was able to verify quickly that there was indeed a Professor Ikeme in the Department of Food Science. Unfortunately, he was told, the man was on vacation and was not on campus that day. As he stood in the office, trying to find someone who knew where Dr. Ikeme could be located, a man there spoke up: "I know Dr. Ikeme. He lives very close to my home. He is at his home today. Follow me and I'll take you to him."

The Sackleys drove up to Dr. Ikeme's house and knocked at the door. It was opened by a man who glanced first at the car with the Church logo on the side and then at President Sackley. When President Sackley said, "I'm looking for Dr. Ikeme," the man replied with a smile, "I am Dr. Ikeme and you are the mission president. Welcome. I have been waiting six years for you." He then introduced his wife and three small children to President and Sister Sackley. Delighted to have found his man, President Sackley said, "Dr. Ikeme, are you a member of the Church?" In response the professor took him to a back room where clothes hung on an indoor clothesline. Now all was clear to President Sackley. "Dr. Ikeme, I see that you are an endowed member of the Church." Brother Ikeme replied, "A very committed endowed member of the Church." One of the elect of God had been found.

For six years Ike Ikeme had faithfully lived in obedience to all of the covenants he had made in the holy temple, not knowing if he would ever again have the opportunity to fellowship with the Saints in mortality. During that time he maintained contact with the missionaries who had taught him in America. One of them, a woman in Salt Lake City, Utah, wrote to him regularly, advising him that he should never lose faith, for the day would come when he could reestablish contact with the Church. Thus sustained, Ike worked and prayed and endured. He told his wife, "I have waited in the Lord's time. You know the Lord's time is the best time."

Ike is married to a beautiful young woman named Patience, who has a master's degree in nutrition from the University of Nigeria and has been offered a prestigious scholarship to complete her doctorate at Cambridge University in England. Though Patience was not a member of the Church at the time President Sackley found her husband, her virtue and love of God shone in her face.

Before she met Ike, Patience was determined not to marry for some years, and certainly not to marry anyone from her home area, because of the type of men in that community. Ike was persistent, however, and she finally agreed to go out with him once, but only once. On that occasion she pointed out that she was a committed Christian. What, she asked, was Ike's religious affiliation, if any? He replied, "I am a Mormon." Patience was puzzled. She knew nothing about Mormons. "What is a Mormon," she asked, "and what do they believe, and how do they act?" Ike told her, "You just watch me."

On hearing this story, the Sackleys asked Patience, "Well, after six years of marriage and three children, what have you learned by watching your husband?" Her reply: "I have learned the Church is true. It is true because my man is true. Nothing that he would be involved with could ever be untrue, and no other religion on earth could cause him to live the wonderful life he lives in our home." What a wonderful example of love and devotion that statement portrays! How great is the power of example!

Ike Ikeme, noble and righteous priesthood bearer that he is, told President Sackley, "I want Patience to be taught the gospel without any pressure from me. I want her to accept the gospel for herself and not because of any influence I might exert." One day soon thereafter the Sackleys drove again to the university, looking for directions to Ike's home. They found Patience, who waved frantically to them. "Why have you come?" she asked. "To teach you the gospel," President Sackley replied.

"That is what I want," said Patience. "Can you come to our home and start right now?"

On November 19, 1987, Patience Ikeme was baptized by her husband, Ike, and confirmed a member of the Church by President Sackley. Just six months later Ike Ikeme was called to preside over the Enugu District of the Nigeria Aba Mission. A dynamic, energetic, loving leader, he will do great things for the Lord in Nigeria.

The First Black Members in Nigeria

Anthony Uzodimma Obinna and his wife, Fidelia Njoku Obinna, were the first black members of the Church in Nigeria. His second given name, Uzodimma, is his African name, given to him by his parents; it means "the best way" or "where the way is good or gainful, no one recognizes the leader, but where it is bad and has no gains, the leader is condemned and receives all the blame." In the Igbo tongue, Obinna means "one who is dear to his father."

Anthony, the fifth child of his parents, was born in 1928 in the village of Aboh Mbaise, Imo State, in eastern Nigeria. His father, Ugochukwu ("gift of God") Obinna, was a farmer, trader, and local judge, as well as an idol worshipper and polygamist. Each year Anthony's parents promised their gods gifts of goats, sheep, and chickens, as well as fruits and vegetables, to protect their lives and those of their families. Ugochukwu was a peacemaker, a lover of truth who hated falsehoods and evil, and was influential in his community.

It was not easy to get an education when Anthony was a boy. At that time Nigerians were afraid of white men and wanted nothing to do with them. They disliked anyone who wanted their children to go to school, preferring instead that their children remain at home to engage in subsistence agriculture. Only children who were considered as unhelpful members of the family were allowed to go to school.

In 1937 an English visitor spoke to Anthony's father; frustrated because he couldn't understand the foreigner, Ugochukwu decided Anthony should go to school. Off the youth went, first to local schools and later to schools in Jos, a town in northern Nigeria.

Anthony started teaching school in 1952. Two years before, he had married Fidelia, an orphan who supported younger brothers and sisters by working as a petty trader. Though she had no opportunity to receive an education, she was honest, diligent, and an outstanding example to other women. She patiently worked and struggled while Anthony finished four years of teacher training. But God had a work for Anthony Obinna that was greater than that as a teacher. He tells the story in his own words:

In November 1965, I was visited in a dream by a tall person carrying a walking stick in his right hand. He asked whether I had read about Christian and Christiana from A Pilgrim's Progress by John Bunyan. I told him that I had forgotten it, and he told me to read it again. After a few months the same personage appeared to me again and took me to a most beautiful building and showed me everything in it. That personage appeared to me three times.

During the Nigerian civil war, when we were confined to the house, I picked up an old copy of the Reader's Digest for September 1958. I opened it at page 34 and saw a picture of the same beautiful building I had been shown around in my dream, and immediately I recognized it. The heading was "The March of the Mormons." I had never before heard the word Mormons. I started to read the story because of the picture of the building I had seen in my dream. I discovered that it was all about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

From the time I finished reading the story, I had no rest of mind any longer. My whole attention was focused on my new discovery. I rushed out immediately to tell my brothers, who were all amazed and astonished to hear the story. ("Voice from Nigeria," Ensign, December 1980, p. 30.)

Because of the civil war, Anthony was unable to write to Church headquarters for more information at that time. When the blockade ended in 1971, he was able to get a letter through, and in response he received pamphlets, tracts, and a copy of the Book of Mormon. Though he was told the Church could not at that time be organized in Nigeria, Anthony continued to read and pray, asking God to open the door for him and his family.

He soon encountered persecutions, name calling, and abuse, but was conditioned by his conviction: "I knew I had discovered the truth, and men's threats could not move me and my group."

Finally the great day came. On November 21, 1978, a few months after the revelation on the priesthood, nineteen persons in Nigeria were baptized by Elders Rendell N. Mabey, Edwin Q. Cannon, Jr., and A. Bruce Knudsen. Among them were Anthony and Fidelia Obinna. The Aboh Mbaise Branch was organized, with Anthony Obinna as president, his brothers Francis and Raymond as his counselors, and Fidelia as Relief Society president. The new branch presidency promptly reported the event in an ecstatic letter to the First Presidency:

Dear Brethren,

The entire members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in this part of Nigeria have the pleasure to thank you and the Latter-day Saints throughout the world for opening the door for the Gospel to come to our people in its fullness.

We are happy for the many hours in the Upper Room of the Temple you spent supplicating the Lord to bring us into the fold. We thank our Heavenly Father for hearing your prayers and ours and by revelation has confirmed the long promised day, and has granted the holy priesthood to us, with the power to exercise its divine authority and enjoy every blessings of the temple. . . .

There is no doubt that the Church here will grow and become a mighty centre for the Saints and bring progress enough to the people of Nigeria as it is doing all over the world.

I first met Anthony Obinna in 1983, while visiting eastern Nigeria in connection with a Thrasher Research Fund project. Two things stand out in my memory of the visit, and both illustrate the quality of the man. First, I was touched to note the love and respect he showed to his old "aunties" (his father's polygamous wives) and other members of his extended family. Second, as we sat in his comfortable but humble home he asked, "And how is the prophet?" My eyes filled with tears as I realized that he, who had never seen the prophet (President Kimball) and probably never would in mortality, still revered and respected him. I was touched by Anthony's humble goodness and deep spiritual nature.

Anthony and Fidelia are the parents of seven children, all active members of the Church. A man of great dignity and stature, he is a trustee of the Church in Nigeria. His brothers Francis and Raymond serve, respectively, as counselor to the president of the Nigeria Aba Mission and as counselor to the president of the Owerri Nigeria District. By their faithfulness and continued devotion, Anthony and Fidelia demonstrate they have not lost the vision obtained two decades ago. Recently they were privileged to be sealed for time and all eternity in the Logan Temple in Utah—the culmination of a long-held dream.

Other Faithful Saints

Not all Africans who join the Church do so in Africa. Many African students go to the United Kingdom, the United States, or elsewhere for schooling and not uncommonly encounter the Church in that foreign setting. Ronke Adefioye, a nineteen-year-old Nigerian woman from Ibadan, for example, went to the United Kingdom in 1987 to complete her university entrance studies. Raised a Muslim in Ibadan, she accepted the gospel and joined the Church after just two months in England. As well as successfully completing her studies, she has been an outstanding stake missionary and assistant nursery leader in the Peckham Ward of the Wandsworth England Stake. She plans to obtain a degree in accountancy at Brigham Young University and then return to her native Nigeria, where she will work and will help build up the Church, especially by teaching her family the truth of the restored gospel.

The story of Jill and John Ehanire begins in the mid-1960s, in the little market town of Alton, Hampshire, England. It was there that Jill first met John in Alton General Hospital. She was a nursing student and he, a young Nigerian physician, was undertaking postgraduate studies in England. Despite their racial and cultural differences, they fell in love and soon married. They had been married about two years and had two small sons when the missionaries first came to their home in April 1968. At that time they lived in Pontypool in north Wales, where John worked as a physician in the local hospital while awaiting a more permanent position in London. The missionaries gave Jill a copy of the Book of Mormon and she experienced a distinct feeling it was true, but because the family was in the process of moving, the missionaries' visit was soon forgotten.

The missionaries recontacted Jill a few weeks after the family arrived in London. Jill began to investigate the Church, was deeply impressed by what she found, and was soon baptized, on November 29, 1968. But her conversion was not without struggle and pain. Although she had a testimony that the gospel is true, she was devastated to learn that John, whom she dearly loved, could not receive the priesthood. Upset and confused, she poured out her heart to her Father in heaven. Why, she asked, had she gained a testimony of the Savior and His church, only to find that her beloved husband was denied God's priesthood?

As she knelt in prayer, a feeling of deep calm gradually came over her. "It was as if a voice said to me very firmly but gently, 'Don't worry, have faith,'" she recalled. "It was as if a great load had been lifted from my shoulders and I was immediately free from the distress I had felt earlier. Greatly comforted and assured, I went to bed early and slept very soundly. The next day I experienced the same wonderful feeling of calm, faith, and courage, replacing doubt and fear."

After her baptism, Jill struggled to stay active in the Church. Often she was encouraged back to church only through the loving kindness of visiting teachers and missionaries. Through it all, John was loving and supportive of her. He studied with the missionaries, challenging them repeatedly with probing questions. Though he was twice their age, he recognized that those young men spoke the words of truth, as God's legal representatives. Though the priesthood barrier was a major test of his faith, John was baptized on October 3, 1970, in the Romford chapel near London.

Sadly, doubts inspired by the priesthood issue crept into John's mind and prevented his active participation in the program of the Church for some time. Jill too continued to struggle with her faith. To compound the problem, the family moved in 1972 back to Nigeria, where John had been offered a good position in a new teaching hospital in his home town of Benin City. The Ehanires had no contact with the Church, save for an occasional letter from friends, for several years.

In 1978, while glancing through a local Nigerian newspaper, Jill saw a photograph showing a black couple from Utah, with the explanation that worthy black men now could receive the priesthood in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Immediately the realization of that divine assurance she had received more than ten years before flooded into her mind. "A joy came to me which no words can describe," she said, "and I hurried to give John the good news."

Four years later, in 1982, a branch of the Church was organized in Benin City. The missionaries soon found the Ehanires, who welcomed them with open arms. Jill recalls, "After they left that evening I cried with happiness and thanked the Lord for sending His church to Nigeria and for allowing John and me back into the fold again."

Dr. John Ehanire, chief medical officer at the University of Benin, currently serves as president of the Benin District of the Church. He is a good physician and, much more importantly, a good man, one who loves his family and honors the priesthood of God he bears. A warm and gentle man, he is the soul of kindness. I am honored to call him my friend.
