Alexander B. Morrison, Dawning of a Brighter Day: The Church in Black Africa ( 1990)

CHAPTER SEVEN

Ghana's Golden Harvest

Ghana, the "Black Star of Africa," is a country roughly the size of England, Scotland, and Wales. Shaped somewhat like a box, it lies near the equator on the Gulf of Guinea and consequently is very hot and steamy. Tropical rain forest starts almost at the ocean's edge and gives way to heavily forested hills in the north, but much of the center of the country is made up of scrub-covered plains, traversed by the White and Black Volta rivers and numerous other streams. Lake Volta stretches for many miles north and south in the eastern part of the country. Approximately half of Ghana is less than 500 feet above sea level.

When it was a British colony, Ghana was known as the Gold Coast. Although some gold has indeed been produced in the country since time immemorial, the term "Gold Coast" originated from a description of the money that changed hands in an evil and monstrous business, one that epitomizes man's inhumanity to man—the slave trade. No one knows for certain how many Africans, including Ghanaians, were sold into slavery, but estimates range as high as fifty million. Probably a more accurate estimate would be ten to fifteen million from West Africa, with another five to ten million from East Africa. The slave trade between West Africa and the Americas peaked in the late eighteenth century, with 700,000 persons being transported under hideously inhumane conditions in the last decade of the century alone. Most were young adults aged fifteen to thirty-five, selected like beasts of burden for their ability to bear children or do brutally hard manual labor in the cotton fields and sugar plantations of the New World. Before transportation, they were held like caged animals in pens while Arab traders bargained for their price with European and American ship owners. One in seven died during the long sea voyage.

Africans themselves, as well as the Arab traders and white shippers, were guilty of operating the slave trade. All must bear a portion of the shame and guilt. Many slaves were prisoners captured in one tribal war or another and sold by their African captors. Others were debtors, outcasts, or those who by misadventure had wandered across the boundaries of another tribe's territory and were captured by a tribal chief prepared to traffic in human flesh for profit. The slave trade enriched kings in the interior of Ghana and other African countries and feathered the pockets of African merchants and middlemen on the coast.

A major factor that led to the end of the slave trade was the decision by the British government in 1807 to bar its citizens from slave trading. The Royal Navy established an antislavery patrol of twenty ships, which detained nearly 1,300 slave ships and freed 130,000 slaves in the period from 1825 to 1865. During that time, however, well over a million slaves were slipped through the blockade and taken to the Americas. Not until the American Civil War was over did trafficking in slaves end in the United States.

Ghana became Black Africa's first ex-colony when it achieved independence from Britain in 1957. Albeit somewhat belatedly, the British had recognized the inevitability of independence and had tried to prepare the country for that day. Whites were not allowed to settle in Ghana and had to receive government approval before they could even seek employment. There were only a few thousand colonial administrators, and a state council largely ran local affairs. Furthermore the country was, and still is, rich in natural resources, including manganese (it was the world's major exporter in 1957), bauxite, diamonds, and gold. Ghana produces and exports vast quantities of cocoa and is one of the major cocoa producers in the world. Of greatest importance, its people are intelligent, clever, and ingenious, with a reputation for resiliency, for never losing their heads, and for staying cool even under the most adverse conditions.

Why, then, is Ghana not better off today than it is? Why are the slums of Accra and Takoradi so depressing and squalid? Why is there so much poverty? At least part of the answer lies in the plunder and pillage carried out by many of Ghana's leaders over the past thirty years. One after another they systematically looted the country of its riches, until the Black Star of Africa became a nation of beggars living in abject poverty. Thankfully, the current leader, Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, is trying very hard to undo many of the errors of the past. As a young thirty-two-year-old Ghanaian officer, he removed a dictator, General Akuffo, from power in a coup in 1979, then handed the reins of government over to a civilian regime. The new regime's indolence and corruption so disgusted him that he overthrew it on New Year's Eve in 1981. Since then, over 80,000 civil servants have been dismissed, and Ghanaians have begun to face up to the hard truths of economics. The Ghanaian unit of currency, the cedi, has been devalued and import prices have shot up. Most importantly, however, since 1983 the gross domestic product has increased by an average of 6 percent per year, and the government gets full marks from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund for at least beginning the long, hard turnaround needed if the country is ever to achieve its potential.

Mention has been made of the ingenuity of the Ghanaian people. I thought of that a few months ago as I drove along the coastal road between Accra and Cape Coast with our then mission president, Miles Cunningham. As we drove along what would have been a million-dollar-a-mile beach in California, we watched a group of fishermen at work. One end of a large net was attached to a rope secured to a sturdy palm tree along the shore, and the net itself was towed by a small boat out into the ocean about four hundred yards or more, until it formed a great half circle. The free end of the net, attached to a rope, was then slowly tugged toward shore by a dozen or more men. The process of bringing the net ashore would take several hours, and if the fishermen were lucky they would land a catch of hundreds of pounds of fish. Technically, this form of fishing is called seine-net fishing. I was impressed by this simple yet ingenious use of resources.

In the spirit of adventure, and perhaps because each of us still retains a large streak of small boy inside him, President Cunningham and I stopped to give them a hand. For several minutes we tugged and hauled on the rope in response to the chanted cadence of the chief among the fishermen. The men laughed and joked, too courteous to comment on our somewhat puny efforts, and when we left they thanked us profusely. It was an elemental, almost primeval, scene, not much changed, I suppose, from what it would have been hundreds of years ago, an experience that lives in my memory as an example of the unchangeable face of Africa.

I felt a kinship to those simple fishermen, though we only exchanged smiles and a few words, and I remembered how the Savior had labored among men like that—men who knew the roar of the waves and the smell of the sea—and how He called some of them to be "fishers of men." I thought of Peter, the apostle, himself a fisherman, whose hands undoubtedly were rough and calloused and whose face was as weather-beaten and wind-burned as the faces of my Ghanaian brothers, and of how he would have felt at home among them.

As I witnessed their poverty and need, my thoughts turned to the great story told with majestic power and passion in John 21. Peter and others of the apostles had fished all night without success. When morning came they saw a man standing on the shore. He called to them to cast their net on the right side of the ship. They did so and were rewarded with a catch so numerous they could not draw it in. Later, Jesus (for He it was who had called to them) fed them fish and bread and spoke these immortal words to Peter: "Feed my lambs; feed my sheep." Oh, I thought, how great is our responsibility to feed you, my African brothers—to feed you with that spiritual food which will bring you eternal life, the glorious gospel of the living Christ! I was heartened by the human contact, sobered by the realization of the magnitude of the task that lies ahead for the Church in Africa, and more aware than ever that He who called Peter has also called latter-day servants to be "fishers of men."

The Church Comes to Ghana

The Church came to Ghana in 1979 with the creation of the West African Mission. As in Nigeria, the first missionaries found numerous small congregations of truth seekers who had started their own religious organizations, patterned after The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, right down to the name. The knowledge on which these groups were based was fragmentary and sometimes distorted. It had been accumulated over the years by Ghanaians who had studied in the United States or the United Kingdom or who had received missionary tracts in response to their requests to Church headquarters. Within the limits of their understanding, however, they did their best to set up and follow Church procedures and practices. Of course, they lacked priesthood authority for what they were doing, and they had to be taught and baptized in the Lord's way. So prepared were the people of Ghana to receive the gospel message, however, that growth of that portion of the West African Mission was rapid.

By the time the Ghana Accra Mission was established in July 1985, there were some 3,000 members in Ghana. Even before then, however, the first Ghanaian missionaries had been called. Elder Benjamin Crosby Sampson-Davis and Elder Samuel E. Bainson were called in early 1981 to serve in the England Manchester Mission. Before he heard of the Church, Elder Sampson-Davis had planned to enter the Anglican ministry, but when the Spirit touched his heart, he gladly gave it all up, turning down a four-year scholarship to an Anglican theological school in Nigeria. His companion, Elder Bainson, was a great missionary even prior to his call, having been responsible for the baptism of several friends. He prayed to be found worthy to serve a mission for the Lord, and his prayers were answered. "Because I've accepted the gospel, so many blessings have come to me," he says. "Sharing the gospel with somebody that doesn't have it is a special thing." (Ensign, April 1981, p. 78.)

In Ghana as elsewhere, missionaries submit a weekly report to their mission president. What a thrill it is to read those reports, which reveal the great faith and sweet spirit of the Ghanaian Saints. A recent report submitted by two Ghanaian missionaries, Sisters Essel and Mantey, indicates how in Ghana "the field is white already to harvest; and lo [she] that thrusteth in [her] sickle with [her] might, the same layeth up in store that [she] perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to [her] soul." (D&C 4:4.) In a single week they had fifty-one discussions, forty-nine of which resulted in a return appointment or baptism. Their weekly letter to the mission president reported: "One of the ways we've gained our sure knowledge that Jesus is the Christ and God is our Heavenly Father is through this our missionary service. We now understand that our Heavenly Father is gathering His family for a wonderful reunion, and we are helping. We had five souls for our baptism, which took place on Saturday 16/4/88 [April 16, 1988]. We were very happy for this mercy that our Heavenly Father showed us. This enabled us to believe that God is the rewarder of all those who diligently seek Him. We know the Church is true and everything in relation to it is also true. We say this in the name of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. Amen."

The faith and conviction of these choice young missionaries will result in a great harvest of souls in Ghana, as the elect of God hear the voices of His ordained servants. What is more, from the ranks of returned missionaries will come the bishops, stake presidents, and sister leaders of tomorrow.

Strong Leaders for the Church

As elsewhere in Black Africa, the Church in Ghana has attracted many outstanding men and women to its banners. One such stalwart is Professor Banyon A. Dadson, pro-vice chancellor (vice president) of the University of Cape Coast. A big man physically, intellectually, and spiritually, he holds a Ph.D. in organic chemistry from one of the world's great universities, Cambridge University in England. Prior to his current appointment, he served as professor of chemistry and then dean of faculty at his university. His professional credentials are more than matched by his spiritual strength. The story of his conversion is an interesting one. His first contact with Mormon teachings occurred in the early 1970s, when he met "Reverend" Billy Johnson, a Ghanaian who had come across a copy of the Book of Mormon and had started his own religious organization based on its teachings, but without official authority from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Brother Dadson attended one of the meetings of the group, but he had difficulty accepting the dancing and drumming that were part of the service. He was searching for the true gospel of Christ but felt that Johnson's organization fell short of the mark.

Nearly a decade later, Billy Johnson again contacted Brother Dadson. This time he told him that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had come officially to Ghana, that a branch had been organized with priesthood authority, and that he, Billy Johnson, had been baptized and called as the first district president.

Brother Dadson came back to church. He soon realized that he had finally found the pearl of great price for which he had been seeking. He was baptized, as were his wife, Henrietta, and the four oldest of their six children. As so often happens, his professional career has been furthered by his Church membership. "The Church has made me a more effective teacher and leader," he explains. "In dealing with the staff, I am constrained by the law of Christ to show love." (Ensign, June 1986, p. 58.)

Emmanuel Abu Kissi, a physician and surgeon, is another Ghanaian who combines great spiritual strength with unusual talents and abilities. He and his wife, Benedicta Lizabeth, first heard of the Church in England in the late 1970s. At the time, Brother Kissi was completing a three-year residency in surgery, and the family lived in Macclesfield, just outside of Manchester. Sister Kissi, a trained nurse/midwife, was in the midst of a spiritual depression so severe she had quit work and, in constant fear she would die, remained at home in their apartment.

One day she called Emmanuel, excited and bubbling with enthusiasm, to announce that she was going back to work. Her husband was, of course, delighted but surprised. What, he asked, had happened to change her attitude? She explained that missionaries from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had come to her door. They talked for a few minutes, and, sensing they could help her, she asked for a priesthood blessing. Instantly the feeling of spiritual depression that had haunted and tortured her for many weeks left, not to return.

The Kissis were taught by the missionaries, but Brother Kissi had questions about the Church no one seemed able to satisfy. Anxious to receive an answer, he sat down to write President Spencer W. Kimball. He recalls: "Just before I put pen to paper, all the answers I wanted became clear. To this day I can't remember the questions."

Brother Kissi has deep compassion for the poor. He and his family could have stayed in Great Britain after the completion of his surgical training and would have enjoyed a much higher standard of living than in Ghana. Yet he was anxious to return home. "The British people wanted me, but my people needed me," he explains.

Emmanuel and Benedicta operate a small hospital in Accra, appropriately named Deseret Hospital. Though ill equipped by Western standards, it is clean and neat and provides facilities desperately needed by the people of Ghana. Brother Kissi's generous, loving heart and deep compassion for those who suffer will not let him turn anyone away, regardless of ability to pay. During a 1983 drought in Ghana he helped distribute rice, corn, and beans sent by the Church to aid members and nonmembers alike. The gratitude of those who were helped by the gift of life-saving food touched his heart and often brought tears to his eyes. Emmanuel Kissi will probably never be rich in the things of this world, but he has learned well the lesson so eloquently summarized by King Benjamin: "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) He exemplifies not only the highest ideals of the medical profession, but also those of Christian charity, which "endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him." (Moroni 7:47.) Brother Kissi's story, which I have heard from his own lips on several occasions, was told in Church News, November 23, 1986.

In Ghana, as elsewhere in Black Africa, sharing and mutual help in times of need are deeply held social values. President Emmanuel Opare, second counselor in the Accra District presidency, tells this faith-promoting story: He was home one weekend with his wife and four small children. Like most African families, the Opares are poor; all the money they had to see them through the weekend was eighty cedis, then equivalent to about one dollar. A man came to the door saying that he needed to go home and had no money for transportation. President Opare felt impressed to give him fifty cedis, even though that almost totally depleted the family's meager resources. Later that day an old school friend came by to visit. The two men had not seen each other for several years and enjoyed visiting together for most of the evening, reminiscing about old times and mutual friends. For a few hours, at least, Emmanuel was able to forget his financial problems. Later that evening, as the friend left, he gave President Opare a present of 5,000 cedis (sixty dollars).

Elizabeth Kwaw, a district Relief Society president and seminary teacher in Cape Coast, exemplifies the great faith of the women of Ghana. During the 1983-84 famine in Ghana she was approached by one of her neighbors, who said, "How is it that we are getting slim but you and your husband continue to be strong and robust?" As Sister Kwaw tells this story, she testifies that the principle of tithing kept her and her family going during that terrible time. Each night she would lie in bed and pray fervently that Heavenly Father would bless her to know what to make or sell in her small store in order to bring in the cash necessary to buy food for her family. She was inspired to sell hush puppies, fried pastries made of cornmeal and spices, and got up at three o'clock in the morning to make several hundred of these tasty snacks daily. She had learned to make them in the United States. Although hush puppies are not a usual part of the Ghanaian diet, sales were brisk, and the proceeds kept her family going. She was careful to pay tithing on her income and grateful to be able to do so, though it would have been so easy, under the circumstances, to forget about the Lord's tenth. Sister Kwaw laughs when she thinks about making and selling such a foreign food, but she is convinced that the Lord inspired her to do so.

Sister Kwaw's husband, Stephen, shakes his head in amazement as he tells about the customers and business in Elizabeth's small store. In a land where everyone has to work at whatever they can find in order to barely scratch out a living, Sister Kwaw's store is very important to the family, even though her husband, Stephen, has a good job, by Ghanaian standards at least.

While serving as district Relief Society president, Elizabeth, assisted by her counselors, cooked lunches for missionary zone conferences every six weeks, as well as for other district functions and activities. Because of these church-service activities, she found it necessary to close her store several days each month during busy selling times. To the amazement of others, business lost from closing the store was always made up the day before or in the days immediately following the closure. Her husband laughs when he recounts that customers would even come to their home outside of regular store hours asking to buy a dress, though dresses of comparable quality could be purchased readily at numerous retail outlets all over town. Elizabeth and Stephen know from experience that when we are on the Lord's errand, He blesses us. They testify to the sweet fulfillment in their lives of the Savior's words: "Give and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom: For with the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again." (Luke 6:38.)

Tracey Addy is a vivacious sixteen-year-old Ghanaian who lives in the city of Tema, just east of Accra, with her parents, Isaac and June, and her four brothers and a sister. The Addys, who are a strong Latter-day Saint family, moved back to Ghana from England a few years ago. Though the adjustments in living style and standards have sometimes been challenging, Tracey and her brothers and sister have been assisted greatly by the examples of their parents.

At a recent district conference in Accra, Tracey spoke of her membership in the Church and how its standards help her to withstand temptation. Said she: "I am glad to be a member of this church, because it makes me different from others, especially in school. My moral standards are different from theirs, [which include,] for example, going out late, never staying at home, wearing dresses or clothes that give bad ideas, and having close relationships with boys. I like to have the moral courage to make my actions consistent with my knowledge of right and wrong. This also helps me to keep far away from trouble.

"Two good examples of strong leaders in this church are my mum and dad. I know my dad works very hard for this church and is devoted to serving it. He gets up early in the morning and comes home to carry on with more work at his desk late at night. And also my mum, who helps the Relief Society and does a lot of work at the district meetings.

"I hope that one day I'll grow up to be like them. I know that Satan works very hard to pull us down, but we can overcome him by prayer and fasting. He can try to tempt us through friends. But if we hold on tight to the iron rod, he'll never be able to catch us. And if we sow the righteous seed in our lives, we will one day be rewarded for our efforts."

How impressed I was with this sweet young woman, with her calm determination to live the standards of the Church and her earnest desire to serve the Lord. I recalled the ringing words of the First Presidency: "How glorious and near to the angels is youth that is clean. This youth has joy unspeakable here and eternal happiness hereafter."

Young Latter-day Saints in Ghana and elsewhere in Black Africa face the same problems as their counterparts in other countries of the world—conflicting priorities, getting and keeping a testimony, the temptations of the flesh, loneliness, career choices, and so forth. Because Latter-day Saints are very much a minority group in African society, some of those problems may seem accentuated, but though temptation may alter its disguise, the challenge is constant worldwide. It is, therefore, gratifying to listen to a dedicated young person such as Tracey, and to realize that she and many more like her represent the promise of tomorrow for the Church in Africa.

In June 1989, without any warning, the government of Ghana issued an injunction that suspended activities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and another church in the country. All expatriate missionaries were required to leave Ghana within seven days, our buildings were locked, and no meetings were permitted. The devil and his agents rejoiced.

After some difficulty, acting under instructions from the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Jack H. Goaslind and I were able to visit Ghana and discuss the matter with senior officials of the government. It was obvious to us they had been misled by professional revilers of the Church into believing scurrilous lies about the Latter-day Saints and their beliefs. The officials were unaware of the revelation on priesthood and of the Church's teachings on the brotherhood of man. They also seemed not to know of the very substantial amounts of humanitarian aid provided by the Church over the years to the people of Ghana, assistance provided in the true spirit of brotherhood and Christian charity.

As always, our faithful members in Ghana have obediently followed the requirement that we honor, obey, and sustain the law of the land, and they have humbly accepted the government's decision. But the flame of faith continues to burn strong and true in their hearts as they anxiously await the day when the injunction will be lifted and they can once again meet to worship God in purity and power. We have the assurance of the Spirit that that day will come soon.

Ghana's golden harvest of souls, which started as a trickle only a decade ago, will in God's time grow steadily into a great torrent. It will roll forward "till, like a sea of glory, it spreads from pole to pole" (Hymns, 1985, no. 268), across the length and breadth of that ancient land, and the Black Star of Africa sparkles with the effulgent beauty of the glorious gospel of Christ.
