Alexander B. Morrison, Dawning of a Brighter Day: The Church in Black Africa ( 1990)

CHAPTER EIGHT

Brave Beginnings in Other Countries

In addition to our major thrusts into Nigeria and Ghana, brave beginnings have been made to bring the restored gospel of Christ to the inhabitants of a number of other countries in Black Africa. Much, of course, needs to be done everywhere. We are just beginning to get our feet firmly under us in those countries. Yet "mighty oaks from small acorns grow," and we can have confidence that the Church will go forward in these and all other lands in Africa, on the Lord's timetable, to bring the peace and joy of the everlasting gospel to all of God's children in that great continent.

Here are brief summaries of the current state of the growth of the Church in various countries of Africa.

Ivory Coast

The Ivory Coast, a West African country known also by its French name as Cote d'Ivoire, has a population of approximately ten million, of whom two million or so live in Abidjan, the capital. Other large towns include Bouake, Yamoussoukro, and Daloa. Abidjan, which has many modern buildings and shops, has been called "the Paris of Africa." Certainly the French influence remains strong there. Although France formally severed ties with her former colony more than twenty-five years ago, French advisers, money, and influence are felt everywhere.

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have lived and worked in Ivory Coast over the past twenty or more years. For most of this time they operated under the auspices of the former International Mission, which attempted to maintain contact with scattered expatriate families in the country. During the 1970s, Barnard Silver and his wife, Cherry, for example, lived in Ferkessedougou, 300 miles up-country from Abidjan, where he was the general manager of a large sugar mill. During this time the Silvers conducted sacrament and Sunday School meetings in their home and visited scattered members throughout the country as they were able to do so. Similarly, Terry Don Broadhead and his wife, Bobby, held meetings in their home in 1986 and 1987. Brother Broadhead is a U.S. military man temporarily assigned to Ivory Coast.

As mentioned in chapter 5, Elder Marvin J. Ashton dedicated the land of Ivory Coast for the preaching of the gospel on September 4, 1987, and set Brother Broadhead apart to serve as the unit leader, with authority to baptize, ordain, and set in order the affairs of the Church in Abidjan. Brother Broadhead now has been released, and Philippe Assard, a native Ivorian, serves as branch president in Abidjan.

Documentation to have the Church officially recognized by the Ivory Coast government was submitted in the spring of 1987. The application still awaited approval as of spring 1990, when this was written, but hopes were high this could be accomplished soon. In the meantime, two faithful expatriate missionary couples, Scott H. and Lu Ciel Taggart [^1] and Robert M. and Lola Mae Walker, were busily engaged in bringing souls to Christ in Ivory Coast, laboring in Abidjan, where more than 100 individuals have joined the Church since early 1988.

As is common in Black Africa, many of the Saints in Ivory Coast experience extreme financial stress. Many heads of families have no work. The unemployment rate approaches 80 percent. Though many of our members are well trained in various occupations and desperately want to work, they cannot find jobs. The Ivory Coast is extremely depressed economically, primarily as a result of the current low world prices for coffee and cocoa, the country's primary exports.

Despite their extreme temporal difficulties, however, the Saints in Ivory Coast evince the same spirit of faith and testimony so common among Latter-day Saints in Africa. They have found an age-old truth, one that has applied to Christians over the centuries: to follow the path of Christ requires faith, courage, and sacrifice. Lucien Affoue, his wife, Agathe, and their children, Patricia, Clarissa, and Geoffrey, for example, illustrate the courage and fortitude of the Ivorian Saints. Brother Affoue joined the Church in Lyon, France, in 1980, while a student. Although Patricia and Clarissa, the two daughters, also joined the Church, at first Agathe wanted nothing to do with her husband's new faith. One day, however, moved by the Spirit, she went to the missionaries and asked to be taught. Soon she too joined, and the family was later sealed for time and all eternity in the Swiss Temple.

While residing in France, Brother and Sister Affoue gained valuable church experience, he in the presidency of the Bordeaux Branch and she as a counselor in Primary. In March 1984 the family returned to Ivory Coast, where Brother Affoue hoped to obtain a teaching position. For two years they were the only Saints in the country. Each week Brother Affoue faithfully held church services for his family in their home. Finally, in 1986, the Affoues received a letter from Philippe Assard, who with his family had returned to his native country from Germany. Brother Assard had joined the Church in Germany and served in the high council of the Dusseldorf Germany Stake. Sister Assard, who is a native German, struggled to learn French and adapt to her new surroundings in Africa. Despite their cultural differences, she and Sister Affoue became fast friends, bound together by the sisterhood of the gospel. Each week the Affoue and Assard families met for church services at the home of the Assards and rejoiced together as they shared their testimonies of the truthfulness of the great latter-day work.

A highlight of these first stirrings of church growth in Ivory Coast was the visit in early 1987 of Elder Russell M. Taylor, then of the Europe Area presidency. Elder Taylor blessed and encouraged the members and authorized Brother Assard to gather together members of the Church and to serve as "shepherd of the flock" in Ivory Coast. How the Affoue family rejoiced as growth began to occur!

In October 1987 Brother Affoue was finally able to obtain employment, as professor of automotive science in a technical college at Bouake, the second largest city in Ivory Coast. Once again the family moved, and once again they were the only members of the Church in their part of the country. Faithful as ever, they held sacrament meeting and Sunday School in their home. A unit of the Church has now been organized in Bouake, with more than twenty members attending each week. Brother Affoue serves as unit leader, with Sister Affoue looking after Relief Society and Young Women, and Clarissa teaching Primary.

The Affoue children are as faithful as their parents. When Patricia came home for Christmas in 1987, she began to teach the Primary lessons to her younger brother and other children. After she left, Clarissa, age thirteen, said to her father, "Now give me a chance to teach the children." Clarissa and a non-member cousin now work with a group that began with four children and has expanded to nearly a dozen.

Solange Sea, aged twenty-five, is the first Ivoirian woman to be baptized into the Church in Ivory Coast. The mother of two small children, Ezekiel and Sarah, she is married to Vincent Sea, a technician with the national electric energy company, and also a member of the Church. Solange, a tall, slender, intense woman, has deep spiritual sensitivities. I listened to the story of her conversion while attending a Church meeting in Abidjan in September 1988. When Solange and Vincent were introduced to missionaries Barnard and Cherry Silver in May 1988, she quickly began to read the Book of Mormon and various missionary tracts for several hours a day. She asked the missionaries whether the Angel Moroni looked like the picture in one of the tracts. Why? they asked. She replied, "One morning this week I had a vision of a heavenly being." At the heavenly visitor's request, she left the bedroom, brought back the two children, and awakened her husband to pray for them all. Vincent did not see the vision, but he understood the depth of his wife's conviction.

Not uncommon for Africans, Solange's testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel came in a dream. As she lay in bed, she saw Jesus approach her and tenderly ask, "Do you love me?" Overwhelmed by a sense of the Savior's love for her and her love for Him, Solange began to weep. She made a commitment to serve Him and accepted the invitation to be baptized. She was subsequently called to serve as a counselor in Relief Society. Her unusual spiritual sensitivity, great desire and commitment to serve, and generous spirit commend her to all.

Liberia

Liberia, with a land mass about the size of the state of Tennessee, is a small West African country that lies just north of the equator at a point where the coastline turns east. The history of Liberia is unlike that of any other African country. It owes its origin to freed black slaves who returned to the continent, their passage home to Africa paid for in the early 1800s by a white philanthropic society, the American Colonization Society, which was chartered by the U.S. Congress. Liberia's American origins are found everywhere in the country, from the name of its capital city, Monrovia (named after U.S. President James Monroe of Monroe Doctrine fame) to its red, white, and blue flag with a single star. The U.S. dollar is official currency, and many streets and townships bear American place-names.

For 133 years Liberia seemed to be a unique African example of rock-solid political stability. In 1971 it had the distinction of being the first African nation to achieve a peaceful constitutional transfer of power when President William Tubman died in office and was succeeded by his vice president, William Tolbert. Nine years later, in 1980, the government of President Tolbert was overthrown in a military coup led by a sergeant in the Liberian army named Samuel K. Doe, who promptly assumed the rank of general.

The Liberia Monrovia Mission was established in early 1988, with J. Duffy Palmer as mission president. Brother Palmer is a World War II veteran of the U.S. Marine Corps who was badly wounded in fighting in the Pacific. He returned from military service to study law and become a judge in Utah. Prior to their call to labor in Liberia, President Palmer and his wife, Jocelyn, served as missionaries in the Nigeria Lagos Mission, where President Palmer was mission president from 1984—1986. The Palmers thus were well suited to open up missionary work in another West African country. No more faithful or dedicated couple could have been found to undertake those crucial first steps involved in setting a new mission in place in Africa.

The Palmers arrived in Liberia several months before the Liberia Monrovia Mission was established and, with characteristic energy and enthusiasm, set to work. The first requirement was to establish the support systems so necessary for the survival of expatriates in Black Africa—safe housing of acceptable quality, an account with a reputable bank, an automobile, registration with appropriate government departments. Some may wonder about the designation of an automobile as a necessity, but our experience in Black Africa has shown that expatriate missionaries simply cannot function there at present without one. Though driving conditions in Black African countries are an adventure at best, failure to have an automobile makes it well-nigh impossible for expatriates to shop for food and other essentials or visit investigators, and they are much safer in an automobile than they would be as pedestrians.

President and Sister Palmer were released from their missions in mid-1989 and returned to their Utah home. President Palmer was replaced by Miles Cunningham, a retired California businessman. President Cunningham and his vivacious wife, Stella, are "old African hands," having served previously in Ghana, where Brother Cunningham was mission president. Both possess in full measure those characteristics of resourcefulness, enthusiasm, and adaptability, coupled with deep spirituality, so essential for successful missionary work in Africa.

Liberia was dedicated for the preaching of the gospel in September 1987 by Elder Marvin J. Ashton of the Quorum of the Twelve. The apostolic blessing pronounced on the land and its people has resulted in steady growth of the Church in Liberia, and by the end of 1989 there were more than 1,000 members.

The great faith and simple reliance on the Lord of the Latter-day Saints in Liberia is illustrated in the following tender tale recounted recently by Sister Ruth F. Stewart, an American missionary in Monrovia:

"Two priesthood leaders, Brothers Jimmy Padmore and Franklin Kennedy, had come to a school where a small local congregation of the Saints meets, early one Saturday morning, to tidy up and prepare the sacrament table. As they poured the water into the cups, Brother Padmore looked at his friend anxiously and said he didn't have any money for the bread. Brother Kennedy sadly said he didn't have any either, and so they finished up in silence and neatly covered the small table with a snow-white cloth. As they locked the door, leaving the bread plate empty, Brother Padmore whispered, 'We'll have bread for the sacrament this morning.'

"As they began the long walk home to get their families, they approached a little stand where bread rolls were for sale. Brother Padmore looked down and saw a twenty-five cent piece lying in the sand. They purchased the rolls and, with big smiles and beaming faces, shook hands warmly and said, 'Brother, we have our sacrament.'"

As elsewhere in Black Africa, a key to real growth in Liberia is to allow—indeed, to insist—that Africans provide the leadership required. Expatriates can and should provide "shadow leadership" and training, but the faster Africans are encouraged to "govern themselves," in the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the faster the work will progress. President Cunningham fully understands that principle and is applying it with vigor and intelligence. Both extensive training and patience are required, but it is essential that the purity of the doctrine and practices of the Church be maintained.

The need is not so much to seek growth as to modulate it. It would readily be possible to baptize hundreds each week in Liberia, but the requirements for wisdom and orderliness indicate otherwise. Elder Ashton's wise words of counsel on this subject bear repetition. In remarks made shortly after returning from dedicating Liberia and two other African nations for the preaching of the gospel, he said that one of our challenges is to "not try to grow beyond our ability to prepare local leadership. Branches must not outgrow the roots." (Church News, October 17, 1987.) That is advice we must never forget as the Church forges forward in Liberia and other Black African countries.

Zaire

One of the most impressive things about the country of Zaire is its size. With fewer than 30 million people, it is three times the size of Texas and occupies much of central Africa. Zaire contains some of the world's densest rain forests, with giant trees towering overhead two hundred feet or more, forming a luminous green canopy that filters out direct sunlight. In the eastern part of the country are vast grassy savannas that, if properly cultivated, could provide huge amounts of the food so badly needed by the people of Zaire. (Of course, even if the food were grown, transporting it elsewhere in the country would pose a problem, since Zaire has at present less than four thousand miles of roads.)

Much of the northern border of the country is marked by the mighty Congo (Zaire) River, the second largest river by volume in the world. In their recurring and eventually successful attempts to find a sea route to the spices of the Orient, Portuguese sailors stopped at the mouth of the Congo in 1482. It was probably the first contact between Europeans and the Kongo Kingdom that flourished there. Until the last century, however, the major contact between the peoples of the Congo and the West was through the hellish and inhuman trade in slaves. Thousands of frightened, brutalized people were transported from the region, many of them taken by Portuguese slave traders to work on Brazilian plantations.

By the late nineteenth century, the European powers were casting avaricious eyes on Africa, in search of cheap raw materials for their factories, new markets for manufactured goods, and better trade routes. King Leopold II of Belgium financed expeditions in the Congo region by H. M. Stanley, an explorer most famous for his part in finding the missionary-explorer David Livingstone, who had disappeared in central Africa. Stanley secured treaties with Congolese chiefs that permitted King Leopold to personally control a million square miles of central Africa. Leopold's Congo estate was later transferred to Belgium, and for many years the region was known as the Belgian Congo. Independence from Belgium was achieved in 1960, and the new rulers, wishing to shed their colonial past, renamed the country Zaire.

The official language of Zaire is French, spoken by most men but by only a minority of women, who, as in other Black African countries, are in general less educated than their male counterparts. More than two hundred local languages are spoken. At a recent sacrament meeting in Kinshasa, the capital, for example, I spoke in French, which the brethren present could understand, and was simultaneously translated into Linguala, a local tongue, for the benefit of the sisters. In the south of Zaire, a variation of Swahili (Shaba-swahili) is widely used. It differs somewhat from the Swahili spoken in eastern Africa.

When The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was granted legal status by the government of Zaire on February 12, 1986, there were only a few members of the Church in that vast country. David M. Kennedy, special representative of the First Presidency, met on that day with Mandunga Bula Niate, then the Minister of Communications and Information in the government of Zaire, and a firm friend of the Church. Also present were Oscar W. McConkie of the Church's legal department and his wife, Judith, and a newly called missionary couple, R. Bay and Jean Hutchings. The group traveled to the home of President Mobutu Sese Seko, where their meeting and a subsequent interview with Elder Kennedy were recorded for television and radio. The interview was broadcast the next day to the people of Zaire.

At the time of their call to Zaire, Bay and Jean Hutchings certainly were no strangers to missionary work, Brother Hutchings having served previously as mission president in France and Switzerland. They promptly began to meet with Zairean investigators and the few members in the country—first in the carport of a member, Nkita Bungi Mbuyi, a returned missionary who had been converted in Belgium, and later in a large villa that was remodeled into a meetinghouse. The first baptisms in Zaire were the sons of Banza Muchioko and his wife, a Zairean couple who had joined the Church in Switzerland several years previously.

By the time President and Sister Hutchings were released at the end of June 1988, a firm base had been laid for future growth in Zaire. Two large, well-organized branches were functioning in Kinshasa. Both were well housed—the Binza Branch in excellent rented quarters and the Limite Branch in an equally fine Church-owned building. Twelve hundred miles to the south, the Lubumbashi Branch, with over four hundred members, was approaching the point where division into two units could be considered.

On July 1, 1988, C. Stephen Hatch, a retired physician from Provo, Utah, became president of the Zaire Kinshasa Mission. President Hatch and his wife, Marjery, had previously served as missionaries in Mauritius and, before that, in Belgium, where he was the mission president. Wise, experienced, competent, and cool, he came to Zaire with a firm vision of where the mission was in terms of progress and where further development is required.

Many Latter-day Saints in Zaire are poor. Most families eat once a day if they are lucky and if someone in the family is working. Yet they exhibit the same spiritual strength and faithfulness so characteristic of other African Saints. Some time ago, for example, a Protestant minister named Baende Isukongola, with a strong congregation in Kinshasa, began to have serious misgivings about the teachings of his church. As he searched the scriptures, Baende noted numerous teachings and practices that were missing from the church he belonged to. Among other problems he became concerned that his church did not teach or practice tithing. He investigated the teachings and practices of other churches but found them also to be incomplete. Then a friend mentioned to Baende that a group he knew only as "the Mormons" evidently preached and practiced tithing. The minister finally established the fact that the Mormons had their world headquarters in the United States. He enlisted the assistance of the U.S. Embassy in Kinshasa, which directed him to the Zaire Kinshasa Mission.

One day Baende arrived on the doorstep of the mission home, anxious to learn about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Each week, armed with a long list of penetrating questions, he met with the missionaries. Soon the Spirit bore testimony to him and he was baptized. He brought his wife to hear the missionaries, and she too joined the Church, as did their two sons. One problem, however, had arisen. Knowing what he knew, Baende could not remain as a Protestant minister, and so he resigned his post. He had to give away a guaranteed income, a secure, assured source of livelihood, but he was glad to do so, realizing that he had found a pearl of great price, a splendrous treasure. It took great courage, in a country with unemployment rates of over 80 percent, to give up a job with no assurance at all that he would ever work again. Then a miracle happened. Baende obtained a permanent, secure job with the government. In the midst of all the unemployment in Zaire, he had again secured his temporal future. Two weeks later one of his sons also secured employment. The good brother recognized the hand of the Lord in his life and testified often of God's goodness to him. He and his family remain faithful members of the Church.

Sierra Leone

Missionary work in Sierra Leone began in 1988, when Elder C. Erwin Waite and his wife, Colleen, and Elder Clair Fisher and his wife, Iliene, arrived in that small, very poor West African country. The first few weeks were very difficult for the Waites and the Fishers as they struggled to find their way through the steamy disorder of Freetown, the capital of Sierra Leone. Their housing was inadequate. Though large enough, the house stood at the end of a dirt road, well high impassable after a rain. The electrical supply failed repeatedly, and there was no air conditioning. They also struggled with sickness and isolation. But through it all their courage remained high and their faith strong. They hung on and persevered. Things began to get better. More acceptable housing was found and electrical generators were purchased to ensure a reliable electricity source. Illness abated, perhaps in part because their housing conditions were improved.

The faith and courage of these missionaries is exemplified in the following excerpts from one of their recent monthly reports:

We are busy teaching new contacts.

We are preparing for another baptism on Saturday, September 10.

We just can't teach fast enough.

We want to develop leadership first, and will be applying soon for another branch here as soon as we can develop the necessary leadership.

The work here is great, the people are the best, and we just love what we are doing.

I hope we can do what the Lord wants us to do.

How blessed we are to have people like the Waites and the Fishers serving as missionaries for the Lord Jesus Christ! They typify a valiant band of missionary couples serving throughout Africa—facing challenges, to be sure, but secure in the knowledge they are on the Lord's errand and encircled about in the arms of His love. They are modern pioneers, the present-day equivalent of those who in the early days of the Church placed all that they had on the altar of service. Praise be to God that the spirit of service lives yet in the Church! The willingness of couple missionaries to serve and sacrifice in African countries such as Sierra Leone tells much not only about the devotion and commitment of the missionaries involved, but also about the power of the work—the power of a cause greater than mortal man, a cause that has a "more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else." (Alma 30:5; emphasis added.)

Kenya

The Church is not yet legally recognized in Kenya, so we have no missionaries there. Since 1981 Church representatives have looked after our interests in that East African country. Our current (1990) district president is Joseph Sitati, an extremely competent and spiritual Kenyan businessman. The Spirit broods over Kenya, however, as over other countries in Black Africa, preparing its people for the day when the fullness of the gospel will be preached with power and authority in that beautiful country. The following story illustrates the point.

In early 1988 Marvin Bowden, who was then serving as Church representative in Kenya, was summoned to a meeting with a district commissioner of the Kenyan government. This official, whose title is a holdover from British colonial days, is, in effect, the senior government representative in the district involved. As such he has the full weight of the government behind him. Since the Church is not yet recognized in Kenya, Brother Bowden was somewhat apprehensive about the meeting. His fears were heightened when the official said to him sharply, "You people are not even registered as a church in Kenya, yet I understand you had 150 people at your meetings last Sunday. I want an explanation!" Then, slamming a copy of the Book of Mormon on the table, he shouted, "And I want to know about that book!"

Brother Bowden took the commissioner at his word and proceeded to tell him about "that book." It was, he said, a book about Christ, another witness for Him. It contained the record of a fallen people and had been translated by a prophet of God. The official listened intently. Made bold by his silence, Brother Bowden proceeded to teach him the first missionary discussion, then the second, and finally the third. The Spirit was strong as that humble missionary bore powerful testimony of the truth of the great latter-day work and of the Savior of the world.

Finally, the commissioner rose from his chair. His tone now was gentle, his voice quiet, "You and your people are free to meet whenever and wherever you wish," he said. "If I can help personally, please let me know." He picked up the Book of Mormon and gently caressed its cover. "My wife and I will join the Church after we've finished reading it," he said.

In recounting this story, Brother Bowden said, "Elder Morrison, I don't even remember driving home from the meeting. I think I just floated home on a cloud of joy."

Such is the power of the work in Africa.

Zimbabwe

For much of its history the part of southern Africa now known as Zimbabwe has been intimately influenced by events occurring in what is now the Republic of South Africa. Fleeing the chaos caused in southern Africa in the early years of the nineteenth century by the expansionist policies of the great Zulu military genius Shaka, Bantu-speaking peoples of the Ndebele (or Matabele) tribe migrated to what now is southwestern Zimbabwe. There they carved out a pastoralist kingdom, driving out the Shona tribe. Over the next half-century, British and Afrikaner traders, hunters, and prospectors moved into the region from the south.

In 1889, the British South Africa Company was formed by Cecil Rhodes to colonize and develop the region. By the turn of the century the Ndebele and Shona tribes had been pacified, and in 1923 Southern Rhodesia was annexed by the British crown. After fifteen years of guerilla warfare, the white minority in Rhodesia formally agreed to multiracial elections, and in 1980 the current state of Zimbabwe was formed, with Robert Mugabe, a Shona, as prime minister. Of the current population of over eight million, probably fewer than one hundred thousand are whites.

The opening up of missionary work in Zimbabwe must be seen as an extension of that which began in 1953, when three missionaries climbed Lion's Head Mountain overlooking Cape Town and dedicated South Africa to the preaching of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. Missionary work began in southern Rhodesia in late 1950, when visas were granted to permit missionaries of the Church to enter the British-ruled Confederation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Four missionaries were assigned to the city of Bulawayo, in Matabeleland, and four others to the capital of Salisbury (now Harare), where white settlers had defended themselves several decades previously against the warriors of the Mashona people.

Within a few months missionary work was firmly established, with the first convert, Hugh Hodgekiss, being baptized early in 1951. Currently there are chapels in Harare, Bulawayo, and Kwe Kwe.

The Zimbabwe Harare Mission was organized on July 1, 1987, with Joseph Hamstead as mission president. An Englishman, President Hamstead had served as a stake president and as president of the London Temple. He and his wife, Margaret, a charming and spritely woman, have been outstanding ambassadors for the Church in Zimbabwe, gaining the respect and trust of senior officials in the Zimbabwe government. Under President Hamstead's leadership, significant expansion of missionary work has begun among black Zimbabweans. Given the racial makeup of the country, one can expect that most of the future growth of the Church in Zimbabwe will occur among our black brothers and sisters. White missionaries in Zimbabwe enter the country as teachers in the school system and are permitted to carry out religious duties only in their spare time, after their daily labor as teachers is finished.

Betty Ann Regenass is a single parent whose first exposure to the Church occurred when she and her two young daughters went to a BYU Program Bureau production in Bulawayo. Missionaries called on her. At first she was wary, until two members of the Church who happened to be insurance salesmen visited her to determine whether she wanted to purchase additional insurance. After some discussion they indicated she couldn't really afford more insurance, but one of them said he had something better to offer. He told Betty Ann about the Church. She resolved to learn more, and she and her family subsequently were fellowshipped by the insurance salesman and his family, had the missionary discussions, and attended meetings and various Church functions. Says she: "At last our lives seemed to have meaning and purpose, and we had a testimony of the truth of the gospel and of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

Betty Ann and her oldest daughter were baptized on August 28, 1976, and her younger daughter joined as soon as she was old enough. The older daughter subsequently attended Brigham Young University. Despite all of the trauma and horror of the civil war in Zimbabwe, which directly affected Betty Ann's family, she remains true to the faith—a believing and practicing Latter-day Saint.

In 1983 Christopher Mandwe was a young African student at a Methodist boarding school in Zimbabwe. He had a great desire to seek out religious truth and attended various Christian churches, but concluded that although all had some truth, each had something vital missing from its doctrines and practices.

After investigating and abandoning an interest in at least five other religious organizations, Christopher met missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Says he: "My eyes and mind were opened, and I knew I had found what I was looking for. Those were some of the most glorious times of my life. I felt the love of God. I had found something that was more precious and above everything."

Christopher soon joined the Church. Shortly afterward he had an experience, typical among Africans, that strengthened his testimony. "About two months after my baptism," he recalled, "my deceased maternal grandmother appeared to me in a dream and told me that there was indeed a living God and that Jesus was the very Christ, the living Son of God. She also told me that the Book of Mormon was true and that I had done the right thing in joining the Church. I then had a strong desire to serve a mission." Christopher returned in early 1988 from serving as a missionary in the England Manchester Mission. He is an outstanding young man whose experience is indicative of the spiritual sensitivity of the African people.

Swaziland

In the early nineteenth century, southern Africa underwent a convulsion of fear and blood let loose by the Zulu tribe, led by a despotic military genius named Shaka. In Shaka's hands, organized terror became an instrument of state policy. His armies, armed with the terrible stabbing spear, the assegai, swept away the other black tribes in the present South African province of Natal. Tribe after tribe was subjugated, its ruling family killed and its young men incorporated into Shaka's armies. Thousands died or fled as the ruthless Zulu war machine rolled south, west, and north. Pockets of resistance managed to survive in the northern hills. One such group, the Dlamini clan, became the rulers of modern-day Swaziland, a mountain kingdom bordered on three sides by South Africa and on the east by Mozambique.

The land area of Swaziland is less than 7,000 square miles, making it one of the smallest countries in Africa. With its mountains, high meadows, and beautiful scenery, Swaziland is sometimes termed "the Switzerland of Africa." More than 90 percent of the approximately 750,000 inhabitants are black Africans.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is not yet a decade old in Swaziland, Church meetings having been held in the country only since 1984. A branch was organized in 1986 with Brother John Scott, an expatriate resident of the country, as president. In 1987 the government officially reognized the Church as a legal entity. That same year the first Swazi members were baptized. By early 1990 there were approximately 120 members, all of whom are black Africans except the branch president, Larry Brown, and his family. Brother Brown is an American public health official on temporary assignment in Swaziland, seconded from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control. He and his family are among the great "nursing fathers and mothers" who are the Lord's pioneers in Africa, helping to establish the Church in one country after another.

In February 1990, Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Council of the Twelve dedicated Swaziland for the preaching of the gospel and the work of the Lord. I was privileged to accompany Elder Maxwell on that historic occasion. The dedication ceremony, attended by local members and Church leaders from the South Africa Johannesburg Mission and the Benoni South Africa Stake, was held on a beautiful grassy hilltop overlooking the capital city of Mbabane. During the program a misty cloud settled over the hill like a soft wool blanket, effectively separating the small group on the Lord's errand from the bustling, noisy city below. It was as though He had drawn a curtain to shield sacred proceedings from worldly influences.

As reported in the Church News (March 10, 1990), Elder Maxwell, in an eloquent, deeply spiritual dedicatory prayer, blessed the country and its rulers and asked the Lord to bless the people with a testimony that the Book of Mormon is another testament of Jesus Christ. A sweet, gentle spirit touched the hearts of all present, and many rejoiced with the realization that in the rapturous rhythm of the Restoration, the time had come "for the fulness of the gospel to come to this good land and to this good people."

Lesotho

Lesotho, the "kingdom in the sky," lies in mountainous country in southern Africa, completely surrounded by the Republic of South Africa. It owes its existence to a chief named Mosheoshoe (Moe-shway-shway), a contemporary of Shaka, and the son of a minor chief of the Sotho tribe. In his early manhood Moshoeshoe experienced the terrible chaos caused by Zulu expansionism. Bands of Zulu marauders raided repeatedly through the mountains and valleys of what today is the country of Lesotho, leaving in their wake a swath of death and destruction. In the dead of winter, Moshoeshoe led his family and two hundred followers to refuge atop a mountain with a perennial spring at its summit. He was to remain in his mountain fortress for half a century, constantly growing in strength through a rare combination of diplomacy and force, playing his enemies off against one another with great skill and subtlety. Moshoeshoe was a remarkable man by any measure, revered to this day by his people as a leader of unusual strength and wisdom.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is in its infancy in Lesotho, having been recognized by the government in July 1989. The first baptisms took place in December 1989, and several foundation families have already joined the Church.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Council of the Twelve dedicated Lesotho on February 22, 1990. Once again I was honored to accompany Elder Maxwell on the Lord's sacred errand.

The dedication took place late on a sunny afternoon in a pleasant grove of trees secluded from the world, near the capital city of Maseru. It was a place of gentle beauty. The afternoon sun, filtering through the leaves, bathed the grove in shimmering shadows, and in the background the Caledon River murmured and gurgled. I thought of another day and another sacred grove, far away from southern Africa, where the Father and Son appeared to a boy prophet and ushered in the last dispensation of the glorious gospel.

An eleven-year-old African boy, Tsuenvane Kutlane, solemnly and with great reverence read a brief history of his land and people. Overcome with emotion, he paused several times to wipe the tears from his eyes with the end of his necktie. I glanced at Elder Maxwell, he of the tender loving heart, and noted his eyes too were wet with emotion. So were my own.

In his eloquent dedicatory prayer, Elder Maxwell petitioned the God of heaven to "smile upon this smiling people, that their basic goodness, friendliness and happiness" would bring many of them to Christ. (Church News, March 10, 1990.) He prayed that Lesotho might be a "host country for a host of those who come here." His listeners were silent, struck by the solemnity of the occasion, and sensing that they were in the presence of a prophet, seer, and revelator.

The presiding elder in Lesotho at the time of its dedication was another expatriate pioneer in Africa, Gary Massey, who comes from Fresno, California. Brother Massey, an agronomist, is in Lesotho to direct a crop improvement project sponsored by the U.S. Agency for International Development. I was excited to see experimental plots where he is growing improved varieties of beans and other crops that will significantly increase the food supply in Lesotho. I thrilled to learn that the farmers of the region are anxious to adopt improved procedures and crop varieties. But even more thrilling was to see Brother and Sister Massey's loving, gentle warmth toward their African brothers and sisters. It was a lesson on the gospel in action.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Elder Taggart has subsequently been called to serve as mission president in Zaire. He and Sister Taggart took up their duties in July 1990.
