Dear Boys & Girls,

Each one of you is special in our sight, and we know you are precious to our Heavenly Father and to His Beloved Son, Jesus Christ. How fortunate you are to belong to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and to live in this very special time when the gospel is in its fulness here upon the earth.

You also live in a difficult time, and you will be tested perhaps more than any other generation who ever lived. You must learn to choose the right, for there is an evil one who will tempt you to make wrong choices. Some people you meet will be agents for Satan and teach wickedness and tempt you to make mistakes. When you are tempted and sometimes make mistakes, remember that there is a way to do better and be better, and that is through repentance and keeping the commandments. Boys and girls, keep yourselves clean and free from sin, for “… there cannot any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of God …” (1 Ne. 15:34).

The most important thing I can say to you is to live the commandments of our Heavenly Father. You will learn about them by listening to and being obedient to the counsel of your parents. You can also learn the principles of the gospel by studying the scriptures, attending church meetings, and sharing these principles with others. Pray often to our Father in Heaven who can be a sustaining influence and who will guide you in the many choices you must make.

My dear young friends, use your leisure time effectively and learn to work. Great things will happen to you; skills will be learned and goals accomplished only as you work and manage your time effectively. Choose wisely the things you listen to and read, or watch on television, for they will influence how you think and act. Select only music and books that will elevate your thoughts and help you to do better and think better. Likewise, be careful in choosing your activities and close friends, for they, too, will influence the kind of person you become.

Show your love for our Heavenly Father through caring and sharing. Reach out to others, share the gospel, and let them be attracted to your way of life by the good example you set. Show your love for our Heavenly Father by obeying the loving counsel of your parents and honoring them by the way you live.

The Savior loves you. Recall with me how He commanded the little ones to be brought to Him, and then how He knelt with them and blessed them! “… The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father.” (3 Ne. 17:16.) Following the prayer, Jesus wept. Then He blessed each little child and wept again. Boys and girls, we hope you realize the depth of love and breadth of concern that our Savior has for you, and that we have for you also. We thank God for a Savior who suffered the little children to come unto Him.

The leaders of the Church love you and pray for you and are concerned about you. We plead with you to be true and honest with yourself, with your family, and with our Heavenly Father.
