Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Preface

The author first met President Joseph Fielding Smith on Thursday morning, April 9, 1970, in a meeting of the First Presidency when he was called to succeed Elder Joseph Anderson as the secretary to the First Presidency. Thereafter, I served President Smith and his counselors during the remainder of President Smith's administration, which ended with his death on July 2, 1972.

The benign, white-haired man I met that morning was almost ninety-four years old. At the time he became the president of the Church on January 23, 1970, he had served as a member of the Twelve for almost sixty years, longer than any other person of this dispensation. During twenty of those years, he had been either the president or the acting president of the quorum. He had served continuously for almost sixty-four years either as the Church historian or assistant Church historian. And he had served for almost five years as a counselor in the First Presidency. Moreover, he had authored twenty-five books and was generally recognized as the leading scripturalist and interpreter of doctrine in the Church. Knowing all this, I was impressed. And on meeting and becoming acquainted with him, I was even more impressed, but in a way I had not expected.

The man whom I met in person was far different from the man I had thought him to be, gauged by his demeanor in the pulpit and his precise literary style. And in the months that followed, the difference became even more apparent. It is true, I suppose, that most people in the public eye act differently when they are offstage. That is to be expected. But to find in one an almost complete reversal of his public image when seen in his private circles is extraordinary.

What the public saw in President Smith was a seemingly stern, no-nonsense speaker who seldom if ever strayed from the strictures of the scriptures. He rarely used stories by way of illustration. Humor never found its way into his sermons. There are few instances when he even smiled in the pulpit. To think of him laughing there is beyond reason. He was always punctual, arriving early at meetings, where he would sit quietly and reverently on the stand, waiting for the meeting to start. And if he conducted, the meeting would always start on time—and it would, if at all possible, end on time. Such precision created the impression that his decisions would be made according to the strict rules of justice, unbending, unyielding, and unfeeling. But the reality is that no one was more charitable and more merciful than President Joseph Fielding Smith in rendering judgment on transgressors. As the Prophet, it was his responsibility to decide cases of cancellation of sealings and restoration of blessings. His decisions were always made in kindness and love and with the widest latitude of mercy that the circumstances could justify. It was not uncommon for him to say on learning the circumstances of an aggravated case, "Why don't people behave themselves?" This was not said accusingly or by way of condemnation but with sadness and regret.

President Smith's love and concern for others was evident in all of his relationships behind the scenes of his public ministry. His wife, Ethel, who bore him nine children, has described this quality and contrasted her husband's public and private images better than anyone else: "I have often thought," she wrote of President Smith, "when he is gone people will say, 'He is a very good man, sincere, orthodox, etc.' They will speak of him as the public knows him; but the man they have in mind is very different from the man I know. The man I know is a kind, loving husband and father whose greatest ambition in life is to make his family happy, entirely forgetful of self in his efforts to do this. He is the man who lulls to sleep the fretful child, who tells bedtime stories to the little ones, who is never too tired or too busy to sit up late at night or to get up early in the morning to help the older children solve perplexing school problems. When illness comes, the man I know watches tenderly over the afflicted one and waits upon him. It is their father for whom they cry, feeling his presence a panacea for all ills. It is his hands that bind up the wounds, his arms that give courage to the sufferer, his voice that remonstrates with them gently when they err, until it becomes their happiness to do the thing that will make them happy. The man I know is most gentle, and if he feels that he has been unjust to anyone the distance is never too far for him to go and, with loving words or kind deeds, erase the hurt. He welcomes gladly the young people to his home and is never happier than when discussing with them topics of the day—sports or whatever interests them most. He enjoys a good story and is quick to see the humor of a situation, to laugh and to be laughed at, always willing to join in any wholesome activity. The man I know is unselfish, uncomplaining, considerate, thoughtful, sympathetic, doing everything within his power to make life a supreme joy for his loved ones. That is the man I know." (Improvement Era, June 1932, p. 459.)

Here, then, was a gentle, kind, and loving man who reflected the best qualities of his upbringing in the home of a prophet. And here was a man who had been tried and tested for more than six decades in his service as a special witness. In the process, he had acquired a depth of knowledge and understanding of the Church, its doctrines and its procedures, superior to that of any other living person. In that sense, therefore, he was eminently qualified to be the president of the Church. But, you say, this man was almost ninety-four years old. Could he effectively be the chief executive officer of a vibrant, world-wide church of almost three million members? Some critics said no. That judgment was based on the false assumption that the role of a prophet is identical with the role of the chief executive officer of a business corporation. Such a judgment ignores the essential role of a prophet: to learn the will of God as to the direction of His earthly church and to transmit that to its members. To do this does not require the vigor of youth, the mastery of administrative techniques, or a vast knowledge of global politics and economics. Still less does it require an expertise in law, the arts, or the sciences. Admittedly, the possession of some or all of these qualities in whatever degree would be helpful; and this Prophet possessed a goodly share of them. But one could function effectively as a prophet though he had none of these, provided that he possessed the faith, the purity, and the spirituality necessary to receive divine revelation.

Joseph Fielding Smith possessed these qualities in rich abundance. He had available a host of able and dedicated men and women, prepared to perform the various duties necessary to bring his prophetic vision to reality. Chief among these were his counselors, Presidents Harold B. Lee and N. Eldon Tanner, experienced and gifted administrators, in whom he had complete confidence and to whom he made broad delegations of authority. Yet he retained the ultimate control, or the key, which he could turn at any time, either to reduce or to increase the authority he had delegated.

It was a constant source of interest and fascination to watch this Prophet at work. He listened more than he talked. And he listened with intensity. His basic mentality was sound, so that when he faced a decision only he could make, he made it firmly and unequivocally after listening to the discussion of his brethren. Because his life extended back to the administration of President Brigham Young, his mind was a rich treasure of historical facts. To hear him relate, for instance, how as a boy he had watched the workmen removing huge granite blocks from the mouth of Little Cottonwood Canyon to be used in building the Salt Lake Temple gave one a sense of intimate contact with the past. Indeed, he was a bridge between the pioneer past and the present. Stored in his mind were countless images and scenes of bygone days that he could often recall with greater clarity and ease than the events of the day before. These included personal recollections of the early leaders of the Church, whom we know only through the written word or by posed pictures that can never convey an accurate perception of what a person really was like. He was personally acquainted with John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow, presidents of the Church, all of whom his father had served as a counselor. He had attended the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple, where he had seen and heard President Wilford Woodruff offer the dedicatory prayer. As a son in a polygamous family, he had poignant recollections of the trauma and terror of the underground years when his father was driven into exile in the Hawaiian Islands. He remembered Salt Lake City when its streets were lighted with gas lamps and when most of its homes lacked indoor plumbing. All this and much more President Smith carried around in the storehouse of his memory, facts that, if triggered by a question or an offhand remark, he could recall instantly and report with uncommon accuracy. What a treasure are the elderly in our midst! What a gold mine of memory they possess that we often fail to tap. And what is said here generally is also said especially of President Joseph Fielding Smith.

He was special because of his long life, his family connections, his apostolic and prophetic callings, and his careful training as a writer and a historian. It is unlikely there will ever be another like him.

It is risky for an author to intrude himself into the narrative. Yet he may have personal knowledge that could provide insights and a better understanding of his subject's character and motivations. On this account, I have elected in this preface to recount several anecdotes based upon personal contacts with President Smith or his immediate family or associates, hoping they will be interesting to the reader.

Joseph Fielding Smith was an avid sportsman, whether as a participant or a spectator. Knowing this, I said to him one day as we walked together toward the temple through the tunnel beneath Main Street, "President, I understand that when you were younger, you enjoyed playing handball." After a pause, he answered in substance: "Yes. For many years three of my friends and I regularly played doubles together, and I enjoyed it very much. But twenty-five or thirty years ago, I gave it up. I did so because of the comments of a doctor friend. I was seated one day in front of my locker at the gym after a game, perspiring heavily and breathing hard, when the doctor stopped to visit. 'Joseph,' he said, 'you are too old to play so vigorously, and if you keep it up, you may fall dead on the court one day.' I said to him, 'Are you trying to tell me I should give up handball?' He answered, 'That's exactly what I am trying to tell you.' President Smith said that he followed that advice and that he never again played a game of handball. Then, after remaining silent for a moment, he added with a twinkle in his eye, "And I don't think my three friends ever forgave me."

While his participation in sports waned with the years, his role as an interested spectator continued to the end. This was especially true when members of his family were involved. It is reported that he never missed a game when a member of the family participated unless he was sick or out of town. Once his son Douglas, who played football at East High School in Salt Lake City, was injured during the first half of a game. His concerned father went to the locker room at halftime to inquire about him. Elder Smith entered while the coach was delivering a lively harangue to his players that was peppered with mild cuss words. Momentarily ignoring his son, who lay prone on the floor, the apostle proceeded to lecture the coach on the evils of profanity and the virtues of pure speech. During all this, Doug feigned unconsciousness to avoid having to provide commentary on his father's impromptu sermon, either to his embarrassed coach or his highly amused teammates.

Perhaps the most striking example of Elder Smith's loyalty to his athletic sons involved Mitt, who was a star on the University of Utah football team. One Saturday night the team had a crucial game that conflicted with the priesthood meeting of general conference. The father, who was torn between his church and family duties, devised a scheme by which he could fulfill both at least in part. He would attend the priesthood meeting and then, during the rest song, slip out to go to the stadium. He approached one of the other Brethren (who later told this story) to invite him to go along. He declined because he had a deacon-aged son at the meeting whom he felt might not understand. Under these special circumstances, however, Joseph Fielding Smith had no difficulty in justifying his actions. The son had to know where he stood in the order of his father's priorities. And to unobtrusively leave during the rest song, as he did, neither created an upset nor violated his apostolic creed.

His concern and love for the family lay at the root of his personal motivations. In them he saw the foundation of his future glory. Consistent with the tenets of the Church, he believed that the perfection he sought depended largely on the integrity of his immediate family circle, linked in an eternal bond with those who had gone before and those who would follow. Therefore, he sought constantly by word and by deed to cement family relationships. His door was never closed to a member of the family. When any of them came for counsel or conversation, he was available.

And he always greeted them in the traditional Smith way with a hug and a kiss. Even his strapping athletic sons received the same affectionate treatment. It was always a touching thing to witness such a demonstration of love, which was spontaneous and genuine and devoid of any self-consciousness or embarrassment.

There can be little doubt that the safety and welfare of his family occupied a central place in President Smith's private prayers and devotions—at least this was the conviction of his son Reynolds, who shared an unusual experience one day as we lunched together in the Lion House. As we discussed his father, Reyn confided that he had had a cigarette in his mouth only once in his life, and then for only a fleeting moment. It occurred when he was a student at the Roosevelt Junior High School in Salt Lake City. Those acquainted with this school know that its entrance was on a quiet side street that had very little vehicular traffic. On this day, Reyn had just walked out of the front entrance of the school with a friend who smoked who urged him, as he had often done, to "just try one." On this occasion, the friend succeeded. Reyn took one of the cigarettes and lit up. A few puffs later, who should pull up at the curb in his car but Reyn's father. Rolling down the window, Elder Smith said to his astounded son, "Reynolds, I want to talk to you tonight after dinner" and drove off. Reyn reported, "When my father called me Reynolds, I knew he meant business." Elder Smith let Reyn stew in his guilt the rest of the afternoon and during the evening meal, when he had surprisingly little to say. Afterward, seated uncomfortably in his father's study, that sacrosanct place that was strictly off limits when the children were young, Reynolds faced judgment. What he received was merely a kindly, loving lecture about the evils of "that filthy habit" and a reminder of who he was and how his conduct reflected on the whole family. It ended with the request that Reyn promise he would never again put a cigarette in his mouth. Reyn took the pledge. "It never happened again," he said. Through all the intervening years, including a stint in the United States Navy during World War II where smoking was endemic, he honored the commitment made to his father. And we do not doubt that Reyn went to his grave with the promise intact.

The odds against Joseph Fielding Smith appearing on that out-of-the-way street at the very moment his young son lit up his one and only cigarette are astronomical. Although he did not say it, Reyn's manner and tone implied that the incident convinced him of the extraordinary depth and power of his father's spiritual sensitivity, especially as it related to the welfare of his family.

The unstinting love President Smith always showed toward the members of his family was reciprocated by them in kind. Without exception, they were always solicitous of his welfare and desirous of doing what he wanted them to do and what would make him happy. In his later years, after it became difficult for Aunt Jessie to drive their little car on the rides around town they enjoyed so much, the sons alternated in serving as their chauffeur. It was one such an outing that produced wild excitement in the Gibbons household. One evening in the spring of 1971, our fourteen-year-old son, Daniel, came running into the study exclaiming, "Dad, Dad, come quick! President Smith is out front." My first impulse was to say to this creative jokester, "Yeah, and is President Nixon with him?" But the exuberance of his tone soon convinced me he was not joking. Hurrying outside, I saw President Smith's modest white Hornet parked in the driveway. At the wheel was Joseph Fielding, Jr., and in the back seat were his father and Aunt Jessie. For several minutes the entire family enjoyed the presence of the Prophet and his wife. Their gracious manner and thoughtful inquiries about our welfare put everyone at ease. There was no pretension or posturing but only a sense of friendship and love that was touching and reassuring.

After Aunt Jessie died, the solicitous love of President Smith's children toward him seemed to grow. They took turns going to Amelia's home in the evenings, where the Prophet had gone to live, to visit, to read to him, or to serve him in any other way they could. These occasions were not looked on as fulfilling a duty but as an opportunity to be near the man who had nurtured them physically through infancy and childhood and who now, in their maturity and his old age, fed them spiritually from the wealth of his accumulated knowledge and wisdom. I hope that through the pages of this book, the reader will derive some of the same spiritual nourishment, along with useful information and insights about Joseph Fielding Smith, the tenth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
