Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter One

A Centennial Baby

The child was born July 19, 1876, only fifteen days after the one-hundredth anniversary of the Dec- laration of Independence. Once the officiating midwife announced that the baby was a boy, there was no doubt what his name would be. The mother, Julina Lambson Smith, the first plural wife of Joseph F. Smith, had been promised that her husband's full name would be reserved for her first son. The other two plural wives, Sarah Ellen Richards Smith and Edna Lambson Smith, Julina's younger sister, knew this and therefore were reconciled when their sons who were older than this baby did not receive their father's full name. At the time, Sarah Ellen had two boys, Joseph Richards and Heber John; and Edna also had two, Hyrum Mack and Alvin Fielding. But it was this centennial baby, Joseph F. Smith's fifth son, who would receive the father's full name, Joseph Fielding Smith.

The family into which this infant was born was one laden with tradition and distinction. The father, Joseph F., was the son of Hyrum Smith, who had shared a martyr's fate with his younger brother, the Prophet Joseph Smith, first president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Joseph F. was born in Far West in 1838, across the street from the temple site, during the height of the Missouri persecutions against the Latter-day Saints. His first name, Joseph, was given in honor of his grandfather, Joseph Smith Sr., the first Patriarch of the Church, and his uncle Joseph, the Prophet. The middle name, Fielding, honored his mother, Mary Fielding, a native of England who had migrated to Canada, where she was converted by the preaching of Parley P. Pratt. After her conversion, Mary moved to Kirtland, Ohio, where she met and married the widower, Hyrum Smith, nurturing the five living children of her husband's first wife while giving birth to her only son, Joseph F.

At the time of the birth of Joseph Fielding Smith in the summer of 1876, his thirty-eight-year-old father was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of the Church and was serving informally as a counselor to the First Presidency, a role he had played for ten years. His youth, his family ties, his eloquence, and his achievements as a missionary and an apostle, added to his close relationship with Brigham Young, the president of the Church, cast an aura of special distinction over Joseph F. Smith that inevitably extended to the members of his large and growing polygamous family. And the inheritance of the exact name of such a distinguished man set this centennial baby apart from the other children in the family. From the moment of his birth, therefore, Joseph Fielding Smith had an edge over his siblings and over all the other children born into Mormon families during this centennial year. And that edge became more evident as the father rose in the hierarchy of the Church and as the son's native abilities began to flower under the impulse of self discipline.

The sprawling two-story family home where this infant was born was located at 333 West First North in Salt Lake City, three blocks northwest of Temple Square. It was directly across the street south of the campus of the University of Deseret, whose name was changed to the University of Utah in 1892. This site was later relinquished to the West High School when the campus of the University of Utah was moved to its present location on the east bench of Salt Lake City. At the time, in addition to the new baby's four brothers, there were three sisters who lived there, Mary Sophronia (fondly called Mamie) and Donnette, Julina's daughters, and Sarah Ellen's daughter Leonora. Thus, Joseph Fielding Smith's arrival brought to twelve the number who occupied this house: the eight children, the father, and his three polygamous wives. But this was only the beginning. These three wives would later give birth to a total of twenty-one additional children; and two other polygamous wives whom Joseph F. Smith later married, Alice Ann Kimball and Mary Taylor Schwartz, would give birth to a total of fourteen. Later on, other housing was provided for members of the clan; but this house on West First North where Joseph Fielding Smith was born would always be looked on as "the old family home" of President Joseph F. Smith and his wives and children.

It is apparent, therefore, that as he grew up, Joseph Fielding Smith never lacked for friends or company. He had all he wanted or needed within his own family. And it was a remarkable family, not only from the standpoint of sheer numbers, but also because of an unusual sense of love and unity among them and a uniform pride in the Smith ancestry. That ancestry extended back eight generations from Joseph Fielding Smith to Robert Smith, the first member of the family in America, who migrated from England in 1638. A tailor by trade, Robert eventually purchased a good-sized farm located partly in Boxford and Topsfield Townships, Massachusetts. His descendants occupied this farm for several generations, so they were known as "the Topsfield Smiths." Significantly, the first of the twenty-five books written by Joseph Fielding Smith was entitled "Asael Smith of Topsfield." He wrote it not long after he became a clerk in the Church Historian's Office. The book was based on extensive research he conducted in old records, wills, deeds, and minutes in the courthouse at Salem, Massachusetts. This was supplemented by numerous records provided by George Francis Dow, secretary of the Essex County Historical Society, at whose request Joseph Fielding wrote the sketch. It was later read by Mr. Dow at a meeting of the society.

Asael Smith, a great-grandson of Robert, was one of the first of the Smith ancestors to whom the family pointed as having had special spiritual endowments of the kind enjoyed so abundantly by his descendants. To some this is anomalous because of a widely held perception that Asael was irreligious, if not agnostic. This resulted from his independent turn of mind and his refusal to accept and follow some of the traditional teachings of protestantism. The most convincing evidence of his deep spirituality, however, is a remarkable document he wrote to his family on April 10, 1799. In it he invoked the blessings of God upon his family, admonishing them to put their trust in Him who, he said, would never forsake them. He affirmed the immortality of the soul and warned against trifling with the things of God. He said that in speaking to or about God to be "in good earnest" and to do everything in respect to deity "in a serious manner." In talking about religion, he did not recommend any particular sect but instead urged his family to search the scriptures and to "consult sound reason." In closing, he declared that Christ "is perfect" and would never fail them "in one circumstance." He also expressed a conviction about the reality of the resurrection, when his body would become like the Savior's "own glorious body." In Asael's eighty-eighth year, his son, Joseph Smith Sr., presented him with a copy of the Book of Mormon, which he read nearly through without the aid of glasses. He pronounced it authentic, declared that a new religious age was upon the world, and confided to members of his family that he always knew that God would raise up some branch of his family to be a great benefit to mankind.

Asael Smith's son, Joseph Smith Sr., father of the Prophet Joseph Smith, was a visionary man. Over a period of eight years, from 1811 to 1819, he received a series of seven vivid dreams which he shared in detail with his family and which were recorded by his wife, Lucy Mack Smith, in her biography of the Prophet Joseph Smith. These reveal the deeply spiritual nature of the Prophet's father (Joseph Fielding Smith's great-grandfather), who accepted his son's account of the origin of the Book of Mormon without question; who was one of the eight witnesses, having seen and handled the plates; and who became the first Patriarch to the church.

Hyrum Smith, another son of Joseph Smith Sr., was Joseph Fielding's grandfather. He was also one of the eight witnesses, succeeded his father as the Patriarch to the Church, and served as a counselor and an assistant to his brother, the Prophet, with whom he shared a martyr's death.

Joseph Fielding's father, Joseph F., was a teamster during the exodus, though but a boy; served as a missionary in the Hawaiian Islands while still in his mid-teens; became an apostle and a counselor to Brigham Young at age twenty-six; was sustained a member of the Twelve at twenty-seven; and before becoming the sixth president of the Church, served as a counselor to presidents Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow.

Besides these illustrious ancestors on his direct family line, Joseph Fielding claimed relationship to a host of Smith uncles and cousins who played vital roles in the development of the Church. A great-great-uncle, John Smith, Joseph Smith Sr.'s brother, was the first president of the Salt Lake Stake and later served as the Patriarch to the Church; a great-uncle, Samuel Smith, one of the Prophet's brothers, was one of the eight witnesses and is reported to have been the first missionary for the Church, distributing a copy of the Book of Mormon that is said to have been instrumental in the conversion of Brigham Young; a cousin, George A. Smith, who was a son of Uncle John, was ordained an apostle and inducted into the Quorum of the Twelve at age twenty-one, the youngest man in this dispensation to receive this distinction. And after Joseph Fielding's birth, other Smith cousins, John Henry Smith and George Albert Smith, a son and grandson respectively of George A., became members of the Twelve. Later still, John Henry became a counselor to President Joseph F. Smith, and George Albert Smith served as the eighth president of the Church. In addition to these high-profile members of the family, there were many other Smiths, some of them concealed under married names, who served faithfully in different organizations and in different communities.

All this created a widely held perception that the Smith family was the first family of the Church, endowed with special distinction—and with special responsibilities. These ideas were repeatedly impressed on the minds of the Smith children as they grew up: that they were descendants of the prophets and that as such, they had a special responsibility to live in a way that would add honor and luster to their ancestors and to the family name. Such was the practice of President Joseph F. Smith, the lingering effects of which were evident throughout the long life of his son and namesake. "Joseph Fielding Smith has never forgotten his heritage," wrote a grandson, Joseph F. McConkie. "He has constantly and consciously sought to walk in the footsteps of his father, not in the sense of aspiration to high position, but rather in dedication and zeal to the gospel cause. He has said that whenever he has passed the picture of his father that hangs in the Salt Lake Temple, his father seems to say to him 'Do your best.' The desire of his life has been so to live that he would be worthy to march at the side of his grand uncle the Prophet Joseph Smith in that last great battle with the adversary." (True and Faithful [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1971], p. 99.) This grandson has also provided insight into the way Joseph Fielding Smith implanted the same ideas in the minds of his own family. "When you visit in President Smith's home," wrote this grandson, "you can sit in a wooden rocking chair which once belonged to his grandfather, Hyrum Smith. Doing so places you under the kindly and watchful eyes of a full-length oil painting of President Joseph F. Smith. And in those days when it was not so difficult for this venerable father and grandfather to rise, Joseph Fielding Smith would walk his grandchildren to the door, place his arm around their shoulders, and say, 'Remember that you have the blood of prophets in your veins.' " (Ibid.)

But pride in ancestors and their achievements was not the most significant thing Joseph Fielding Smith learned in the home of his father. There he also learned by word and deed the more important principles of love and unity. In his later years, Joseph Fielding Smith characterized his father as the most tender-hearted man he ever knew. The father lavished love and affection upon each of his many children, demonstrated not only by his words but by the well-known Smith family custom of kissing each other when they met, whether in public or in private. Perhaps this tender conduct toward the members of his family was caused in part by the fact that Joseph F. was only six years old when his own father was murdered; and he was orphaned eight years later when his mother died. Therefore, he never really knew the joy of a nuclear family, except during the first six years of his life. And even those years were abnormal as the Latter-day Saints were struggling to recover from the ordeals they endured in Missouri and to build a new city at Nauvoo, Illinois. The heavy demands upon the time of Hyrum Smith, who played a key role in these events, and the pressures that accompanied them prevented any real semblance of family life. So the extraordinary efforts Joseph F. made to create a sense of security and love among the members of his family no doubt traced in large part to a desire to provide them with something he did not have as a boy.

One should not think, however, that frequent expressions and demonstrations of love in this family eliminated the need for discipline. An illustrious heritage did not exempt the Smith children from occasional acts of disobedience nor from their consequences. Joseph F. loved his children enough that he was not reluctant to discipline them in cases of misconduct. And in rare instances, the discipline included mild physical punishment. Joseph Fielding always remembered the time when his father punished him physically because he thought the son had lied to him when, in fact, he had not. Years later when Joseph Fielding mentioned this to him, the father disclaimed any recollection of the incident, but he added in jest that if, indeed, it had occurred, the punishment then administered applied to other unknown infractions for which the son was not punished!

1992 Deseret Book Co.
