Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Two

The Growing Years

To understand Joseph Fielding Smith, one must un- derstand the environment of his youth. His an- cestral heritage and special family traits have al- ready been sketched. These exerted a powerful influence on the boy as he grew. Carrying that name and being under the influence of the famous man who first bore it ensured that he would have a strong sense of identity and a powerful incentive for achievement. Yet the influence of the father on the growing boy, significant though it was, did not match the influence of the mother. The father's church and civic duties and his responsibility to the other wives and their children prevented him from giving special attention to any one child. It was the mother, therefore, who was the main source of training and discipline. And the father's frequent absences from home on church assignments, or because of pressures exerted by enemies of the Church, accentuated the mother's role.

An important but unexpected assignment came to the father less than a year after Joseph Fielding's birth. In April 1877, the general conference of the Church was held in St. George, Utah, coinciding with the dedication of the temple there. Because of the event's historic significance, Elder Smith brought along several members of his family, including Julina and her nine-month-old baby. Years later, Joseph Fielding would refer to this as his first church "assignment," undertaken in company with the president of the Church, Brigham Young. On the second day of the conference, it was announced that Joseph F. Smith had been appointed to preside over the European Mission and that he would be leaving soon for his mission headquarters in Liverpool, England. As they had no foreknowledge of it, the call came as a great shock to Elder Smith and his family.

That the young father and husband had been called unexpectedly during a session of the general conference came as no surprise as this was a characteristic of President Young's administration. Nor was it unusual for Joseph F. to be called to leave his family in pursuit of his apostolic calling. The Smiths had long since become reconciled to the dominant influence exerted over the lives of the entire family by the father's role as a member of the Twelve. The charge he had willingly accepted upon his call to that quorum, and to which his wives and children were equally devoted, had imposed a lifelong obligation to subordinate his personal affairs to the demands of his office and to be prepared on a moment's notice to go where duty called. What was surprising, however, was the place to which this assignment would take him. Only three years before, he had received an identical call. At that time, he had left his three wives and their children and gone to Liverpool, where he remained for a year and a half before being summoned home. If it occurred to Joseph F. and his family that the blessing of serving in Merry Old England might well be shared more liberally with other members of the quorum, no one mentioned it. The decision was accepted silently, willingly, and uncomplainingly. All seemed to understand that such was the lot and the expectation of the Smith family.

When the family returned to Salt Lake City, they immediately began to prepare for the father's departure. Unlike his earlier call to preside in Liverpool when he went alone, this time Joseph F. was allowed to take members of his family with him. At a gathering of the clan, it was decided that Sarah Ellen and her four-year-old son, Joseph Richards, would accompany the apostle. The fact that Sarah was then grieving over the death of her baby, Heber John, who died a month before, weighed heavily in the decision for her to go along. To simplify the problems of travel and of living in a foreign land, it was also decided that Sarah's six-year-old daughter, Nonie, would stay in Salt Lake City with Julina.

So close were the children of the three wives and so interdependent were they upon each other, and upon their natural mothers and their "aunties," that Nonie settled into the routine of life under the direction of her surrogate mother, Julina, with no apparent difficulty or trauma. Repeated instances such as this tended to obliterate any lineal distinctions between the Smith children and to create the illusion that there was no such thing as a half-brother or half-sister among them. Indeed, in his maturity Joseph Fielding Smith would bridle at the suggestion that any of his father's children were half-brothers or sisters, regardless of the wife who gave birth to them. They were brothers and sisters, one and all, equally loved and admired.

Given the tenuous financial condition of the Church at the time, Joseph F. Smith's lack of independent means, and the slender living allowance then provided for the General Authorities, one may wonder how the two wives and their children who remained at home were able to survive. The answer is simple—they worked. Both Julina and Edna were trained midwives and continued to ply their obstetrical skills while their husband was away. The standard fee for a delivery was $5.00, paid either in cash or domestic commodities. The burgeoning polygamous population in the valley and the prominence and professionalism of Joseph F.'s wives assured a rather steady though not rich income from this source. In addition to their midwifery, Julina and Edna supplemented their income by cooking at the Endowment House. These resources, with help from the neighbors in cultivating the family garden and in tending their domestic animals, enabled those who remained at home to live without want.

The death of President Brigham Young in late August 1877 unexpectedly shortened Joseph F. Smith's second tenure as the president of the European Mission. He was asked by John Taylor and the other brethren of the Twelve to return home early to participate in important decisions affecting the Church. The Brethren decided that the First Presidency would not be reorganized immediately and that the affairs of the Church would be temporarily directed by the Quorum of the Twelve, acting through an executive committee and various task committees. Obviously these steps could have been taken without the presence of Joseph F. Smith in Salt Lake City. However, subsequent events proved that his personal support and abilities were wanted and needed by John Taylor as the Twelve worked through the many difficulties that followed the death of President Brigham Young. That Elder Taylor selected him as his second counselor when the First Presidency was reorganized in October 1880 suggests the extent to which he relied upon Joseph F. Smith.

The main difficulty that faced the Church during this period and that heavily influenced the Smith family arose on January 6, 1879. On this date the United States Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the 1862 anti-bigamy act in U.S. v. Reynolds. This decision eroded away the main legal justification the Saints had had for ignoring this law. They had contended that the act was unconstitutional and that therefore it was not binding on them. For seventeen years the Latter-day Saints had squared their commitment to the twelfth article of faith, which enjoins obedience to law, with a deliberate noncompliance with the 1862 act on the ground that it violated their constitutional right to freedom of religion and therefore was void. The Reynolds decision swept away that contention, leaving the Saints without a legal basis for ignoring the act. This put them in the position of asserting that God's mandate through the Prophet that the Saints live in plural marriage superseded the civil law. It was this irreconcilable conflict that so tragically affected the Latter-day Saints in the years that followed and, in a special way, cast a cloud of sorrow and gloom over Joseph F. Smith and his family.

The storm of public opposition to the Latter-day Saints that produced the 1862 act and other repressive legislation intensified following the Reynolds decision. Aggressive enforcement of that act and the later passage of the Edmunds Act and the Edmunds-Tucker Act in 1882 and 1887 applied additional pressure on the brethren who practiced plural marriage and drove them underground. A chief object of the effort to ferret out and prosecute Mormon polygamists was Joseph F. Smith, not only because of his position in the First Presidency but because he was the custodian of the Endowment House records, which contained incriminating evidence that some of the brethren had entered into plural marriages. Included among them was the record of Joseph F.'s last two polygamous marriages, to Alice Ann Kimball on December 6, 1883, and to Mary Taylor Schwartz on January 13, 1884.

At the time his father married Mary Schwartz, Joseph Fielding Smith was not yet eight years old. He was far too young to understand fully the theological and political implications of the events that dominated the life of his family. Nor could he understand why anyone would want to imprison his father or interfere with the orderly pattern of his family life. But he understood clearly the fear created in him by the federal officials who prowled the neighborhood seeking his father or asking questions as to his whereabouts. "We refused to even tell them our name," the son later wrote. "We lived a very peaceful and happy family life except when we became troubled and I became frightened by deputy marshals. In those early days they were always seeking to bring trouble upon the authorities of the church, and because of those conditions my father was sent away when I was a youth. . . . Both father and mother were in the [Hawaiian] Islands for a number of years." (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, pp. 38-39.)

The departure of Joseph Fielding Smith's parents for the Hawaiian Islands occurred in January 1885 while he was eight years old. The father had to leave because of the increased tempo of the efforts to find, try, and imprison him and to exact from him evidence about plural marriages performed in the Endowment House. This information would then be used to prosecute other Mormon leaders. Actually, young Joseph's parents made an abortive attempt to leave for Hawaii the previous month. On December 18, 1884, the apostle, his five wives, and all the children gathered furtively in the Smith home. There, in a tearful and tense atmosphere, the family was told about the father's need to flee and about the decision that Julina and her baby girl of the same name would accompany him. After making necessary explanations and after imparting counsel to guide the family during his absence, Joseph F. blessed each wife and child who would remain behind. It was hardly the ideal scene one would envision to usher in the season of joy and peace. And it was especially poignant for young Joseph Fielding, both of whose parents were to go away, leaving him in charge of his "aunties." In his maturity, he recalled the emptiness that engulfed him as he watched the receding horse-drawn sleigh that carried his parents and sister to the train depot, his mother waving forlornly until the sleigh was out of sight.

A heavy winter snow storm that blanketed the intermountain area stalled the Smiths' train in southern Idaho, making it necessary to return to Salt Lake City. This brief reunion of the family, which added a glimmer of joy to the holiday season, made their final parting even more poignant when, later, Joseph Fielding's parents and his sister Julina left again for Hawaii.

The eight-year-old boy had difficulty adjusting to the absence of both parents. Although he received loving care from his aunties and was buoyed up by the friendship of his brothers and sisters and assorted relatives, they could hardly substitute for the bonding influence of his mother and father. After two years, his mother returned, bringing with her his sister, Julina, and a new brother, Wesley, who was born in the islands during her absence. His father remained in Hawaii for some time afterward; but even when he returned to Utah, he was seldom able to visit his family because of the incessant pressures exerted by the federal officials. Thus, for a period of seven years, from ages eight to fifteen, Joseph Fielding Smith was essentially fatherless.

In reflecting on this period of his life, he observed: "People will say 'Well you ought to be good, having the father to train you that you had.' But, they don't know all the circumstances. My father was a busy man, away from home in those years a good part of the time. In fact, during the years when a boy needs the counsel of his father the most, I had no father, because he was sent away because of difficulties with the government and spent his time with my mother on the Islands of the Pacific, which were called the Sandwich (now Hawaiian) Islands. So, during those years when a boy needs his father's help and counsel, I had no father." (Ibid., p. 39.)

Yet, there were offsetting compensations for the loss of his father's companionship. The most important of these was the development of a strong sense of independence and responsibility. Being his mother's eldest son, Joseph Fielding became, in a way, the man of that branch of his father's family. He took the role seriously and he devoted himself to it with uncommon diligence. Although very young at the time, Joseph Fielding did a man's work. His father owned a farm at Taylorsville in the western part of the Salt Lake Valley. There the son became proficient in all farming chores—planting, irrigating and harvesting hay, and caring for the livestock. As in all things, that proficiency was not gained without much effort and not a little trauma. He once broke a leg when he was swept off a load of hay by a bar atop the gate to the Church tithing yard. Later, he was thrown from a load of hay when the team was spooked, landing on the double tree between the horses, which bolted down an embankment into the canal. Terrified that he might be killed or maimed, Joseph was finally able to break clear of the animals and load and escaped unhurt. A neighboring farmer helped him and his brother, George, retrieve the wagon and horses from the canal. In the city was a family garden plot, which, in season, always needed tending; and chickens and a cow near the family home required attention all year around.

At age ten, when his mother returned from Hawaii, Joseph Fielding began his most unusual work career as a youth—he served as his mother's driver on her calls as a midwife. His task was simplified when a delivery occurred during the daytime and in good weather; indeed, under such circumstances, his work was enjoyable. Nighttime calls, however, especially during bad weather, were unpleasant. "I marvelled that so many babies were born in the middle of the night," wrote he, "especially on cold winter nights." On these occasions, he "fervently wished that mothers might time things a little better." (Ibid., p. 53.) It was not so much the driving he objected to, for that was usually quite enjoyable, regardless of the weather. What he disliked were the preparations to get under way and the waiting when he got there. To roll out of a warm bed at night during the winter months; corral his horse, Meg; harness the horse; drive to the home of his mother's patient; and then wait, sometimes for hours, first tried and then developed his own patience. And following a delivery, his mother would return daily to the home of the patient for five or six days to make certain that everything was all right. Considering that Julina Lambson Smith delivered almost a thousand babies and needed chauffeuring services for the initial and follow-up calls, one gains an insight into the heavy involvement of Joseph Fielding Smith in his mother's obstetrical practice. And considering that Julina never lost a mother or a baby during the years of her midwifery, one also gains an appreciation for her skill and professionalism.

The horse, Meg, which usually provided the transportation for Julina and Joseph, was a gentle mare, obedient and reliable. However, her stable mate, Junie, was just the opposite. Junie was feisty, temperamental, and disobedient, albeit funny, likeable, and smart. "Junie was one of the most intelligent animals I ever saw," Joseph Fielding said of her. "She seemed almost human in her ability. I could not keep her locked in the barn because she would continually undo the strap on the door of her stall. I used to put the strap connected to the half-door of the stall over the top of the post, but she would simply lift it off with her nose and teeth. Then she would go out in the yard." (New Era, January 1971, p. 4.) Once in the yard, Junie would turn on the faucet that fed water into the animal's drinking trough. But she would never turn it off. Instead, she would wander aimlessly around the yard, trampling the lawn or the garden, or generally making a nuisance of herself. However, she never ran away. She always stayed close to home, so the family had the exclusive enjoyment of her high jinks. At times during the day, her antics were a source of amusement and were passed off with good-natured tolerance. But it was different at night. It was a source of great irritation to Joseph Fielding to hear the water running in the drinking trough in the middle of the night. Then, because he had charge of the horses, he had to get out of bed, turn off the water, corral Junie, and try to lock the gate in a way to prevent her escape.

The contest between the mare and his son did not go unnoticed by Joseph F. "My father suggested that the horse seemed smarter than I was," reported Joseph Fielding. "One day he decided that he would lock her in so that she could not get out. He took the strap that usually looped over the top of the post and buckled it around the post and under a crossbar, and then he said, 'Young lady, let's see you get out of there now.' My father and I left the barn and started to walk back to the house; and before we reached it, Junie was at our side, somewhat to my delight. I could not refrain from suggesting to Father that I was not the only one whose head compared unfavorably with the mare's." (Ibid.)

While the chief function of the horse Meg was to transport members of the family in their buggy on business or errands, she, as well as Junie, could be saddled for recreation like a ride up the canyon for sight-seeing or fishing. There were also horses at the Taylorsville farm, and Joseph and the other Smith children rode them for fun when their chores were finished. And swimming was a favorite recreation, as was baseball. During Joseph's youth, each ward had its own school whose curriculum included sports, especially baseball. There were spirited competitions between ward teams. "Our chief 'enemies,' " he wrote, "were the boys of the Fifteenth Ward, which adjoined the Sixteenth Ward, to which I belonged." These "enemies" included George Q. Morris, with whom Joseph Fielding would later share the apostleship. This early exposure to competitive sports was the beginning of a lifelong interest that he savored, whether as a participant or a spectator. This interest was transmitted intact to each of his sons.

Joseph Fielding had no interest in hunting, which was a popular sport in his day, as it is now. This resulted from a natural repugnance toward killing and from a shocking experience he had as a boy when some friends persuaded him to go hunting. During the hunt he shot a rabbit, whose cries of anguish sounded almost human. He was so devastated by the experience that he never again used a gun.

The ward schools provided Joseph Fielding Smith with his only formal education as a boy, except for two years in a "college," which was the equivalent of high school. In the Church schools he was drilled in the basics of reading, writing, and arithmetic. His elegant signature and cursive script attest to the thoroughness of his training in penmanship. And his voracious appetite for books and the written word, an appetite that was never satisfied, says much for the effectiveness of these rudimentary schools. While they were short in the scope of their curriculum and the technical training of their teachers, they were long in the motivations for excellence implanted in their students.

Joseph's favorite reading was always the scriptures. If given a choice between them and any other literature, classical or modern, he would always select the Standard Works. "From my earliest recollection," he told a Tabernacle audience, "from the time I could first read, I have received more pleasure and greater satisfaction out of the study of the scriptures, and reading of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the work that has been accomplished for the salvation of men, than from anything else in all the world." (Conference Report, April 1930, p. 91.)

There can be little doubt that President Smith's preoccupation with the scriptures, which he read repeatedly and thoughtfully from his youth, had a predominant effect on his literary style. That style was precise, taut, and unadorned. It aimed for accuracy and brevity. It sought to convey ideas and facts with a minimum of words in a vocabulary that was understood by the ordinary reader. It is seldom, if ever, necessary to use a dictionary in reading the writings of Joseph Fielding Smith. It was not that his vocabulary was limited in scope; in fact, it was rich and extensive. But, in writing or speaking, he always opted for words that were frequently used and well understood. Betraying his British heritage, he preferred to use short, descriptive, Anglo-Saxon words that carried a punch and drove home his meaning without doubt or equivocation. He seemed wary of words with more than two or three syllables, and he shied away from the frequent use of words derived from the Romance languages. In a sense, his literary style was a reflection of his character—clear, uncomplicated, honest and forthright, free of subtlety, familiar and comfortable as an old friend.

The young Joseph Fielding Smith was encouraged and guided in his reading by his mother. In later discussing the influences that shaped his life, he said, "I am grateful for the training that I received and I tried to follow the counsel that was given to me by my father. But I must not give him all the credit. I think a good part of it, a very great part of it, should go to my mother whose knee I used to sit by as a little child and listen to her stories about the pioneers. My mother deserves a great deal of credit so far as I am concerned because she used to teach me and put in my hands, when I was old enough to read, things that I could understand. . . . I had a mother who saw to it that I did read, and I loved to read." (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 56.)

While the scriptures formed the bulwark of his reading in the early years, his mother later led him into reading the history of the Church as recorded in the Millennial Star. Given his mother's intimate involvement in the preservation and recording of Church history during her youth and his own later distinction in that field, it is easy to surmise that Joseph Fielding Smith's career as a Church historian was shaped and fueled in large part by Julina Lambson Smith. It would not be an exaggeration to say that Julina was reared on Church history. At age nine, she went to live with her Aunt Bathsheba, who was married to George A. Smith. At the time, George A. was the Church historian. The Smith home was on East South Temple across the street south from the present Church Administration Building at 47 East South Temple, and a wing had been added to the Smith home to house the Church's historical archives. Julina lived in this house for nine years and intermittently helped her uncle and his assistants with various archival tasks. One of these assistants was young Joseph F. Smith, a cousin of her uncle George, who at age twenty-six was a veteran of three missions to Hawaii. As they saw each other in the Historian's Office over the months, love bloomed. "I often saw him and admired him," wrote Julina in her later years. "I thought he was the most handsome and finest man I had ever seen. I didn't think for a moment he had ever really noticed me but later I learned he had watched me for some time and had fallen in love with me. When he proposed marriage, I was somewhat frightened and also happily surprised. I answered him by saying, 'I will not marry anyone unless my Uncle George approves.' Joseph went immediately to Uncle George A. . . . and asked for my hand. He said, 'Joseph, there isn't a young man in the world I would rather give her to.' " (Julina Lambson Smith, "Family History," Church Archives.) Joseph F. and Julina were married in 1866 when he was twenty-eight and she was eighteen. That same year Joseph F. was ordained an apostle and designated as a counselor to President Brigham Young. The following year he was set apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

This, then, was the environment into which Joseph Fielding Smith was born ten years after his parents were married. Under their tutelage, especially that of his mother, he became imbued with a love for the scriptures and for the history of the Church. It was in the realm of these two subjects that the mature Joseph Fielding Smith would carve out a special niche for himself.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
