Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Three

The Maturing Years

The patterns of one's life emerge only in retrospect. As we look back now, it is easy to trace the parental and environmental influences of his infancy and early youth that helped shape the man Joseph Fielding Smith ultimately became. But as he actually lived those years, young Joseph may have wondered now and then whether there was any symmetry or overriding purpose in his life. He endured so much confusion and uncertainty. The years when his parents lived in Hawaii were especially upsetting for the boy. While his aunties and his brothers and sisters were good to him and loved him, this did not compensate fully for the absence of his parents. In these circumstances, he reached out to other adult relatives for support and direction, especially his Uncle Albert, his Aunt Melissa Davis, and his great-aunt, Mercy Thompson. The Davis family lived on a farm west of the Jordan River. Whenever Joseph felt lonely or in need of encouragement, he could always find a listening ear at the home of this saintly couple. Moreover, the Davis's horses were always available for a ride without the constraints sometimes imposed, or at least felt, on his father's farm, where horseback riding was usually a reward for work performed, not an activity of sheer recreation as it was at Uncle Albert's.

Aunt Mercy Thompson was the sister of Joseph Fielding's grandmother, Mary Fielding Smith. Mercy and her sister, Mary, and their brother, Joseph Fielding, were converted at Toronto, Canada, by Elder Parley P. Pratt in the 1830s and soon after moved to Kirtland, Ohio, where they became personally acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith. Later, Mercy married Robert B. Thompson, one of the Prophet Joseph Smith's personal secretaries, who died at Nauvoo in 1840 before the exodus. Aunt Mercy migrated west with her sister, Mary Fielding Smith. After Mary's death, her son, Joseph F. Smith, prepared a small home for Aunt Mercy only a block from the Joseph F. Smith family home on West First North. There he was able to help take care of her needs. Young Joseph Fielding Smith was a frequent visitor there, especially while his parents stayed in Hawaii. He never knew his grandmother, Mary Fielding Smith, who died shortly after coming to the Salt Lake Valley, long before Joseph Fielding was born. "I have always regretted that," he told a Tabernacle audience, "because she was one of the most noble women who ever lived; but I did know her good sister, my Aunt Mercy Thompson, and as a boy I used to go and visit her in her home and sit at her knee, where she told me stories about the Prophet Joseph Smith. And, oh, how grateful I am for that experience." (Conference Report, April 1962, p. 44.)

The boy's anxieties were eased when his mother returned from Hawaii in March 1887. And four months later he and the rest of the family were overjoyed when the father also returned. It was originally intended that President Joseph F. Smith would remain in Hawaii longer than this. However, he was summoned home earlier than was expected by George Q. Cannon, First Counselor in the First Presidency, when President John Taylor's condition became critical. He arrived in Utah on July 18, 1887, the day before Joseph Fielding's eleventh birthday, and went directly to President Taylor's hideaway in the home of Thomas F. Roueche in Kaysville, several miles north of Salt Lake City. There he found President Taylor sitting in a chair in a semiconscious condition with his feet and legs much swollen. When the counselors entered the sick room together, President George Q. Cannon roused the Prophet and said to him that it was the first time the members of the First Presidency had been together for two years and seven months. When asked how he felt about that, President Taylor answered weakly, "I feel to thank the Lord."

Because he was still much sought after by federal officials, Joseph F. Smith was unable to visit his family in Salt Lake City openly. So, shortly after returning to Utah, he went there under cover of night for a brief but joyful reunion. He then returned to the Roueche home in Kaysville, where he remained until July 25 when President John Taylor quietly passed away.

To Joseph F. Smith, John Taylor was the "Great Martyr." He noted the Prophet's death in his journal: "He rallied for a few moments, but precisely at 5 mts to 8 p.m. the Great Martyr breathed his last. Thus what the deadly bullets of the Carthage assassins failed to do 43 years ago the 27th of last June, the malignant persecutions of their successors have accomplished, by driving him into exile to avoid falling into their murderous hands." These harsh words were summarized in a phrase often heard among the Latter-day Saints: "In Utah was finished what Carthage began." (CHC 6:188.)

Later Joseph F. Smith collaborated with George Q. Cannon to compose an official statement that assessed the blame for President Taylor's death. It recounted the murders of Joseph and Hyrum Smith in the Carthage jail, where John Taylor was critically wounded. The blood he then shed, wrote they, mingled with the blood of the slain Prophet and Patriarch to make him "a living martyr for the truth." His death on the underground, they concluded, made him a double martyr. "President John Taylor has been killed by the cruelty of officials who have, in this territory misrepresented the Government of the United States. There is no room to doubt that if he had been permitted to enjoy the comforts of home, the ministrations of his family, the exercise to which he had been accustomed, but of which he was deprived, he might have lived for many years yet. His blood stains the clothes of men, who with insensate hate have offered rewards for his arrest and have hounded him to the grave. History will yet call their deeds by their right name." (In Roberts, Life of John Taylor, pp. 413-14.)

The bitter feelings this statement reveals were especially poignant to Joseph F. Smith, feelings he often expressed to his family and which were shared by his son, Joseph Fielding. As the statement implies, President Taylor's death was linked in Joseph F. Smith's mind with the martyrdom of his father Hyrum Smith and his uncle, Joseph Smith, in the Carthage jail on June 27, 1844. At that time, Joseph F. was a few months less than six years old. He was, therefore, too young to have understood the complicated religious, political, and social issues that underlay the Carthage jail murders. These he would learn later. But he was old enough to understand the meaning of his father's death and to remember vividly in later years the terrible impact it had upon him. In 1906, when he was sixty-eight years old, President Joseph F. Smith visited Nauvoo with a party from Salt Lake City. As the group visited various places of historic interest in the city, President Smith shared his personal recollections of the events that preceded and followed the murder of his father and uncle. Stopping on one of Nauvoo's streets, he pointed to a spot where he had stood when the group of horsemen passed on their way to Carthage. His father stopped, and, without dismounting, picked the boy up, kissed him, and then put him back on the ground. Joseph never saw his father alive again. He also recalled the night of the martyrdom. After the family had retired, someone knocked on the window to tell Mary Fielding Smith that her husband had been killed; and he recounted how, as the bodies of the two brothers lay in state, someone lifted him up so he could look upon the faces of his father and uncle for the last time. These terrible events were the sad legacy of the Smith family and were kept alive by their periodic retelling within the family circle. And now as the mature Joseph F. Smith faced further harassment at the hands of the federal officials following the death of President John Taylor, his wives and children would become personal witnesses and, to some extent, participants in still another chapter of family woe.

Soon after President Taylor's death, the Twelve met to discuss their next move. It was decided to follow the precedent set after the deaths of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, with the Twelve temporarily administering the affairs of the Church through an executive committee and task committees. On February 2, 1888, Joseph F. Smith received an assignment from Wilford Woodruff, president of the Twelve, that would again take him away from his family. He was asked to go to Washington, D.C., as the Church's representative in the Eastern States. A written commission given to him eight days later more fully defined his responsibilities. He was to take charge of all the business affairs of the Church in that region; to preside over the Church branches and over all the proselyting missionaries there; to direct the immigration of new converts; and to act as the Church's political agent. In this last capacity, he was to direct and correlate the activities of all Church members in the east who had been or would later be appointed to work toward statehood for Utah.

After being set apart for his new assignment by President Wilford Woodruff and Elders Franklin D. Richards and George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. did something that had become a ritual in the Smith family. He called all his wives and children together, gave them counsel and instructions about their activities and conduct during his absence, and then laid his hands on their heads to bless them. One can imagine the impact such an incident had upon eleven-year-old Joseph Fielding Smith who would reach age twelve within a few months, the age at which Latter-day Saint youths pass into manhood and receive the Priesthood of Aaron. It is one thing to learn about patriarchs and prophets from the scriptures and ecclesiastical literature. It is quite another to witness a scene such as this, in which the role and function of a family patriarch is demonstrated in a way that the participants will never forget. From such incidents, it is easy to see why the family of Joseph F. Smith was always held up as a model for the Latter-day Saints to emulate. And it is also easy to see the origin of the life-style Joseph Fielding Smith followed in rearing and instructing his own family.

The day after blessing his family, Joseph F. Smith left for the East in company with London convert Charles W. Penrose, who, just a week before, had celebrated his fifty-sixth birthday. Sixteen years later when his friend was seventy-two, President Joseph F. Smith would call Elder Penrose to the Twelve; and seven years after that, when the Englishman was seventy-nine, he would call him as a counselor in the First Presidency, where he would serve during the last seven years of President Smith's administration. He was selected to accompany Joseph F. on this mission to the East because of his good judgment and his negotiating and literary skills.

Had one checked the passenger list of the train that carried this pair, he would not have found the names of Joseph F. Smith and Charles W. Penrose. Instead, he would have found the names of Jason Mack and Charles Williams, pseudonyms they used to mask their identity from their enemies. This was a mark of the times for Latter-day Saint polygamists, who, during the underground years, were constantly on guard, furtive about their movements and secretive about their purposes. And to add another layer of protection, some of the brethren occasionally changed pseudonyms. Joseph F. Smith, for instance, used the name of J. F. Speight during his exile in the Hawaiian Islands.

The effect on Joseph Fielding Smith of this subterfuge and of his father's deliberate refusal to obey the antipolygamy laws is impossible to ascertain. It did not create in him a sense of rebellion against civil law, since throughout his life he was a model of conservatism and good citizenship. Still less did it create any personal ambiguity about the uniform application of Church doctrine and policy since Joseph Fielding Smith was without peer in insisting that they be obeyed by all and in obeying them himself. It can be assumed, therefore, that when he matured to the point where he understood the issues involved, he accepted the views of his father and other Church leaders as expressed by President John Taylor—that since the law directly conflicted with revelation, the Saints were justified in violating the law and also in taking the steps necessary to avoid being caught doing it.

When his father went east with Elder Penrose, Joseph Fielding Smith had not matured to the point that he could have articulated his reasons for endorsing what his father said and did. It was sufficient for him that his father said it and did it. He relied unquestioningly on his words and actions. To the little boy, his father could do no wrong, and the son did whatever the father asked. It was his father, for instance, who had introduced Joseph Fielding to the Book of Mormon and given him the incentive to read it. "When I was a small boy, too young to hold the Aaronic Priesthood," he reported later, "my father placed a copy of the Book of Mormon in my hands with the request that I read it. I received this Nephite record with thanksgiving and applied myself to the task which had been assigned to me. There are certain passages that have been stamped upon my mind and I have never forgotten them." (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 57.) By the time he was ten years old, young Joseph had read the book through twice. So diligent was he in following the direction of his father that he would hurry to finish his chores, or sometimes even leave a ball game, so he could go and read the book.

This copy of the Book of Mormon was defective—some of the pages were out of sequence. Young Joseph learned later that because of this defect, his father was able to buy it at a reduced price. Money was scarce for a man with such a large and growing family. Therefore, economy and frugality were watchwords in the Smith household. And sometimes, even with the most rigid budgeting, there was not enough to go around. Joseph F. remembered one dreary Christmas when there was no money at all with which to buy gifts for his children. "Under these spiritless conditions, one day just before Christmas," he wrote, "I left to do something for my chicks. I wanted something to please them, and to mark the Christmas day from all other days—but not a cent to do it with! walked up and down Main Street, looking into shop windows—into Amussens Jewelry store, into every store—everywhere—and then slunk out of sight of humanity and sat down and wept like a child, until my poured out grief relieved my aching heart; and after a while returned home, as empty as when I left." (Improvement Era, July 1966, pp. 615-16.)

The father remained in the East for several months, directing the lobbying efforts for statehood, supervising the local branches, and overseeing the immigration of European converts. Even though he had a drawing account for his expenses, he lived with the most exacting frugality, mending his own clothes, sewing on lost buttons, and guarding every penny with utmost care. On February 17, 1888, for instance, the day of his arrival in Washington, D.C., he noted in his diary: "My expenses today were, porters fees 50 cents, cab 50 cents = $1.00." The following day, after noting that he had had an oyster lunch with L. John Nuttall, he recorded, "I took a dozen raw—40 cents." And on the first day of a trip to New York, he noted these expenses: "Cab fare 37 1/2 cents [he had shared a cab with Elder Penrose] provisions 85 cents, telegram 25 cents, Railway fare $6.50, cash paid to Bro. Penrose, $1, total = $8.97 1/2 cents." Later on a trip to Newport News, where he inspected ships he had engaged to bring converts from abroad, he and his companion put up at the Hotel Warwick, where he found everything "first class . . . especially prices." At the day's end, Joseph F. tabulated his expenses, exclusive of the "exhorbitant" hotel bill of $4.00, which he paid the next day: "Breakfast $1.00, cab 25 cents, bus 10 cents, railway 30 cents, porters fee 37 1/2 cents, total $2.17 1/2 cents."

At home during his absence, Joseph F.'s family practiced the same rigid economy. Nothing was wasted around the Smith household. Clothes were continually being altered or mended or were laid aside until another child grew into them. Seldom was new clothing purchased. And when a garment had absolutely passed the stage of usefulness, the worn fabric was saved in a cache for a future rag rug. The rule of the house on clothes was capsulized in a simple couplet that reportedly originated with Brigham Young: "Use it up, wear it out; make it do, or do without."

Not only were things not wasted, but neither was time. In such a household where the family lived constantly on the edge of want, everyone capable of working had their assigned tasks. It was during this period that Joseph Fielding came into his own as his mother's chief obstetrical aide. In between calls, he and his brothers who were old enough had literally endless chores with the barnyard animals and, in season, with the family garden near the home and with the Taylorsville farm. Meanwhile, the girls in the family were occupied with numerous household tasks, sewing, mending, cleaning, baby-tending, and cooking, although, as will appear later, cooking was not the exclusive domain of the girls, since Joseph Fielding became particularly adept in the culinary arts.

As for the mothers and aunties, they expertly juggled their time between duties in the home and their employments outside it so that the children were adequately supervised, motivated, and trained, and the skimpy household budget was augmented with money earned from midwifery or from cooking at the Endowment House. In such a communal environment, any lines of distinction between the children of the different wives were practically erased so that the children willingly and without thought took direction from the wife who happened to be in charge at the moment.

While the chores and tasks were endless, the family's application to them was not. There were interludes of play and recreation, especially when the children were toddlers. And when they reached school age, they regularly engaged in sports and cultural activities, which were part of the curriculum.

The father returned temporarily to Salt Lake City in June 1888, having spent four months in his assignment in the East. The federal officials still sought his arrest, so he had to lay low. But by now, he was expert enough in avoiding detection by using disguises, or by moving about after dark, that he was able to meet periodically with his family. Joseph Fielding reported later that on such occasions, his father "spent his time instructing his children in the principles of the gospel. They one and all rejoiced in his presence and were grateful for the wonderful words of counsel and instruction which he imparted on these occasions in the midst of anxiety. They have never forgotten what they were taught, and the impressions have remained with them and will likely do so forever. . . .Among my fondest memories are the hours I have spent by his side discussing principles of the gospel and receiving instruction as only he could give it. In this way the foundation for my own knowledge was laid in truth." (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 40.)

President Joseph F. Smith was able to remain in Salt Lake City through December 1888, furtively meeting with his family on occasion and counseling behind the scenes with his Brethren of the Twelve. Because he stood at or near the top of the government's arrest list, he never attended public meetings during this time, nor appeared on the streets unless it was dark or he was in disguise. Because of this, he was unable to attend the October general conference, though he was in town, and learned about the proceedings only by reading summaries of the sermons in the newspapers or by receiving briefings from those who did attend.

Joseph F. left Salt Lake City on December 30, 1888, to return to Washington, D.C., after having enjoyed the companionship of his family during the Christmas season. Before boarding the train, he went through the usual ritual of meeting with, counseling, and blessing his wives and children. At Ogden, as a precaution against detection, he left the north-south feeder train before it entered the station, was driven around the business district in a buggy, then boarded the Union Pacific east-west train after it left the station.

He remained in the nation's capital for only another three months before returning to Salt Lake City to stay. During this time, he continued to direct the lobbying effort out of public view, concealed behind his pseudonym and sending and receiving messages in cipher. He helped polish a detailed presentation made to the Senate Committee on Territories by U.S. Congressman from Utah, John T. Caine, and others, which pleaded Utah's case for statehood. Because it was detailed and convincing, Elder Smith had 15,000 copies printed and mailed to influential people around the country, including government officials and secretaries of bar associations.

Another project of Elder Smith and his lobbying committee was to endeavor to obtain presidential pardons for convicted or indicted polygamists. Before returning home to stay, two cases were successfully concluded, those of George Q. Cannon and Charles W. Penrose. On February 21, 1889, he wired congratulations to Elder Cannon: "While deeply regretting the circumstances which have kept you so long confined, I rejoice that today will see you comparatively free once more. I congratulate you and thank God. All here join." These were among the first of many presidential pardons granted to Latter-day Saint polygamists, arranged for by the lobbying machinery Elder Joseph F. Smith helped to perfect. Many months later, following the publication of the Manifesto, that machinery was instrumental in obtaining a general amnesty for all Mormon men who had previously engaged in plural marriage.

Since he had fulfilled the main purposes for which he had been sent East, Joseph F. Smith was permitted to return to his family in March 1889, a few weeks after the success in obtaining the presidential pardons for Elders Cannon and Penrose.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
