Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Four

Into Manhood

On his return to Salt Lake City, Joseph Fielding's father was home, yet not at home. What he was able to do for his friends, he had been unable to do for himself. Therefore, he came back under the same cloud of illegality that had covered him when he left. He was still being sought by federal officials for violation of the polygamy laws and was unable, therefore, to live openly with his family. Under these circumstances, space was made available to him in the Gardo House, east of the Historian's office on South Temple across the street from Brigham Young's Beehive House. There in the Gardo House, on April 5, 1889, Wilford Woodruff raised the question about reorganizing the First Presidency. All the members of the Twelve were present except Francis M. Lyman, who was still in the penitentiary for polygamy. After discussion, it was decided to reorganize, and on motion unanimously approved, Wilford Woodruff was ordained and set apart as the fourth president of the Church. According to the usual procedure, President Woodruff nominated his counselors. They were George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, who were then approved by the Twelve and set apart by him.

At the time, Joseph F., although only fifty-one years old, had held the apostleship for twenty-three years, during most of which time he had served as a counselor to the president of the Church. It was that office, and the responsibility it entailed, that had made him a principal target of the federal officials. Therefore, his selection as a counselor to President Woodruff, while accepted willingly and without reservation, was not a cause of rejoicing but of deep reflection and of some misgivings. "I would rather have taken a mission to Vandeman's land as an elder," he confided to his diary, "than to be called to the responsibilities of a counselor in the First Presidency if my own choice was to be consulted. But inasmuch as the President had expressed his mind upon it—and had given us the 'will of the Lord' on the subject—so far as I was concerned, that was the end of the matter with me." Yoked as he was to the apostleship, he was not at liberty to consult his own desires but was under covenant to follow the direction of the Prophet without question.

We are left to conjecture about the effect of such an example of faith and fidelity upon President Joseph F. Smith's young son and namesake who was then almost thirteen years old. Given the boy's adulation of his father, his obedient nature, and his serious turn of mind, it is reasonable to assume that the impact on Joseph Fielding was powerful and lasting.

Living in the Gardo House, under the threat of indictment and conviction, was akin to imprisonment for Joseph F. Smith. He was unable to appear in public except in disguise or at night; therefore, he did not attend the October general conference. His papers and books were moved to the Gardo House, where, behind the scenes, he was able to confer regularly with the Brethren, handle paperwork, and receive some selected visitors whose reliability in keeping confidences was unquestioned. So, on the day after the conference, he received Francis M. Lyman, who brought with him a gift from a fellow prisoner who was still at the penitentiary. It was a carved oak walking stick that had been made for President Smith by his longtime friend, William H. Maughan, bishop of the Wellsville ward in Cache Valley, whom Joseph F. had called to preside over the Birmingham England conference in 1875.

As indicated, what little walking President Smith did at this time was at night or when he had on a disguise. He became quite adept at concealing his identity. Shortly after the general conference where he was sustained again as a counselor in the First Presidency, he walked in disguise to the First North home. "After a short visit with my family I returned to the Gardo, meeting only three persons on the trip . . . B. Young, C. O. Card and Geo. W. Thatcher," he wrote. Then with a certain sense of pride, he added, "They did not know me."

At the time of this visit in April 1889, only Julina and Sarah and their children, including Joseph Fielding, were living in the old family home. Because of the dangers threatened by the federal officers, the other wives and their children had been dispersed to different locations. Edna, for instance, was then living at a hideout called "Camp Solitude"; and the others were located temporarily in different places in the valley. In view of subsequent events, this dispersion of the family seems to have been a prelude to the historic action taken the following year. For some time, the leaders of the Church had been quietly discussing alternate solutions to the problem of plural marriage. The lobbying efforts for statehood that Joseph F. Smith had directed were part of this process. Yet they knew that the ultimate solution lay in the spiritual realm, which they could not control. It was to this principal source that the Brethren turned for relief from the burdens that had been imposed upon the Latter-day Saints by the antipolygamy acts. These burdens had affected them both collectively and individually. Collectively, these acts had effectively dismantled the Church as an operating entity. The Edmunds Tucker Act, passed in March 1887, had provided for the disincorporation of the Church, for the dissolution of the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, and for the escheatment of Church properties to the government of the United States. Subsequent legal action taken under the act implemented these severe provisions, resulting in the confiscation of Church properties and the appointment of a receiver to control them. And the burdens on the individual members of the Church were demonstrated by the upset to family life typified by what had happened to the family of President Joseph F. Smith.

In a search for a solution to these complex problems by spiritual means, the First Presidency proclaimed December 23, 1889, the eighty-fourth anniversary of the birth of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as a general fast day throughout the Church. To end this fast, the First Presidency and the Twelve held a special prayer circle in the Gardo House, where Joseph F. Smith was still living. He later noted in his diary specific things the brethren had focused on as they implored the Lord for guidance out of the difficulties that had engulfed them. "Among the subjects prayed for," wrote President Smith, "were the following: 1. That the plots and schemes which are being framed for the purpose of robbing us of our civil and political rights and obtaining control of our cities, counties and territory, might be confounded. 2. That all who conspire in any manner to injure or destroy the work of God or take from the people their rights and liberties be defeated. 3. That the unfavorable actions of courts and of officials might be overruled in such a manner that no injury will be done to Zion. 4. That the executive of the nation, the cabinet, the senate, the house of representatives, the judiciary and the people of the nation might be so influenced and controlled that their hearts may be softened towards the people of God, and not inclined to listen to the slanderous reports and falsehoods circulated concerning us, and which may be brought before them; and that all officers of our nation may be inspired with such wisdom, justice and mercy that they may gain the love and esteem of the people and the approbation of the Lord. 5. That the supreme court should be so moved upon and strengthened and filled with courage as to render a righteous decision in our causes before them. 6. That the eyes of the nation might be opened to see us in our true light, and be inclined to trust us with kindness and consideration due to fellow citizens who are loyal and true to the constitution of our country. 7. For the Lord to come to our help and deliver us from the many snares spread around us for our overthrow and destruction, to make our path plain before us, and to lead us to escape the pits dug for our feet. 8. That the Lord will pour out in great power His Holy Spirit and the gifts thereof upon his servants that they may be filled with qualifications and power necessary to enable them to magnify their offices acceptable to Him, and to fill the hearts of the Saints with comfort and peace, witness unto them that he has not forgotten and does not neglect Zion. And to pray for such other things as the Saints saw and felt that we needed."

By degrees, and over a period of years, these fervent prayers were answered. And in some instances, the answers came in ways the Brethren had not expected or foreseen. Their own attitudes and actions played an important role in the changes that occurred. Thus, during the early part of 1890, the First Presidency and the Twelve quietly took steps toward a suspension of the authority to perform plural marriages. In early September, Joseph F. accompanied Presidents Woodruff and Cannon to San Francisco, where they stayed for over two weeks as the guests of Colonel Isaac Trumbo. Away from the pressures of day-to-day administrative work at headquarters, the members of the First Presidency were able to counsel in a leisurely way. The arrangements were ideal for this, as they had a large suite in the Palace Hotel with separate bedrooms for each and with a large, common parlor. The party returned from San Francisco on September 20. Three days later, slanderous and distorted reports were circulated about steps allegedly taken by the First Presidency looking toward the cessation of plural marriage. This prompted President Woodruff to make the following entry in his journal on September 25, 1890: "I have arrived at a point in the history of my life as the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints where I am under the necessity of acting for the temporal salvation of the church. The United States Government has taken a stand and passed laws to destroy the Latter-day Saints on the subject of polygamy or patriarchal marriage, and after praying to the Lord and feeling inspired, I have issued the following proclamation which is sustained by my counselors and the Twelve Apostles." He then set out in its entirety what has since been referred to as the Manifesto, by which the teaching and practice of plural marriage was suspended.

While the revelation was recorded in President Woodruff's journal, the proclamation was a formal document dictated by him and edited by Joseph F. Smith, President Cannon, and others. The final draft was carefully reviewed and approved by President Woodruff and his counselors. On September 24, it was given to W. B. Dougall, who was in charge of the Deseret Telegraph office, for transmission through the Associated Press. The following day when the AP dispatch arrived from the East, the statement had been severely edited, much to the annoyance of President Woodruff. He then directed that the entire proclamation be sent out over the AP wire

As expected, the document created widespread discussion outside the Church and not a little consternation within it. Although it was not wholly unexpected, either by the enemies or the members of the Church, the reality of it required some radical readjustment in thinking. The enemies, for instance, suddenly found themselves bereft of the main focus of attack upon the Mormons. And the members were left to sort out the meaning of an action suspending a principle given to the Saints by a prophet.

As the leaders counseled before the October general conference, weighing the impact of the Manifesto on the faithful members of the Church, there was extensive discussion whether it should be presented to the conference for formal acceptance. Joseph F. Smith spoke strongly in favor of doing this at a meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve held on Thursday, October 2, 1890. But there was a difference of opinion that caused the Brethren to lay the matter aside for the time being. The issue arose again three days later when a wire from congressman John T. Caine reported speculation among the national leaders as to whether President Woodruff's Manifesto "stood alone, unsupported by authority from the church." This, with conflicting statements made by Utah's governor and others, caused the Brethren to decide to present the document for action by the conference. This was done on Monday, October 6, 1890, when Bishop Orson F. Whitney read the "Official Declaration" or Manifesto to the general conference assembled in the Tabernacle. Then, on motion of Lorenzo Snow, president of the Twelve, the document was unanimously accepted as "authoritative and binding" on the Church.

This historic action had little immediate impact on President Joseph F. Smith and his family. He was still under indictment for past violations of the antipolygamy laws. And though he had begun to disperse his various fam-ilies, establishing them in different homes, he continued to cohabit with his wives. This constituted a continuing violation of these laws, which still remained in effect. Therefore, it was necessary for Joseph Fielding's father to remain on the underground despite the Manifesto. He continued to live in the Gardo House, venturing out only at night or when he had on a disguise.

Yet the Manifesto had a restraining influence upon many nonmembers, especially those whose opposition to the Church had been based solely on a philosophical rejection of polygamy as a marital institution. Such as these took a liberal and forgiving view toward the Latter-day Saints who had practiced plural marriage, urging either that the laws not be enforced or that they be applied with leniency. These relaxed attitudes even affected members of the judiciary. Non-Mormon judge Charles S. Zane was a prime example of this shift in emphasis. Before the Manifesto, he interpreted the law rigidly. Afterward, he applied flexible standards of equity in deciding unlawful cohabitation cases. He even went so far as to sign a petition asking that polygamists be given an official pardon. Another judge, James C. Miner, reacted similarly when in one case he dismissed a suit against a polygamist who said he accepted the Manifesto, imposing a fine of only six cents. Adopting this new attitude also, local prosecutors were less inclined to press charges vigorously. This wise policy of compromise and accommodation received executive confirmation when, in January 1893, President Benjamin Harrison granted amnesty to all Saints who had observed the law since the Manifesto, and when, in September 1894, President Grover Cleveland issued an even broader decree of amnesty.

Before these general actions were taken, however, Joseph F. Smith received what he had hoped and prayed for over many years—a presidential order of personal amnesty. He had been under a cloud for seven years, living furtively, shielded by pseudonyms and disguises, secretive about his movements, constantly on guard against federal officials, and anxious about the possibility of arrest, conviction, and imprisonment. With the Manifesto in place, and sensing the changed attitudes among the federal officialdom at all levels, he applied to President Benjamin Harrison for amnesty on July 20, 1891. There was a twenty-five day delay in sending the application to Washington, D.C., because of a desire to obtain the endorsement of prominent Utah officials who were not Latter-day Saints. Among the nonmembers who endorsed the application were territorial governor Arthur L. Thomas and chief justice Charles S. Zane. President Harrison, who was on vacation at the time, received the application at Cape May, New Jersey. A press release from there on September 7, 1891, announced, "Amnesty has been granted to Joseph F. Smith." Two weeks later the official document arrived in the mail bearing the signature of President Harrison and William F. Wharton, acting secretary of state. "I thank God," wrote President Smith in his journal on September 21, 1891, "and am grateful to the President of the United States." The Sunday following the arrival of the certificate of amnesty, President Smith openly attended worship services in the Salt Lake Tabernacle for the first time in seven years. "The house was full to the galley," he wrote. "I spoke briefly, for I was so overcome by my feelings that I could scarcely restrain them. A good spirit was present. . . . This is a memorable day for me, and no words at my command can express my gratitude to God."

These events were the cause of great rejoicing in the family of President Joseph F. Smith. At last the father and husband could return openly to the old family home on West First North. He could again walk the streets of Salt Lake City in broad daylight without fear, using his own identity. He could again mingle with his children in public, work with them around the home and on the farm, and teach and train them, both in the privacy of the home and in his office in the First Presidency's suite.

However, life in the Old Home was not quite the same when President Smith took up residence there again after receiving amnesty. Only Julina and her children then lived there. Separate permanent homes for the other four wives and their children had been established at other locations within easy walking distance from 333 West First North. Even at that, there were enough children living there that Joseph Fielding never wanted for companionship. At the time, Julina had nine living children, ranging in age from twenty-two to ten months. The oldest, Mamie, and her nineteen-year-old sister, Donnie, were old enough to assume many of the household responsibilities previously borne by the other wives. Moreover, fifteen-year-old Joseph Fielding pitched in to help with the house work. It was during this period that he learned his way around the kitchen, helping to prepare meals and mixing and baking bread. He also learned how to make a good pie. And he did his share of washing and ironing clothes for himself and for his six younger brothers and sisters: David, age twelve; George, ten; seven-year-old Clarissa; Wesley, five; Emily, three; and Rachel, ten months. One other child, Edith, would be born later. These household duties were in addition to Joseph Fielding's outside chores at the house and on the Taylorsville farm and to his responsibilities to chauffer his mother on her obstetrical calls. But David and George were now old enough to help with all these duties, so that the full load did not fall solely on Joseph Fielding.

The financial burden on Joseph F. Smith to maintain five separate households was overwhelming. Since his own sources of income were severely limited, he had to look within the family for help. The answer was for the older boys to find employment outside the home. This was the incentive for Joseph Fielding to obtain employment at ZCMI as a stock clerk and "cash boy." He began working there in his late teens and continued at it until he left for the mission field in the spring of 1899. The demands of this employment made it necessary that he completely shift his obstetrical chauffering duties to his younger brothers, David and George.

The work at ZCMI was a drudge. "I worked like a horse all day long," he later reported to his family, "and was tired out when night came, carrying sacks of flour and sacks of sugar and hams and bacons on my back. I weighed 150 pounds, but I thought nothing of picking up a 200 pound sack and putting it on my shoulders. I was a very foolish fellow, because ever since that time my shoulders have been just a little out of kilter. The right one got a little more 'treatment' than the left." (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 65.)

Before commencing this employment, Joseph Fielding completed his formal education with two years of study at the Latter-day Saint College, which provided high-school level training. There he had taken the main courses offered by the school's narrow curriculum—mathematics, geography, history, basic science, and penmanship. He was a solid, careful student, more interested in substance than in form, independent and analytical in his thinking and not easily swayed from conclusions to which his reasoning had led him. Valuable as this formal schooling was, it was during his years at the college, and throughout his employment at ZCMI, that Joseph Fielding Smith received an extracurricular training that, more than anything else, helped prepare him for the prophetic role he would play later in life. It was during these years that his father began to use the son as an unofficial, unpaid secretary. And it was a service Joseph Fielding would render intermittently during the remainder of his father's life.

As Joseph Fielding worked with his father, handling correspondence, conducting research, taking dictation, preparing documents, carrying messages, or serving as a sounding board and confidant, he acquired an insight into the structure and operation of the Church and a close view of a prophet of God at work, things he could never have learned in a book or from a lecture. The father, while lauding education and encouraging Church members to become well educated, was convinced that learning by experience and observation was superior to book learning. "The best school I ever attended is the school of experience," he wrote to Joseph Fielding while he was in the mission field. "There are some things that seem difficult for me to learn. One thing is english orthography and I see you are a little like me in this regard." He then listed several words the son usually spelled wrong, gave the correct spelling for them, and expressed confidence that when writing in the future he would spell them correctly. (This and other quoted correspondence to or from Joseph Fielding Smith is located in the Church archives.) In other similar ways, the father taught the son many things of a technical, procedural nature that enabled him to function ably in his personal, church, and other employments. These were important to Joseph Fielding who, throughout his long life, acknowledged his debt to his father for the practical training he had received from him.

Of all the things his father taught him, however, nothing was more important or of more lasting value than the instruction he received about gospel principles and their application to daily life. "Among my fondest memories," he reported later, "are the hours I have spent by his side discussing principles of the gospel and receiving instruction as only he could give it. In this way the foundation for my own knowledge was laid in truth, so that I too can say I know that my Redeemer lives, and that Joseph Smith is, was, and always will be a Prophet of the Living God." (Improvement Era, June 1932, p. 459.) The son left this account of the impact on him of his father's powerful testimony: "As a preacher of righteousness, the sincerity of his words penetrated the souls of men. He spoke as one having authority and with a firmness, conviction and confidence begotten of a knowledge of the truth. There was no element of doubt or uncertainty in his testimony. Especially was this so when he spoke of the divinity of the Savior or the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It has sunk deep into my heart; it fills every fibre of my soul; so that I say before this people, and would be pleased to have the privilege of saying it before the whole world, that God has revealed unto me that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God, the Redeemer of the world." (Ibid.)

During the early years of service as his father's volunteer secretary, Joseph Fielding had an insider's view of many significant events in Church history. None of these was more impressive to him than the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple, which took place in April 1893. From infancy, he had seen this building in a half-finished state of construction. The work on it was torturously slow, occasioned by the difficulty of moving and fashioning the huge granite blocks used in building the walls and the periodic stoppages or slow-downs in the work caused by a lack of money or pressures exerted during the underground years. As a young boy, Joseph Fielding had watched with fascinated interest as the workmen chiseled the unwieldy granite blocks into shape and hoisted them into place. He had also seen how cast-off stones were used in constructing the nearby Assembly Hall, which, though started many years after the temple, was completed more than ten years before it. To see all the debris, machinery, and workmen's tools removed from the square, leaving the completed temple standing stately and tall near the Tabernacle and the Assembly Hall, undoubtedly created a sense of pride and thanksgiving in Joseph Fielding and all other Latter-day Saints. And such feelings would have been greatly accentuated as they entered the temple to see the dignified beauty of its interior appointments. No expense or effort had been spared to make the sacred building a fit abode for the Savior of the World, whose house it is.

Joseph Fielding was present in the temple when President Wilford Woodruff dedicated it to the Lord. Seated in the large assembly room of the temple that day, from where he could see his father on the upper level of the stand at President Woodruff's left, little did seventeen-year-old Joseph Fielding Smith realize that in his old age the prophetic mantle then worn by Wilford Woodruff would rest upon his shoulders.

Joseph Fielding saw President Woodruff later in 1893 under very different circumstances. In September of that year, the Prophet invited his counselors and members of their families to join him and his family on a trip by special train to Chicago, Illinois, to attend the World's Fair.

Joseph Fielding was one of the members of his father's family privileged to go. Significantly, it was his first trip outside Utah. That alone was enough to make it one of the most memorable experiences of his life. But the attraction of the fair, the invitation extended to the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir to participate in a choral contest there, and the privilege of traveling as the guest of the Prophet in his private cars added special meaning to the occasion. "I had the privilege of sitting in the state room or the room that was given to President Woodruff," Joseph Fielding reported later, "and listened to his counsel and advice." (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 63.)

The apparent awe young Joseph had for the Prophet and his sense of gratitude at being present in that intimate setting worsened the impact of an unhappy incident that occurred during the trip. "We got scolded by President Woodruff," he reported in his old age. The "we" referred to himself and a son and daughter of President Woodruff who were Joseph Fielding's good friends. The three teenagers had gone to the open platform at the rear of the train, where they were eating watermelons and throwing the rinds over the low railing that enclosed the platform. Their youthful exuberance and apparent obliviousness to the dangers involved apparently worried President Woodruff. "When we came in we got a scolding. We were told that if that train had gone with speed around a corner we could have been swept off, which was absolutely true, and I remember that very keenly." (Ibid.)

That Joseph Fielding Smith remembered this reprimand with such vividness over such a long period of time, as he also remembered so poignantly the occasion when his father punished him for something he did not do, implies an extraordinary tenderness and sensitivity of spirit. There was no rebellion or obstinacy on his part on either occasion. Nor is there any indication that he became sullen or self-pitying as a result of the treatment he received. Still less is there any hint that he sought to retaliate or to defend or justify his conduct. He merely took the rebukes in silence. The impact they may have had upon his thinking or future conduct is, of course, a matter of conjecture. But it is not unreasonable to infer that these and other similar incidents helped develop the quality of character referred to by his wife Ethel: "If he feels that he has been unjust to anyone, the distance is never too far for him to go and, with loving words or kind deeds, erase the hurt."

While Joseph Fielding had no apparent inkling of his prophetic future when he heard President Woodruff offer the prayer at the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple, he received special insight about it less than three years later when he was given his first patriarchal blessing. It was on January 19, 1896, that he went to the Patriarch to the Church, John Smith, for this purpose. The Patriarch, who was Joseph Fielding's uncle, was the oldest son of Hyrum Smith by his first wife, Jerusha Barden, who died in Kirtland in the mid 1830s, leaving several children. John was five years old when, in 1837, his father, Hyrum Smith, married his second wife, Mary Fielding, who bore her only son, Joseph F. Smith, in 1838. So Mary Fielding raised these two boys and the other children sired by Hyrum Smith as a unified family, making no distinction between her own children and those to whom Jerusha had given birth.

When, therefore, John Smith laid his hands on the head of his nephew to bless him, he did so not only with full knowledge of their relationship and of Joseph Fielding's relationship to the martyrs Joseph and Hyrum Smith, but also with the spiritual power and insights gained during more than forty years of service as the Patriarch to the Church. He was ordained to that office on February 18, 1855, by President Brigham Young when John was only twenty-two years old. Over the intervening forty-one years, he had given hundreds of patriarchal blessings. It is unlikely, however, that he ever gave one of greater significance than the one he conferred on his nephew. In addition to the usual preliminaries, the declaration of lineage (Ephraim), and promises about his status and blessings in the eternities, it contained these special provisions about his earthly role and mission: First, the man who lived to age ninety-six was told: "It is thy privilege to live to a good old age." Second, his role as the head of the Church was foreshadowed: "It is . . . the will of the Lord that you should become a mighty man in Israel" and "It shall be thy duty to sit in counsel with thy brethren and to preside among the people." Third, he was given insight into the half-nomadic kind of life he would lead during his apostolic ministry: "It shall be thy duty to travel much at home and abroad, by land and water, laboring in the ministry." Fourth, he was admonished about things that were essential to enable him to fulfill his role in life: "Thou hast much to do in order to complete thy mission in life. . . . Reflect often upon the past, present and future . . . hold up thy head, lift up thy voice without fear or favor, as the spirit of the Lord shall direct . . . strive to inform thy mind and be prepared for events to come, and remember the instruction of thy parents and honor the Priesthood. . . . Remember also that he [God] will reward thee according to merit." Fifth, he was promised certain spiritual gifts and blessings: "The blessings of the Lord shall rest upon thee. His spirit shall direct thy mind and give thee word and sentiment, that thou shalt confound the wisdom of the wicked and set at naught the counsels of the unjust. . . . It shall be thy duty to be a peacemaker wheresoever thou shalt sojourn . . . and peace shall be in thy circle. . . . Thou shalt find friends among strangers.. . . Thou shalt lay hands upon the sick and they shall recover for this shall be one of thy gifts."

Reading this blessing in the light of Joseph Fielding Smith's life confirms that the patriarchal mantle worn by his father, Hyrum Smith, and his grandfather, Joseph Smith Sr., had fallen on John Smith. It proved to be an accurate and valuable blueprint for the man destined to become the tenth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Later the same year in which he received his patriarchal blessing, two other events occurred that had an important influence on Joseph Fielding Smith's future in the Church. On September 8, 1896, he received the Melchizedek Priesthood and was ordained an elder by Charles Seal. He was then received into the Sixth Quorum of Elders in the Salt Lake Stake. His certificate of ordination was signed by Z. C. Mitchell, the president, and Frederick A. Fish, the secretary. Two days later, Joseph Fielding received his endowments in the Salt Lake Temple.

Ordinarily, a young man of twenty does not receive his endowments unless he is planning to leave on a mission or to get married. Neither of these events was in the offing for Joseph Fielding when he went to the temple in September 1896. His mission was nearly three years away, and his marriage would not take place for eighteen months. But he was seriously interested in a young lady at the time, Louie Shurtliff, the daughter of Lewis Shurtliff, who was the president of the Weber Stake in Ogden, Utah. Louie was boarding at the Smith home while she attended the University of Utah across the street. Her distinctive name was a contraction of "Louisa," the name of Lewis Shurt-liff's first wife, who died before he married Louie's mother, Emily Wainwright.

President Joseph F. Smith had been well acquainted with Lewis Shurtliff since their boyhood days in Nauvoo. When it was learned, therefore, that his daughter Louie planned to attend the University of Utah, she was invited into the Smith home, which had ample room for a boarder since at that time only Julina and her children occupied it.

Louie Shurtliff was the same age as Joseph Fielding Smith. At eighteen, when she first came to live in the Smith home, she was a tall, attractive young lady, well bred, studious, and musically talented. Her only purpose in coming to live with the Smith family was the convenience of having accommodations near the university. During the three years of her residence there, she discovered a more important and enduring purpose.

Her relationship with Joseph Fielding seems to have remained on a strictly platonic level for many months. He was shy and reticent and quite unskilled in the nebulous realm of dating and romance. Of course, having been raised around a troop of girls, he pretty well understood them and their winning ways. But these were his sisters, with whom he felt perfectly at ease. But with a girl outside the family circle, it was different. Therefore, in keeping with his conservative, cautious character, Joseph was apparently quite formal if not distant toward Louie. He was exceedingly busy at the time, working at ZCMI and in his spare moments in the evenings or on weekends, assisting his father. Besides, at age eighteen he was too young to give any consideration to a serious relationship with a girl.

But even if he had wanted to develop such a relationship with Louie in the beginning, it is doubtful that Joseph Fielding would have been successful. She had come to Salt Lake City for an education, not for romance. She was a serious student who applied herself with discipline to the requirements of university-level study. While the University of Utah was comparatively small at the time, still it had a faculty of distinction that demanded high performance from the students. Its new president, James E. Talmage, who also taught courses in geology, was even at that early time highly regarded in academic circles. The faculty also included the likes of George M. Marshall, an honors graduate of Cornell University who was professor of English literature; George R. Mathews, a Yale graduate, professor of modern languages; and Byron Cummings of Rutgers, professor of ancient languages and literature. The director of the school's speech and drama department at the time was Maude May Babcock, one of Utah's most noted actresses. These and other professors, and lecturers like Joseph F. Merrill in physics and chemistry and Richard R. Lyman in engineering, kept Louie and her fellow students challenged and occupied. And if in the beginning of her career at the university she had been interested in serious socializing, she would likely have been more inclined toward the students with whom she was thrown into contact each day, such as J. Reuben Clark, Stephen L Richards, and George Q. Morris, who were key members of the staff of the Chronicle, the school's newspaper; or David O. McKay, who was prominent in school athletics.

So, in the beginning it seems that the relationship between Joseph Fielding and Louie, although cordial and friendly, was nothing special and certainly nothing that hinted they would be man and wife. Over a period of months, however, their relationship changed. They found that they had much in common, including a pioneer heritage extending to the earliest days of the Church. They shared the background of having been reared in homes where the fathers were heavily preoccupied with Church responsibilities. And although Joseph Fielding was not a university student, he was studious and analytical, which gave him and the Smith's attractive boarder another plank of common interest. In the end, however, the thing that radically altered their platonic relationship, was that they fell in love! Joseph Fielding was never able to explain or define exactly what happened. He only knew that at some point, months after Louie Shurtliff came to live in the Smith home, he was certain he wanted to marry her, to share children with her, and to spend his life and eternity with her.

In time, Louie became convinced of the same things. Exactly when is a matter of speculation, as neither one later attempted to pinpoint the date. Clearly, however, they had reached an understanding by the end of her second year at the university. Persuasive evidence that Joseph's intent and commitment were more than transitory is seen in the fact that in the summer of 1896 he rode his bicycle to and from Ogden twice to see Louie, who had gone home for the summer. This was two round trips of a hundred miles each over unsurfaced, rutted roads—on a bicycle! Obviously, the young man was hopelessly hooked.

Louie's last year as a boarder at the Smith home passed swiftly and pleasantly. We can imagine with what alacrity Joseph left the drudging work at the store and hurried home to clean up so he could spend time with Louie. He enjoyed listening to her play the piano. And occasionally she could coax him into singing a duet. They had little money and little spare time, so their courting consisted almost entirely of visiting in the family parlor in the evenings, attending social events at their ward or at the university, and, when the weather was good, strolling.

What little time they spent together in the parlor was well chaperoned; in addition to his parents, there were Joseph Fielding's seven younger brothers and sisters who trooped in and out at will.

Louie graduated from the University of Utah on June 7, 1896, with a three-year teaching certificate. Her parents had bought her a stunning white brocaded satin gown for the occasion. It is not unlikely that they had something other than graduation in mind when they bought it—with its dainty lace stand-up collar, the dress was ideally suited for use as a temple wedding gown.

Although Joseph Fielding and Louie and both of their families knew by now that marriage was in the offing for the young couple, there were convincing reasons why it should be delayed for a while. In the first place, they had no money and no home and no immediate prospects of getting one. And second, Joseph Fielding was now twenty-one years old, the age at which many Latter-day Saint young men had already completed their missions. Indeed, as already mentioned, at the same age his father was already a seasoned missionary, having served several years proselyting in the Hawaiian Islands during his mid teens. Everyone had assumed from the beginning that Joseph Fielding would one day fill a mission as his father had done. The question was not whether he would go, but when. He was prepared to leave at any time.

Meanwhile, he continued to work at ZCMI. Louie returned to her home in Ogden, where she held two jobs, teaching school and, in the off hours and on Saturdays, clerking in her father's store. The young couple carried on their courtship the following year through regular correspondence and periodic personal visits. They alternated in traveling to and from Salt Lake City and Ogden, staying overnight in the homes of their parents. Whenever Louie went to Salt Lake, she would stay in the same room she had occupied for three years, feeling as much at home there as she had in her parents' home in Ogden.

By early spring in 1898 Joseph Fielding had not received a call to the mission field, so the couple decided not to delay the marriage longer. And it was not uncommon in those days for young married men to be called on missions. Therefore, there was no thought that marriage would preclude Joseph Fielding from later serving as a missionary. He explained the circumstances of the nuptials: "When she finished and graduated from her school," he wrote, "I did not permit her to go home and stay there, but I persuaded her to change her place of residence, and on the 26th day of April, 1898, we went to the Salt Lake Temple and were married for time and all eternity by my father, President Joseph F. Smith." (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 75.)

The couple joined in marriage that spring day was one of great promise. The patriarchal blessing Joseph Fielding had received two years before portended a future life of significant service in the Church. And his new bride harbored the feeling that her quiet and faithful young husband was destined to become one of the high leaders of the Church. It was, therefore, with great hopes and expectations for the future, with little money and an abundance of love for each other, that they set up housekeeping in the Smith's old family home, where a small apartment was prepared for them. By living there, they hoped to save money toward the purchase of their own home. The expenses and duties in maintaining the house were shared so that while living there was an economy to the newlyweds, it did not impose an added burden on President Smith's already overloaded budget.

The young couple lacked the means to travel on a honeymoon. So, they settled down immediately into a pleasant domestic routine with Joseph Fielding working at ZCMI and Louie involved with the customary household duties. Their religious and social life revolved around the Sixteenth Ward, whose chapel was located a few blocks west of the old family home. Joseph had played a key role there in the past, serving for a time as the superintendent of the Sunday School. Within six months of the marriage, however, he was called to serve as a member of the Salt Lake Stake YMMIA Board, being set apart by two members of the stake presidency, Angus M. Cannon, president, and Joseph E. Taylor, counselor, and by Richard R. Lyman, a future member of the Twelve, who was then the superintendent of the stake YMMIA. Since there was only one stake in the Salt Lake Valley at the time, this assignment brought Joseph Fielding into personal contact with leaders of the Young Men throughout the area, entailing as it did speaking and training assignments in the various wards that dotted the valley. Meanwhile, Louie became active in the auxiliaries of the ward, where her musical talents and her professional training as a teacher made her much in demand.

It was an exciting time for a young couple to begin their married life in Salt Lake City. Much of the trauma and bitterness caused by the conflicts over plural marriage had disappeared. Statehood for Utah, which became a reality on January 4, 1896, had removed the irritation that federal dominance over local governmental affairs had created for so long. Utahns now felt that they were in charge of their own destiny; and that feeling had released the pent-up energies of the people. A sense of forward motion, of enthusiasm, self-confidence, and creativity permeated the state.

Joseph Fielding and Louie partook of these feelings. Theirs was a favored and promising position. Sharing the house of a member of the First Presidency, a man whom both Lorenzo Snow and Wilford Woodruff had prophesied would one day be the president of the Church, they were accorded privileges and opportunities few Church members enjoyed. They had reserved seating at the general conference sessions, occasionally received passes to various entertainments, and were given discounts on some purchases. Because of their family status and especially because of Joseph Fielding's name, they were accorded a special deference and respect quite apart from their own achievements and good qualities of character. That "the blood of the prophets" flowed in the veins of Joseph Fielding Smith was a powerful psychological factor that not only motivated him to high achievement but also exerted a potent influence on all who knew him, setting him apart in a special circle of distinction.

In the first few months of their marriage, this young couple enjoyed a freedom and exhilaration that would never be surpassed during their life as man and wife. They were not encumbered with the responsibility of caring for babies. The little apartment they had in the old family home was easy to maintain, so they were free to come and go at will. Various inexpensive amusements and recreations were available to them, such as occasional plays at the Salt Lake Theatre, outings and picnics at Saltair on the lake, Tabernacle choir rehearsals, and, of course, the frequent, continuing round of social events at the ward. And across the street were the library facilities of the university and the attraction of the periodic athletic events in which the university teams were engaged. Most important to them, however, was the excitement and sweetness of conjugal love that they experienced for the first time after their temple sealing. Life was indeed rich and rewarding for Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Fielding Smith Jr.

A few months after their marriage, an important change in Church leadership occurred when President Wilford Woodruff died. He and his first counselor, George Q. Cannon, had gone to San Francisco to recuperate from health problems, leaving Joseph F. Smith in charge of affairs at home. At the time the Prophet's condition was not considered serious. It therefore came as a surprise when on September 1 President Joseph F. Smith received a wire from George Q. Cannon advising that President Woodruff was critically ill with a uremic infection, that he was unconscious and was not expected to recover. The next day he was dead, at age ninety-one. The Church marveled that President Woodruff had lived so long in good health. The patriarchal promise to Joseph Fielding Smith that it would be his "privilege to live to a good old age" would cause him to exceed that record by five years.

Because of instructions given by President Woodruff, there was little delay in reorganizing the First Presidency following his death. Eleven days later, on September 13, 1898, eighty-four-year-old Lorenzo Snow was ordained as the fifth president of the Church. At his side were the same counselors, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, who had served his two immediate predecessors, Wilford Woodruff and John Taylor.

As far as the Smiths were concerned, this change in Church leadership had little impact on their lives. Joseph F. played essentially the same role he had played under Presidents Taylor and Woodruff, retaining the same responsibilities and enjoying the same privileges. Although he did not speak out about it as he had done at the death of President Taylor, he undoubtedly would just as soon not have continued to bear the crushing burdens this position entailed.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
