Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Five

The Missionary

Joseph Fielding Smith was not as well acquainted with JLorenzo Snow as he had been with his predecessor, JWilford Woodruff. He remembered President Snow Jas a somewhat reserved man, "loyal and true to the Gospel of Jesus Christ." This lack of close acquaintance was because Lorenzo Snow served as president of the Church for only three short years. And during most of that time, Joseph Fielding was out of the country, serving as a missionary in Great Britain. Therefore, he was not involved in special events with President Snow, such as the trip to the Chicago World's Fair, where members of the families of the First Presidency came together in a personal, intimate setting.

The call to the mission field signed by President Lorenzo Snow was dated March 17, 1899. That it designated Great Britain as his field of labor was mildly surprising to Joseph Fielding. During a preliminary interview with him, Franklin D. Richards, president of the Twelve, had asked Joseph where he would like to serve. Giving the expected answer, he said he wanted to go to the place where he was sent. "But, you must have some place you would prefer to go to," persisted the apostle. Gauging from this that his own feelings might be given weight in the decision, he said he would really prefer to go to Germany. "So they sent me to England," wrote the missionary jokingly. The reason for this stated preference was never explained. Given his name and strong family orientation, one might have expected the prospective missionary to have opted for Hawaii or England, where his father had served. Such an expectation was no more valid, however, than was Joseph Fielding's hope that he would be sent to Germany.

Joseph's brother, Richards, Sarah's son, who was three years older than he, was also called to England at the same time, as was a neighbor, William Armstrong. The three young men were given two months to prepare for their departure. Joseph Fielding's first concern was to provide for Louie's care during his absence. One idea was that she continue to reside in the Smith home, where she had already lived for four years, including one as a young bride. The couple finally decided, however, that she should return to Ogden to live with her parents. There she could resume her teaching and her work in the Shurtliff store to help maintain her husband in the mission field.

With this major decision out of the way, the missionary turned to other less important yet essential things that had to be done before he could leave. There was the purchase of necessary clothing, luggage, toiletries, and writing materials. The latter included a diary, a four-by-six-inch leatherbound notebook, the first of dozens of similar diaries that Joseph Fielding Smith filled during the remainder of his long life. To protect them from moisture and to prevent undue fraying of the pages at the edges, this one had a fold-over, snap-on cover. Motivated by the instructions of the modern prophets about keeping personal diaries, the training of his historically minded parents, and his own sense of history, Joseph Fielding faithfully recorded the significant events of his subsequent life in these diaries. They provide the core of the remaining portion of this biographical sketch.

On April 22, 1899, a month before his departure, the missionary received his passport from the U. S. Department of State. It described him as a light-complexioned, brown-haired, twenty-two-year-old man, five feet nine inches tall with bluish-gray eyes. In three months he would turn twenty-three. The document could not describe the conflicting joy and sorrow that agitated "Jos. F. Smith, Jr." as he prepared to leave family, friends, and country for the first time.

On May 12, 1899, the day before they left Salt Lake City, Joseph Fielding and Richards and the other departing missionaries received their formal pre-mission training—brief instructions from President Joseph F. Smith and Elder George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant of the Twelve about the policies, procedures, and pitfalls of missionary work and the joys, sorrows, and rewards it entailed. Afterward, they were set apart. Both of the Smith boys were blessed and set apart by their father who, at the same time, ordained them to the office of seventy.

Joseph Fielding finished packing the next day; and that evening, Saturday May 13, 1899, he left for the mission field. "At six o'clock told all the folks goodbye," he wrote under that date in his first diary entry, "and left for the depot with feelings that I never felt before, because I was never away from home more than one month in my life, and to think of going away for two years or more causes very peculiar feelings to take possession of me."

Missing from those who met at the old family home to bid the missionary good-bye was his eleven-year-old sister, Emily. Irritated because Joseph had often sent her and the other younger children to bed early during the months of his courtship and marriage with Louie, Emily had prayed that the Lord would call her brother to the mission field speedily. Now that her prayers had been answered, she felt guilty and ran to a neighbor's house to hide so she wouldn't have to face him.

The first leg of the journey, from Salt Lake City to Ogden, was pleasant, although filled with nostalgia, as the local train sped by scenery that was familiar to Joseph Fielding and his companions. At Kaysville a fellow missionary, Fred Williams, boarded the train as did Joseph's father-in-law, Lewis W. Shurtliff, who wanted to spend some time alone with his son-in-law before he caught the mainline train in Ogden. More than most, Lewis Shurtliff understood the peculiar feelings Joseph Fielding was experiencing. Over thirty years before, shortly after the death of his first wife, he had been called on a mission to England, leaving four small children behind. Now he wanted to buoy up his young son-in-law, to share counsel that might be useful in the mission field, and to assure him that Louie would be well taken care of during his absence.

The Union Pacific eastbound mainliner the missionaries boarded in Ogden had originated in the Bay Area near San Francisco. There and at intervening stops it had taken on an almost full load of passengers. Those who boarded at Ogden created an overload. The chair car to which the missionaries were assigned was a scene of bedlam. "We could not sleep," Joseph confided to his diary, "for the car was so crowded and we were cramped in our seats and there was great confusion." A cloud of tobacco smoke that filled the car worsened the conditions, inflaming the eyes of the missionaries and causing them to cough and wheeze. It is not unlikely that Joseph Fielding Smith's long war against "that dirty, filthy habit" began this miserable night. Never before had he been subjected to heavy tobacco smoke over such a long period of time. His only previous lengthy trip on a train was the one to Chicago to attend the World's Fair. Then, however, he had traveled in President Woodruff's chartered cars, which were notably free of tobacco smoke. In the years ahead, his duties required frequent long trips on public conveyances where smoking was allowed, and Elder Smith became outspokenly militant in condemning it. He was never known to be reticent or diplomatic in voicing his outrage at having to breathe someone's tobacco smoke. And more than once he was even heard to mutter words of disapproval when he passed a smoker on the street.

In these conditions, the night seemed endless as the train rocked and lurched its way through the canyons and valleys of northeastern Utah up to the Wyoming plateau. There, when it became light, the situation improved, with new and interesting scenery to distract his attention from the conditions inside the car. Joseph Fielding's interest in the Wyoming landscape did not arise from its beauty; in fact, it was uniformly dull and in some places just plain ugly. But perhaps the young missionary reflected on events of long ago that had occurred in that bleak place, events that had involved his father and other relatives who had struggled there under far worse conditions than those in Joseph's chair car.

On reaching Cheyenne, Wyoming, late Sunday afternoon, the missionaries were transferred to a cleaner, less crowded car. "I washed myself for the first time since leaving home," Joseph wrote, "for I had not had a chance before then, there being no water on the car we were on." Moreover, the scenery had improved around Cheyenne with the appearance of some perennial trees, like those in the canyons east of Salt Lake City.

By Monday the train reached Omaha, Nebraska, where the missionaries switched to another railroad line for the more pleasant trip across Iowa and Illinois to Chicago. Here Joseph Fielding and his brother, Richards, temporarily parted with the other missionaries going to England in order to travel to Buffalo, New York, from where they took a side trip to see Niagara Falls. This was done not only with their father's approval but at his suggestion. President Joseph F. Smith felt that while the chief object of a mission was to preach the gospel, another less-important though vital purpose was to educate the missionary and to give him a broader understanding of people and places.

"It is the greatest sight that I ever saw," wrote Joseph Fielding with a sense of awe following a four-hour inspection of the falls. The brothers rented a hack that took them to all of the main view points on both the American and Canadian sides. Conscious of the need to economize, Joseph wrote with apparent satisfaction, "There are very many schemes to get a man's money from him, but we did very well as the entire trip cost us less than four dollars each."

On Thursday, May 18, Joseph and Richards rejoined their companions in New York City, where they spent two days absorbing its sights and sounds. Keyed in by their sisters Mamie and Donnie, who had lived in New York while studying at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, the Smith brothers, accompanied by some of their companions, made the grand tour. Before beginning it, however, there was an essential ritual for Joseph Fielding to perform. "The first thing I did when I reached here," he wrote, "was to take a good bath. . . . I feel like a new man now."

The elders did most of their sightseeing on foot. They walked all through Central Park and down to the Battery, from where they could see the Statue of Liberty. The canyon-like aspect of New York's streets created by today's skyscrapers did not exist then. Still, the missionaries were duly impressed with the city's tall buildings. "Saw the largest building in New York (thirty stories) but do not know its name," wrote Joseph. However, since this was not much higher than the top of the Moroni statue on the Salt Lake Temple, the missionaries were not as impressed with New York's buildings as they were with its harbor and rivers and with its infinite variety of ships, boats, tugs, barges, and ferries. Standing in South Ferry Park, they were fascinated to watch the seagoing ships enter the harbor and move slowly up the Hudson River to dock. A ride on the ferry gave them a better perspective of Manhattan Island as well as a tame prelude to the exciting ocean voyage ahead of them. And for young men who had never before visited a sea port, New York's bustling waterfront with its crush of passengers, porters, baggage carts, stevedores, and cabs was an unbelievable sight. Walking across the Brooklyn Bridge, the visitors were impressed with the flow of traffic, counting as many as twenty cars in a minute's time, one every three seconds! In Brooklyn the thing that interested them most was the Navy Yard, where they were permitted to board and inspect several of the ships in dry dock.

On Saturday morning, May 20, the elders traveled to Philadelphia, their port of embarkation. During the afternoon they had time to take in the main historic sites of the city—Independence Square, the Liberty Bell, and Carpenters Hall, the meeting site of the First Continental Congress. Here the elders were intrigued with the Declaration of Independence and with the signatures of the founding patriots, especially the flamboyant script of John Hancock.

Saturday evening at the conference headquarters, Joseph Fielding found an unexpected gift waiting for him—a letter from Louie! He wrote, "It was a very agreeable surprise to me to receive a letter from home as I did not expect one until I reached Liverpool."

There were nineteen missionaries in Joseph Fielding's group who boarded their ship Saturday night at the Philadelphia pierhead. She was a Belgian liner named the Pennland, a ship of somewhat ancient vintage, seaworthy, but very slow and lacking in many of the amenities found on the faster and newer ships. This was the maiden voyage for all of the missionaries except Joseph's brother, Richards, who had accompanied his parents to Liverpool as a little boy. But Richards had little recollection about that trip; and so he shared with the others romanticized ideas about ocean travel as, with gaiety and anticipation, the Mormon elders boarded the Pennland Saturday night. They came aboard early so as to be ready for an early departure Sunday morning.

One night aboard this ship, even though she was secured at dockside and was therefore free from the turbulence of the open sea, dispelled most of the myths the Mormon missionaries had heard about seagoing ships. Inside, the Pennland was dingy, stinky, and stuffy. The ventilation was poor, and odors accumulated and preserved over the years had become so intermingled as to produce a new, peculiar odor that was distinctively "The Pennland Smell." Moreover, their sleeping accommodations were cramped and crowded. These conditions, and the natural excitement they felt about their departure, guaranteed that the elders would be up and dressed and in the open air topside to see the hawsers cast off shortly before 6:00 Sunday morning, May 21, 1899.

A pilot was taken aboard the Pennland to guide her out to the open sea. Whether it was through the pilot's ineptness or because she was simply a bad-luck ship, the Pennland found herself stuck on a sand bar within a short while after leaving the Philadelphia pier. Reluctant to dislodge her by reversing and racing the engine, the captain merely dropped anchor and waited for a team of tug boats to come and pull her off. This procedure took seven long hours, during which the missionaries joined the other passengers for lunch and later attended a worship service conducted by the Pennland's chaplain. Joseph showed little enthusiasm for what he saw and heard there, reporting only that he found the service to be "very peculiar." In the late afternoon, the ship was finally freed from the sand bar. "By 6:00 we were on our way toward the mighty deep," he reported. "We remained on deck until the ship's pilot left. We then went to our rooms."

The following day, the elders learned their first nauseating lesson about the sea. "Most of our company were sick," wrote Joseph Fielding. However, neither then nor later was he troubled with seasickness. "I had to be practically alone for a number of days," he noted later, "as all the other missionaries remained in their cots."

The Pennland took thirteen days to make the trip from Philadelphia to Liverpool, almost twice as long as for newer ships. The passengers did not really become conscious of the snail's pace of their ship until other ships began to pass them. The incident that finally convinced the competitive elders that they were definitely not riding on a winner involved the steamship St. Louis. Joseph Fielding Smith told the humiliating story: "On the way we saw the smoke from the steamship St. Louis, which left a day or two after we did from New York. It came in sight, passed us, and went out of sight inside of one hour." For ambitious young men who wanted to get ahead in the world, repeated instances such as this, which demonstrated the inferiority of their ship, were distressing. So, when at last the Pennland passed another vessel, it was cause for mild rejoicing. "It is good to think that we can move faster than some things," wrote Joseph. And yet, even that victory was tinged with an element of defeat. In reporting the incident, Joseph Fielding noted that it took almost six times as long to pass this slower ship than it had taken for the St. Louis to pass the Pennland.

Despite his preoccupation with the slowness of his ship and its shabby accommodations, Joseph enjoyed his first sea voyage. Since he was not plagued with seasickness, he was able to enjoy every novel experience to the fullest. The sight of a whale, an iceberg, a flying fish, or a gliding albatross was an exciting experience for this untraveled and unsophisticated young man from Utah. And occasionally Joseph remained on deck at night, gazing for hours at the heavens through an atmosphere so clear that the stars and galaxies seemed to be multiplied in their numbers and brilliance.

One advantage of the Pennland's slower pace was that it afforded an opportunity to become better acquainted with the other passengers and to try to plant a few gospel seeds. So a day or two after their ship was under way, Joseph and his companions who were not down with seasickness began to circulate among the passengers, talking to them and distributing tracts to those who showed an interest. "We hope they will read them," he wrote. With the captain's approval, the elders scheduled their own worship service the second, and last, Sunday they were aboard ship. Joseph, who was one of the two speakers, recounted events of Church history, showing that the Saints had been treated unjustly. The audience was unimpressed; and later most of the passengers seemed to avoid the elders when possible. So, even before reaching his field of labor, Elder Smith began to sense a feeling of rejection that was to shadow him throughout his stay in England. And yet, occasional comments or questions from the passengers implied that they were favorably impressed with the appearance and deportment of the missionaries, which reflected favorably on the Church and, the elders hoped, would help tear down the barriers of prejudice and misunderstanding that impeded their work.

The Pennland made landfall midmorning, Friday, June 2, as the southeast coast of Ireland came into view—a blessed sight for the seasick elders. Chief among these was Joseph Fielding's brother, Richards, who had few moments of comfort during the long voyage. Joseph had been very solicitous of him and had tried to help; but there was little that could be done since there was no place to go to avoid the constant rocking of the ship. But as the Pennland made its way up the St. George's channel and rounded Carmel Head, the turbulence subsided.

After sailing into the harbor, the Pennland moved up the Mercy River toward the Liverpool wharf. As the ship moved slowly along, Joseph Fielding had his first close-up view of the land of his forefathers. Here civilization had existed for centuries. Long ago, Roman legions had dominated the land, bringing with them their government, architecture, and language, all of which, in diluted form, were still to be found in England. But what drew his attention was the ancient appearance of the buildings at dockside, long rows of weathered warehouses, begrimed with layers of soot and smoke left by pollution, which hung like a pall over the waterfront.

On the pier waiting to welcome the new elders were members of the staff of the European Mission headquarters. After exchanging greetings and collecting their baggage, the new elders were taken by cab to the mission headquarters at 42 Islington.

While Richards had no clear recollection of it, this was the same place he had lived with his parents for a few months during 1877. It was once a proud and respectable neighborhood, but it had almost become a slum. Even during the 1870s, it had begun to deteriorate. The father, President Joseph F. Smith, reported that during a stroll he and his assistant, L. John Nuttall, took through the neighborhood in January 1875, they counted fifty pubs or "gin palaces" within a mile's radius of 42 Islington. At that time, the father had written that "liquor in some form has become an indispensable necessary to the English people." (Joseph F. Smith Diary, January 5, 1875.) And during the intervening twenty-four years, the conditions around the mission headquarters had deteriorated even further, so much so that shortly after Heber J. Grant was called as the mission president in October 1903, 42 Islington was sold by the Church.

This, then, was the place to which Joseph Fielding and Richards and their companions were welcomed on June 3, 1899. It was far removed from the old family home on West First North, both in terms of the seven thousand miles that separated them and of the vastly different environments that surrounded them. Although the elders knew they were far from home, yet inside the mission headquarters, they found a touch of home in the mission president and the office elders, all of whom were from in and around Utah.

The mission president who greeted them was Platte D. Lyman, who but a short time before had replaced Rulon S. Wells, a member of The First Council of the Seventy. President Lyman's counselors, James L. McMurrin and Henry W. Naisbitt, were away from Liverpool at the time on an assignment in Scotland. That assignment, which had taken them to Glasgow for meetings of the Scottish Conference, demonstrates the truism that history deals in surprises and coincidences. It was at a priesthood meeting in Glasgow on May 29, 1899, that James L. McMurrin uttered the well-known prophecy that young David O. McKay, the conference president, would one day sit in the leading councils of the Church. Five days later, there appeared at 42 Islington a new, untried missionary, Joseph Fielding Smith, who, seventy-one years later, would succeed David O. McKay as the president of the Church.

President Lyman lost no time in assigning the new missionaries to their fields of labor. The next day, Sunday, June 4, Joseph Fielding boarded a train headed for Nottingham, the city to which he had been assigned. He was alone. Richards was on his way to Leeds, while the other elders had left, or would soon leave, for their assignments in different parts of Great Britain or Continental Europe, all of which was under the jurisdiction of the mission presidency in Liverpool.

The three-hour train ride to Nottingham took Joseph into the heart of the East Midlands coal fields and into one of the most highly industrialized areas of England, famed for its manufacture of hosiery and fine lace. Although he could understand the language of the people, their customs and attitudes were strange, making the missionary feel ill at ease. "The railroads in this country," he mused in his journal, "are so different from those in our own country that a person must keep his wits about him. I travelled alone, in a strange land, and among a strange people, where I would have little or no sympathy if I were known." This last statement was a veiled reference to the deep antagonisms that had developed toward the Church in England. The name Mormon had become a word of bitter derision there. Indeed, it was libelous to falsely accuse a person of being a Mormon. These attitudes sprang chiefly from the practice of polygamy and the distorted publicity given to it by the English press and clergy. Despite the Manifesto, there was a widespread belief that the Church still taught and practiced plural marriage. And this created a suspicion in many that the missionaries sought only to lure women to Utah, there to subject them to a life of debauchery. On this account, Joseph Fielding believed he would receive no sympathy from the other passengers were it known that he was a Mormon missionary. So, he withdrew within himself and made no effort to engage those around him in conversation. "My thoughts were continually turning towards home," he wrote.

Through miscommunication, the missionaries in Nottingham had not been advised of Elder Smith's arrival, so no one came to the train station to meet him. Since he had been furnished with the address of the conference headquarters, Joseph collected his baggage and hired a cab to take him there. He found the missionary quarters locked and empty. The elders had gone to afternoon worship services at the branch. Putting his trunk and grip in the doorway, Joseph began walking back and forth in front of the building to stretch his legs and case the neighborhood. He was careful not to walk beyond the view of his gear, because many rough-looking boys were playing in the street. Joseph questioned their intentions, and they returned the favor. "[They] eyed me with curiosity," wrote the new missionary, "and sang a parody on one of our mountain hymns for my own personal benefit." Joseph found the serenade amusing. "Chase me, girls, to Salt Lake City, where the Mormons have no pity,", they sang with gusto. "If I approached them, they would run from me," he wrote, "which amused me as much as I amused them." Such a reception the first day in his first field of labor boded ill for the future. The attitudes of derision and unfriendliness shown by these boys likely reflected attitudes they had learned at home, attitudes that would not be conducive to missionary work.

Joseph Fielding was welcomed warmly and apologetically by the missionaries when they returned from church. Had they known he was coming, they would have met the elder with the famous name and accompanied him home, avoiding the confrontation with the urchins in the street.

Elder Smith was made acquainted with his new companions and the digs that would be his home for several months. All the missionaries laboring in Nottingham shared the same house, which included their living quarters and the conference office. They did most of their own laundry, all of their own sewing, and some of their own cooking. Some meals were prepared for them by hired cooks, and their shirts were usually washed and ironed professionally. Each elder contributed a proportional amount to a common fund that was drawn on to pay for food and housing. Having come from a large family, such communal living was nothing new to Joseph Fielding Smith. Indeed, he felt right at home.

The conference president, George Ruff of Coalville, Utah, was not in Nottingham when Joseph arrived, so the new elder did not immediately learn what his first assignment would be. The following day, Monday, being the usual preparation day for the missionaries, no proselyting was done. Instead, one of the elders, George F. Ashley, accompanied Elder Smith to a shopping district downtown where he bought a hat, which was then part of the standard gear for missionaries, and some writing paper and envelopes. On the way home, the elders visited Arboretum Park, where "all kinds of birds" were kept. In the months ahead, Joseph would visit here periodically as a diversion to study the wide variety of birds that had been gathered for the enjoyment of the people of Nottingham.

Upon the return of President Ruff, Joseph was assigned to labor in Nottingham, an assignment that would keep him at conference headquarters for the first five months of his mission. Tuesday, June 6, 1899, was his first day of actual proselyting. "This has been a very important day in my short life," he wrote enthusiastically. "I came from my home less than a month ago for the purpose of preaching the gospel of our Lord." His day's work consisted of the two main kinds of proselyting engaged in by British missionaries at that day—tracting and street meetings. As to the first, he and his companion distributed twenty-five tracts. "It did not come to me very easy," he reported frankly. And as to the street meeting he and two other missionaries held, he wrote: "I bore my testimony to the world for the first time today, but I will be able to do so better. With the help of the Lord, I shall do his will as I was called to do."

It had been sixty-two years since the first Latter-day Saint missionaries, Heber C. Kimball and his companions, had commenced proselyting in England. Within a few days after their arrival in Preston in 1837, they had baptized their first converts in the River Ribble. During the next several decades, thousands of converts were baptized in the British Isles and Europe. In the early years, especially, the harvest was plentiful. The stories of the baptism of whole congregations by Wilford Woodruff had become part of the folklore of the Church, well known to Joseph Fielding and all the other British missionaries.

This and other examples of unusual proselyting success in England created unreasonable expectations in the minds of many missionaries. The assumption was that if the earlier missionaries had enjoyed such phenomenal success, so could they. But there was a vast difference between the two eras. Wilford Woodruff, for instance, was thirty-three years old when he worked in England the first time, a veteran of several previous missions and of Zion's Camp, a member of the Twelve and a personal confidant of the Prophet Joseph Smith, whose testimony of the events in the Sacred Grove had imbued him with a fiery fervor that would never be quenched. He and the other missionaries of his day brought a new and startling message of the appearance of Gods and angels on the earth in modern times and of a new sacred record of ancient peoples who once inhabited the American continent, translated from golden plates by a young man, a modern prophet, who then lived in the United States. The startling effect of such a message and the eloquence and spirituality that surrounded these men gained widespread attention, attracting large groups of people who wanted to hear and see them. In such a context, tracting of the kind performed by Joseph Fielding and his companions was almost unknown to the earlier missionaries. The tracts they had published were used chiefly for distribution at their meetings to elaborate on subjects covered there or to lead the audience into a study of other gospel principles. They relied mostly on word of mouth or newspaper advertising rather than on tedious tracting to create teaching situations. And in the beginning, widespread opposition from the press and the clergy had not developed, and the minds of the people had not been poisoned against the Mormon missionaries, especially in reference to polygamy, whose practice by the Latter-day Saints was not publicly acknowledged until the 1850s.The hardening of attitudes during the intervening sixty years had created a rock-like resistance to Mormonism that the missionaries found almost impossible to penetrate. Nor was their task made easier by the existence of strong local units of the Church. The routine practice of the early missionaries to encourage new converts to migrate to the United States had regularly creamed off most of the ablest converts. This, with the widespread practice of having missionaries preside over local Church units, had stunted the growth of the Church in England, preventing the development of a thriving Mormon community to which the missionaries could point as evidence of the fruits of their message and on which they could rely for help in their work.

All these conditions combined created an almost impossible proselyting task for Joseph and his companions. It was tough sledding all the way. Just how tough is seen in the fact that during his two-year mission, Elder Smith did not convert and baptize a single person. He did confirm one member, but that was the full extent of his proselyting harvest.

It took Elder Smith only a few days in the field to conclude that his efforts in bringing new members into the Church would not be crowned with much, if any, success. But being young and inexperienced at the time and being unaware of the great convert harvest that would take place in England a few decades later, he ascribed this to the wrong reason. "The blood of Israel has almost been gathered," he confided to his journal a week after commencing his labors in Nottingham. As later events proved, the blood of Israel was still there in large numbers; but their eyes had been so blinded by the lies and distortions circulated about the Latter-day Saints, or by their own misconduct, that they failed to see and refused to hear.

One must not think that because of a lack of converts Elder Smith's mission was a failure. Quite the contrary. He worked hard during the months of his service. In a letter to Louie after he had been in the field for several months, Joseph reported that he and the other missionaries distributed 10,000 tracts each month, either through door-to-door contacting or at street meetings, and that they visited about 4,000 homes each month. It is impossible to gauge what the ultimate results of such a vast amount of work was or might be. An impression made at a door or on a street corner, or a tract picked up and read months, or even years, after it was delivered might be the seed that would ultimately grow into a conversion. Therefore, the number of converts a missionary baptizes can often be a misleading criterion as to the success or failure of a mis-sion. The true test is whether one has worked hard and consistently and done his best under the circumstances. Judged by that standard, Joseph Fielding Smith was eminently successful.

But the flip side of missionary work pertains to the training and discipline of the missionary. It was here, perhaps, that the value and "success" of Elder Smith's mission can best be seen. It was in England that he received his first detailed training in the organization and development of the Church at the grass-roots level. It was here, through constant study and prayer, that his understanding of the doctrines of the Church flowered. It was here that his personal discipline was improved through faithfully following the missionary regimen of early rising, regular study, persistent work, and fervent prayer. Here he learned greater self-reliance and self-confidence by living and working under difficult circumstances in a foreign land. Here he learned humility when any thought or hope of a great harvest of converts was dashed. And finally, it was here that Joseph received his first intimate view of the ways of the world, a view that was vital in his understanding of the weaknesses and frailties of men and women and therefore of their need for the saving principles of the gospel he taught.

The polygamous community in which Joseph Fielding Smith was born and reared lived by a strict code of morality and sobriety. Sexual relations outside the marriage covenant, once known, were dealt with severely. There was a single standard of morality for both men and women, and the violation of marital covenants by persons of either sex was not tolerated. And the Word of Wisdom imposed upon the Latter-day Saints a code of abstinence from the use of alcohol, tea, coffee, and tobacco. There were, of course, saloons in Salt Lake City, but they were clustered in a small section of the downtown area that residents like Joseph Fielding seldom if ever passed through. Any incidents of public drunkenness or brawling in Salt Lake City usually occurred in this small area, and seldom were women involved. Moreover, the information about what went on in the saloon district was skimpy as far as most residents of Salt Lake City were concerned, seeping out only occasionally by word of mouth or, in aggravated cases, by articles in the local newspapers. Having been reared in such a sheltered environment, twenty-three-year old Joseph Fielding Smith was hardly prepared for what he found in Nottingham. "On our way home," he recorded in his diary soon after arriving there, "we saw more drunken men and women than I ever saw before in my life, and the women I believe outnumbered the men. I have seen more wickedness here in two weeks than I have seen at home in all my life." Later on a July afternoon, Elder Smith and a companion went to study in the city's spacious park, reputedly the scene of some of the exploits of Robin Hood and his men of the Sherwood Forest. The elders very soon had to abandon the idea. "The Spirit of God is not on that piece of ground," he wrote emphatically, "for it is a wicked spot. We saw things there in broad daylight that we could not imagine if we had not seen." And he learned of astonishing things that he did not see when the relatives of one of his companions told the elders that "it was a common thing for men to exchange wives for a week at a time."

The loose morals among the adults was reflected in a lack of proper training and supervision of the young people who congregated aimlessly in the streets or parks on weekends and holidays. "Coming home from Arnold Sunday night," Joseph wrote in a letter to Louie, "for a distance of almost five miles the streets were so full of young people that I could hardly work my way through, and a good part of the time had to take to the road. You could not imagine what it is like hardly without seeing it for yourself."

Such were the conditions Joseph found among the people of Nottingham. They were good people of the same stock as Joseph's ancestors, people with potential who sorely needed the truths the elders taught. But their attitudes and life-style caused them either to ignore the missionaries or to summarily reject their message when it was presented to them. To be subjected to such indifference and rejection day after day was discouraging. In these circumstances, encouraging letters from home were a main source of motivation for the missionary to continue with the work and not to give up. Louie was Joseph's most faithful correspondent. Her frequent letters, always upbeat and positive, were filled with expressions of love and support, news about family and friends, and anxious inquiries about Joseph's health and diet. As to the latter, he assured Louie in a letter written a month after he arrived in Nottingham that he and his companions ate "very well" although their menus were conspicuously lacking in variety. "We have the same thing every day of the week," he wrote. "The elders speak of it as the one mush, one meat, and one jam. Every morning we have mush made from graham flour, never a change, for the law is as strict as that of the Medes and Persians. For dinner we have meat . . . and for tea ham and canned tomatoes or some lettuce. . . . I do not starve by any means. I can eat plenty."

Joseph Fielding's parents also were faithful in writing to him, although because of the many demands on their time from the other children, they did not write as often as Louie. Julina, like Louie, seemed preoccupied with Joseph's health and asked many searching questions about his diet, rest, and hygiene. The father, on the other hand, seemed most interested in his son's finances and his spiritual growth and development. On June 22, 1899, five weeks after the son left home, President Smith sent Joseph Fielding a "receipt" for five dollars, which was a medium of exchange used by the Church to enable missionaries in the field to draw money from mission headquarters that had been deposited to their credit in the United States. "While you and Buddie [Richards] will no doubt be as economical as you can be," wrote President Smith in the letter with which the receipt was transmitted, "I do not want you to go hungry, naked, or without shoes, and I hope to be able to supply you what you may actually need over and above your own resources." In acknowledging the gift, Joseph told his father, "I shall be very careful of the means you send me. I do not spend anything unless I have a good reason for it." Perhaps to underscore just how careful he was to economize, he told his father that he even refrained from buying the delicious English toffee that was such a favorite of the missionaries. He went on to say things that must have been especially pleasing to the father. "I am here to preach the gospel," wrote Joseph, "and I hope I will be able to do that well." In doing that, he expected not only to confer a blessing on those whom he taught but also to reap a personal blessing that would help qualify him for future service. "It is my desire to improve my mind and talents while I am here," he continued, "that I may always be useful for something in life." Finally, he shared with his father the earnest desire of his heart. "I want to be right on all things," he confided, "and nothing gives me more pleasure than to learn something about the gospel. My desire is to become acquainted with it and gain wisdom." It is not difficult to see how this desire of the earnest young missionary found fulfillment in the future when he became the Church's most prolific writer on doctrine and the General Authority to whom doctrinal questions were most often referred for answer.

"I like your spirit," President Smith wrote in answer to his son's letter. "I have faith in your integrity and I have pleasure and satisfaction in you." He then set up some personal goals for Joseph to strive toward. "I want you to cultivate wisdom and deliberate judgment and patience as well as the Holy Spirit and the love of God," he counseled. He also shared some of the things that troubled the Brethren at home. "The Salt Lake Tribune and the hireling priests," he wrote, "have stirred up a hot wave of persecution against the elders in the Southern States Mission. They have mobbed and beaten a number of our elders and have burned and destroyed a number of our meeting houses. It is all in the democratic South."

Such news enabled Joseph Fielding to make comparisons between the conditions in his own mission and elsewhere. The British missionaries were sometimes subjected to mob action, usually as the result of controversies arising at street meetings. Then, in the heat of the moment, it was not uncommon for drunks in the audience to abuse them verbally, or sometimes to throw things at them. But it was not in the British character to beat, tar and feather, or kill missionaries as was sometimes done in the United States. In a talk delivered in the Kenwood II Ward of the Wilford Stake, June 26, 1960, Elder Smith told of an experience he had in England when a butcher grabbed a knife and threatened to kill him because Joseph had offered him a tract. "I knew in England he wouldn't do that," he told the audience. "If he had been in the United States, I don't know what he would have done, but English people don't do that." (Tape in possession of the family.) So with all their faults and failings, Elder Smith recognized a certain gentility and tolerance among the English that minimized any real concern about being harmed.

As to possible damage to chapels, there was no concern because the Church owned no chapels in England. The members met in small, rented halls whose quality ranged from tolerable to disreputable. Because of the poor reputation of the Mormons in England, landlords in middle or lower middle class neighborhoods would not rent to the Church. Therefore, the leaders, desperate for some place to hold meetings, took anything that was available. As a result, the mission had acquired a collection of crummy halls situated in shabby neighborhoods whose appearance repelled investigators and embarrassed the missionaries. After a year in the field, and with things looking up a bit after acquiring something a notch better, Joseph Fielding described the meetingplace of the Nottingham Saints for Louie: "Ever since I have been here and for a long time before," he wrote, "the Nottingham Saints have been meeting in a sort of suspension shanty over a stable almost three rods back from the street—the last place on earth a person would look for a meeting room, and a place that would frighten away a timid investigator. . . . We have had hard work to get a hall anywhere else, for everyone will not receive the 'Mormons.' They have paid about $1.75 a week for the old room that is not worth ten cents. But at last we have found another room and moved into it yesterday. It is an improvement on the other, but still is not the best on earth but as good as we can get, I suppose."

It was in the old room over the stable that Joseph Fielding and the other missionaries met each Sunday with the Nottingham Saints, and an occasional investigator, during the first several months of his mission. It was here, with an occasional assignment to speak or teach, that he enjoyed a change from the dreary sameness and discouragement of tracting and street meetings. It was something to look forward to. Despite the dingy surroundings, it was a joy to meet with the Saints and elders, to sing the songs of Zion, to share testimonies and insights into the gospel, and to partake of the sacrament. These unchangeables glossed over any defects in the quality of the meeting place.

After several months in the field, Joseph Fielding was transferred to nearby Derby, a city founded a thousand years earlier by the Danes that was noted for the manufacture of fine porcelain and textiles. Here, as in Nottingham, the young missionary, whose hometown was less than thirty years old when he was born, stood in awe at the ancient appearance of the city's streets and main buildings. He found the people much the same as in Nottingham, indifferent to his message and antagonistic because of misconceptions about the Latter-day Saints.

In Derby, Joseph was the senior companion to Elder Stephen W. Walker, who was nine years older than he. Elder Walker is reported to have written home, observing that his new companion was very young and a little green but that he would "leave his mark upon the world."

The routine in Derby seldom varied. The elders were up early to shave, study, pray, and breakfast. When the weather permitted, they left their apartment in midmorning to tract or visit members. Later in the day, after "tea" and more tracting, they would often hold a street meeting, which usually commenced with the pair singing a Latter-day Saint hymn, followed by a prayer and talks by both elders. While one was speaking, the companion would circulate among the listeners or passers by, distributing tracts and, where possible, engaging in gospel conversations. The meeting ended with a closing prayer. The elders never knew, and never would know, whether the meetings had any beneficial effect upon those who listened to them or who accepted their literature. But they had a therapeutic effect upon the missionaries, deriving from a sense that they were preaching the gospel and therefore were doing their duty. Moreover, there was a certain exhilaration that attended the speaker as he lifted his voice and gave expression to his thoughts and bore his testimony. And at the end of the meeting, there came a feeling of satisfaction, or at least a sense of relief that the ordeal was over.

However, there was nothing exhilarating about tracting. For Joseph, it was hard, discouraging, and mostly unproductive work. Too often the conversations at the door were mere monologues. Those who answered the knock would usually clam up when they saw who it was. "I visited 81 houses with tracts," he recorded one depressing day, "but could not get the people to talk. . . . I find it very difficult to get the people to talk either for or against us. Most of them are silent unless it is to say, 'Good afternoon.' " On the same day he wrote, "One or two tracts were refused and one door was slammed in my face." Occasionally Joseph shared his distaste for tracting, explaining to Louie his frustration when people refused to talk to them: "I would rather have someone accuse us of almost anything so long as he will talk than to have them keep as mum as an oyster."

Once in a while, however, the elders found an exception—someone who talked, perhaps too much. Such was a Catholic woman who gave Joseph "a thorough roasting." She reversed the usual roles with the missionaries and did most of the talking. "She could not say anything mean enough about the 'Mormons,' " Joseph told Louie. "She said they were the vilest people on the earth." And being an orthodox Catholic in Victorian England, the little lady fired off what she probably thought was the ultimate insult when she charged that "Brigham Young was the twin brother of Henry the Eighth."

Those few who did talk were an incentive for the missionaries to learn the doctrines of the Church. Since they never knew what points might be raised by the few talkative ones, the elders had to be prepared for anything. So Joseph Fielding acquired a thorough knowledge of the gospel through regular, concentrated study. His hours spent reading the scriptures formed the foundation of his vast knowledge of the doctrines of the Church. In a letter to Louie in November 1899, not long after being transferred to Derby, Joseph commented on his diligent efforts to learn the doctrine and to memorize key scriptures. "I am trying to learn something while I am here," he wrote. "Since I left Nottingham I have put my time in to study and I feel that I can hardly find a minute when I do not feel that I ought to be preparing my mind with useful knowledge." Then indicating that these preparations were intended as much for the future as for his present work, he added: "I feel that when I come home that more will be expected of me than I am capable of as it generally is with returned missionaries. They are generally supposed to have learned all that the Bible contains or else they have neglected their duties." Reflecting feelings of inadequacy in this effort, he frankly confided to his wife: "But it must not be expected of me for I am rather dull of comprehension. I have tried all day to learn a passage of scripture and have not got it yet. But I am determined to learn it before I am through. It is the 9, 10 and 11 verses of the second chapter of 1st Cor[inthians]."

Because the biased attitudes of the people prevented a logical, consistent presentation of gospel principles, Elder Smith ordinarily had to use his gospel knowledge as a tool to refute unfair charges against the Church. "The only way to meet these people," Joseph wrote in his diary, "is to ask them if they believe the Bible and when they say yes you can soon make them wiggle." He told of one particularly combative woman whose criticisms were answered one by one from the scriptures, "until she began to abuse our people and tell me how wicked they are, etc. When she got through I spoke to her in such a way that she became ashamed of herself and began to beg my pardon without telling me so in that many words."

So throughout his mission, Joseph's relationship with his contacts was essentially an adversarial one. Notwithstanding, Joseph and his companions continued day after discouraging day with their rounds of tracting and street meetings. Their tracting efforts took them all over Derby. And some of the neighborhoods were tracted more than once, something that had been done by scores of missionaries who had preceded them. The townspeople generally had become so accustomed to seeing the missionaries that their minds had been closed to the message, and their negative responses had become automatic. Given these circumstances, one can understand what prompted diary entries such as this one: "I am of the firm opinion that this nation among others is almost gleaned. I went tracting this afternoon and delivered over 100 tracts with little success."

The elders walked to and from their tracting areas and anywhere else they wanted to go. Only in an emergency or dire necessity would they take a cab or bus or train. And when they had to consult with conference headquarters in Nottingham, they usually walked there and back. In March 1900, for instance, having heard that packages from home had arrived there, Joseph and his companion walked the twelve miles to Nottingham to pick them up. They stayed overnight at conference headquarters and returned the following day. "This morning Brother Walker and I left Nottingham for Derby carrying our bundles with us," wrote Joseph in his diary. "They weighed altogether about thirty pounds. The snow made it very bad under foot and increased the difficulty of walking." On opening his package at Derby, he found that it included a fruit cake. "I had used the bundle as a seat while we ate our lunch," he wrote in dismay. "But the cake tasted just as good for all that, and ten times better because it was made by my sister at home."

Joseph Fielding's most ambitious walk during his mission was from Ultoxeter in Staffordshire, through Derby, to Nottingham. "I left at 6 a.m.," he wrote, "and I arrived in Nottingham at 12 at night, travelling on foot all that distance." He could not recall ever riding on a bus during his mission. "I walked," he wrote, "I didn't have the money to take street car rides."

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, missionary, 1900 Long and frequent walks in the open air, an adequate diet, and sufficient rest combined to keep Joseph healthy throughout his mission. He was seldom sick and was hospitalized only once, and then not for illness. Following Joseph's transfer back to Nottingham, one of the office elders caught smallpox and was put in the hospital. So were the other five office elders, who were quarantined for two weeks in an isolation ward to restrict the spread of the disease. Ironically, it proved to be the most enjoyable proselyting experience of Joseph's mission. "We have made friends with the nurses and others who visited us during our imprisonment," he wrote in his diary. "Many times we have had talks with them about the gospel; also left with them books to read." When they were released from the hospital, the elders sang several hymns, leaving the staff "with tears in their eyes." He felt the experience had broken down many barriers and that the missionaries had planted many seeds that would later bear good fruit. "I think we have made an impression at the hospital for good, especially with the nurses who confess that we are not the people they thought we were and they will now defend us at all times."

In June 1900, after six months of service in Derby, Elder Smith was transferred back to Nottingham. There he would serve as the clerk of the conference during the remainder of his mission. At the same time, his junior companion, Stephen W. Walker, was appointed as the conference president, replacing George Ruff. Joseph did not receive this transfer with enthusiasm. "I am thankful I do not have to stay here at this more than a year," he wrote to Louie. "That is just about 12 months more than I care for." Later he confided to her, "If I am here in the field two years, then 18 months of that time will be 'killed' in the conference house."

Two main factors lay at the root of Joseph's dissatisfaction. First, his clerical duties severely limited his proselyting activities. He had come to England to preach the gospel, something he could not do while chained to a desk. There his days would be spent mostly in what to him were routine and uninteresting activities. The second factor was one he did not discuss openly but that was hinted at broadly in his diary and correspondence. That was the sense of disappointment or even failure he experienced when his junior companion was called as the conference president in preference to him. And that sense was compounded by being relieved of full-time proselyting duties and assigned to subordinate, routine tasks under the direction of the one who had previously looked to him for leadership. Joseph was mature enough and sufficiently schooled in Church doctrine and procedure to know that one's position in the Church and before God is much less important than his performance and character. Yet he was human enough to wonder whether the reversal of positions between him and Elder Walker reflected a defect in the quality or the strength of his leadership. Whatever were his thoughts about the matter, there can be little doubt that it was a growing experience for him and taught a lesson that was essential for the future Prophet to learn.

Although they were not to his liking, Elder Smith settled into his new duties with the determination to make the best of a bad situation. His work in the office was generally divided among three areas: clerical duties, which took most of his time; some proselyting in the afternoons and evenings; and personal and housekeeping chores. Intermixed with these were study, personal and official correspondence, and occasional recreational activities. Also, at times when the conference president was away from Nottingham, Elder Smith assumed his responsibilities as necessary.

The elders who worked in Nottingham shared the same living quarters, as already noted. They alternated in handling the cooking, shopping, and housekeeping chores. The other elders must have looked upon the arrival of Elder Smith as a gift from heaven. Because of his orderly habits and the training he had received from his mother and aunties in cooking and housekeeping, Joseph soon brought about a revolution in the way the elders lived at the Nottingham conference house. "This morning I got up early," he wrote in his diary, "as I am on the committee preparing breakfast this week. . . . The quarters we occupy are not the cleanest in the world. . . . I went through the cupboard this morning and tried hard to straighten it up a little for it was in a terrible condition. After I had thrown away a large number of tin cans etc., and emptied a dozen or more papers of mush into one and after throwing many other papers away and cleaning a few dishes that were covered with dirt and grease, the place looked somewhat respectable."

But an orderly, more sanitary kitchen was only a small part of the contribution Joseph made to the cleanliness and well-being of the elders living in the conference house. He soon introduced the brethren to an entirely new diet. During his first stay in Nottingham, he deplored the menus that were served. He noted in his journal, "I have had to eat things since I have been here that would turn almost any Utahn's stomach." Especially repugnant to him was the meat usually served for dinner that had been "dead many days." Within a few months after returning to Nottingham as the conference clerk, all this had been changed. "We buy in for ourselves and cook for ourselves," he wrote to Louie in November 1900, "so we have just what we want and plenty of it. We are not starving ourselves now. We live almost entirely on vegetables and fruit. We seldom see meat unless we get a piece to make soup with. . . . All the elders here say they never felt better in their lives. I feel well, and I think the way we are living has a great deal to do with it."

Joseph, the old groceryman, also introduced his companions to the miracle of the bean and the economies that came from bulk buying. He wrote, "I taught them some things that they did not know. One was that navy beans were very good. You could eat them boiled or in soup. I went to the store one day to get some navy beans. . . . The man reached down off the shelf a one pound package and handed it to me. I said 'I don't want just one pound; I want eight or ten pounds.' He looked at me in astonishment. He went to his shelf, looked up, and he took down eight one-pound packages and said, 'This is all I've got.' I took the eight packages home. We lived on beans boiled and bean soup. You don't know how good it is if you haven't tried it."

When Joseph's mother learned of the extent to which he had become involved in cooking for the elders, she was annoyed. "I do not think I will ever teach another boy to cook," she wrote. "You made a mistake. You should have spoiled everything you tried to cook."

Joseph's positive influence upon the other elders extended far beyond the kitchen. He was a model of self-discipline, worthy of emulation by all. He was usually the first one out of bed in the morning. lf ever one of the other elders wanted to arise before the usual hour, he needed only to ask Elder Smith to arouse him. He knew Elder Smith would already be up, poring over the scriptures. And the wisdom and insights he gained by this means, added to the rich store of doctrinal knowledge he had acquired before his mission under the tutelage of his father, magnified his stature in the eyes of the others. When questions of doctrine or procedure arose, he was usually looked to as the final arbiter. This also included the conference president, Stephen W. Walker, who, although nine years older than Elder Smith, was always willing to defer to his younger companion in doctrinal matters. On one occasion, for instance, Joseph and President Walker were engaged in a conversation about religion with their landlord, Mr. Blood. "I was somewhat backward at first about speaking," Joseph Fielding noted in his diary, "and only did so when I saw it was necessary." He soon found it necessary to intervene when the landlord said that while they believed differently as to matters of church government, all Christian sects were in agreement about the fundamental doctrines of the church. "We drew the line at this," wrote Joseph, "and by request of President Walker I took the argument off his hands." In a lengthy diary entry, Elder Smith traced the broad outlines of the conversation that followed, which demonstrated his precise understanding of the gospel and the facility with which he cited the key scriptures to support his contentions. When Elder Smith referred to the principle of continuing revelation as a main feature that distinguished the restored church from all others, the landlord was "horrified." "He began to take me in hand as a youth," wrote Joseph, "whose knowledge of the scriptures had been sadly neglected and perverted to ever think of such an idea." Mr. Blood cited the curse of John, invoked upon all who "shall add unto these things" as negating the idea of continuing revelation. But when Elder Smith logically explained that John wrote his gospel after this statement was made and that the Bible, as such, did not then exist, the landlord "changed the subject" immediately, shifting to a concept that he thought was unassailable—that salvation comes only by faith, works being unessential. On being questioned, he first conceded that one would have "to keep the counsel of God" to be saved, which is a kind of work. But he rejected the idea that baptism is necessary. "No," he said emphatically. "Where do you get such a doctrine as that? . . . Not in my Bible." At that, he went to get his Bible, and on returning he demanded, "Now show me where God says baptism is essential to my salvation." When Joseph read from the third chapter of John what Jesus said to Nicodemus and from 1 Peter 3:18-21, Mr. Blood, completely unhinged, "danced up and down shouting . . . Christ or baptism? Which is it? Does Christ save us or does baptism? . . . It is either Christ that saves us or baptism. Which is it? If we are saved by baptism we have no need of Christ." When asked about the scriptures he had just read in his own Bible, he answered hotly, "I won't believe Paul or Peter." The session went on for nearly two hours, during which Joseph answered all of the questions the landlord raised, covering a broad range of gospel subjects. It was a remarkable performance by one so young to call up by chapter and verse the numerous scriptures necessary to answer the questions randomly raised by the landlord. There can be little doubt that the disciplined training Joseph Fielding Smith received in the mission field, during an era when the elders were constantly attacked for their beliefs, helped prepare him for the key roles he would play during his apostolic ministry, his roles as a defender of the faith and an answerer of gospel questions.

Notwithstanding the hours of careful study Joseph had spent in acquiring the knowledge necessary to answer Mr. Blood's questions, there was no sense of conceit at the accomplishment, nor did he ascribe to himself any special qualities of intelligence. "Never before was I assisted through the power of God than at the time," wrote he of the incident. "It was due to his assistance that we were successful."

Joseph understood well the difference between winning an argument and gaining a convert. So, as the combative, adversarial attitudes toward the Church changed in Great Britain, the role and focus of the Mormon missionaries changed also. A key figure in that change was Joseph Fielding Smith. It is significant that during the 1950s and 1960s, when the church reaped such a great harvest of converts in the British Isles, Joseph Fielding Smith, in his role as the president of the Twelve, was also the chairman of the General Church Missionary Committee. During these critical years, when the foundations of the Church were so significantly strengthened and extended there, the notions of arguing or debating with nonmembers had disappeared entirely. Indeed, missionaries were then instructed to avoid argumentative confrontations and to move on to others when someone like Mr. Blood was encountered. During Joseph's missionary days, however, such a policy would have deprived the elders of almost all proselyting contacts because of the deep-seated antagonisms toward the Church and its representatives.

While Elder Smith freely acknowledged divine help in the discussion with the landlord, as he always did in performing his missionary labors, he nevertheless was conscious of his own abilities and was never reluctant to express his views openly and with self-confidence. He once told of a gospel conversation he had with another elder who, exasperated by Joseph's insistence that he was right on a point of doctrine, blurted out, "Joseph Fielding Smith, if you don't repent, you're going straight to hell." (Joseph F. McConkie, True and Faithful, p. 26.) Joseph Fielding always expressed his views calmly and precisely without heat or rancor, but with a certitude that was sometimes unsettling or annoying to those who disagreed with him, as it was in the case of this missionary companion.

With so little time for proselyting and because the neighborhood near the conference house had been saturated with tracting, the office elders often had trouble finding something to do. Street meetings were always an option, and the elders held many of them. Yet this was an unsatisfying and largely unproductive activity. "This is a very poor place for open air work at best," Joseph wrote to Louie shortly after being transferred back to Nottingham, "as we can only go in some out-of-the-way place to hold meetings and then to talk to lamp posts and dirty youngsters who never saw a bathtub nor heard of an article called soap." In these circumstances, the elders occasionally attended the meetings of other religious groups, hoping either to make acquaintances that might open the door to teaching situations, or to receive permission to speak at their meetings. One such group was the "Brethren's Bible Class," whose meetings Elder Smith attended on several occasions. At first he was optimistic that this would open new teaching opportunities. He wrote to Louie, "They have partly offered us the use of their hall if we would go and talk to them. But they want to question us as they feel led. If we get the chance we will go, for there may be some among them who are seeking for light and we may be able to do some good." Joseph and the other elders were disappointed when they met with this group, who simply called themselves the Brethren. They found that their "offer" for the elders to come and speak was an apparent device to get the missionaries into their midst so the Brethren could convert them to their beliefs. Disappointed, Joseph reported the results to Louis: "They muzzled us and did not permit us to speak. They spent all the time on the subject of 'saved by grace' believing that all who call on the name of God shall be saved, no matter what their works may be." This was a doctrine prevalent in England at the time, and Joseph was not allowed to respond or to ask questions, as he had done with his landlord.

Another group whose meetings the elders once attended was a spiritualist cult that used the same hall the Latter-day Saints used for their meetings. Present was a clairvoyant, a Mrs. Peters from Manchester, who, in attempting to demonstrate her powers, questioned a young man who was seated directly in front of Elder Smith and his three companions. When Mrs. Peters failed in her attempt to describe an acquaintance of the young man, she discontinued questioning him and turned to someone else. "The woman then suddenly left him," Joseph Fielding explained in his journal, "and declared to the congregation that the four men who were sitting just back of the young man to whom she had been giving the description had a great deal of power and for that reason she had failed." Joseph later decided it was a waste of time to attend these meetings. "I do not care to go see them any more," he confided to his diary. "I am satisfied."

The incident about attending the spiritualist meeting was recorded in Joseph's diary in great detail, as were many of his other experiences. Although he may not have consciously done so for that purpose, this habit was an excellent exercise to help hone his writing skills, which were to play such a key role in his apostolic ministry. And the numerous letters he was required to write as the conference clerk and those he wrote to Louie and other members of the family for his own enjoyment served the same purpose. Had Elder Smith seen clearly what the future held for him, he likely would have felt less concerned about the eighteen months he "killed" in the conference headquarters, for that service provided an important ingredient in shaping the man young Joseph Fielding Smith was to become.

As Elder Smith searched for different ways to use his time profitably, he hit upon an idea that again called his writing skill into play. He drafted a letter that was mailed to about two hundred ministers who lived in the Nottingham and Derby area. An LDS pamphlet was sent with each letter. Joseph's objective in doing this was clearly set out in the diary. "They are teachers of the people," he wrote, "and the people naturally follow them. I feel that they are in need of warning if anyone is, and they ought to have it. I want them to have it, too . . . for they should be left without excuse . . . [so] they cannot say the gospel was never presented to them." In the hope of opening a correspondence with them, Joseph Fielding wrote to each minister: "I desire that you kindly forward to me a pamphlet setting forth the fundamental principles of your faith, which, I promise you, I shall carefully read." He then added a statement that sounds like modern ecumenism: "My sole desire being that we might come to a 'unity of the faith.' " What Elder Smith did not tell the ministers was that the unity he had in mind was the unity that would prevail when they joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints! Although young and relatively inexperienced, Joseph was not lacking in self-confidence or in the scriptural knowledge that would have enabled him to hold his own in discussions about doctrine with even the most learned among the professional clergy in England.

Elder Smith was not surprised by the minimal response he received from the local clergy to his letter, although he may have been a little disappointed. "The ministers do not answer us now," he wrote to Louie. "I think they have had their heads together to see what they could do in order to put down this strange doctrine. I think they must have come to the conclusion that the best thing to do is to ignore us, to let our letters go unanswered."

Two of the three ministers who did respond seemed to be concerned about the serious drain on membership that had been suffered by the Church of England. Both also seemed to attribute this to unimportant differences in detail and not to any fundamental differences in doctrine. "The differences which separate us are so slight," wrote the Reverend Perry Holbrook, "and the division among Christians causes such untold harm that I earnestly wish that good and true people would be content to hold their little notions private." The Reverend S. Arthur Berry expressed essentially the same view. "It is much to be deplored," he wrote, "that men should have severed themselves from the national church and so pandered to their own wishes that we find today several hundred different sects in England all divided rather by circumstantials than essentials." And Reverend Berry, reflecting an attitude that anyone who entertained views different from those taught by his own church was apostate, harumphed, "I certainly will read the pamphlet you so kindly sent, although I must confess that it seems to be published without authority."

Another minister who responded to the letter was even less cordial. "Some years ago," wrote Reverend George Hill, "I looked into the doctrines of the Mormons, and found them so utterly incredible that they cease to interest me. I have perused the pamphlet you sent to me and find that my early judgment is well warranted." Joseph Fielding's judgment of the ministers was no less explicit. "These men do not want the truth," he told Louie. "They are ministers by trade, because it is money in their pockets."

Whatever disappointments Joseph experienced in his work, whether in the rejection from the British clergy or in the abrupt, discourteous treatment he received in tracting, were soothed by the loving letters he received regularly from Louie. "My own precious Joseph," began a typical letter, "I do love you so much that I could not possibly tell you because it grows greater with each day that comes." Louie then identified one of the chief characteristics—trustworthiness—that distinguished Joseph from so many young men. "I do trust you so entirely," she wrote, "and have such perfect confidence in you that I am more happy in leaving you and being left than I could possibly be if you were as giddy as some young men are. But I know that you love duty far more than you do pleasure and so I have so much love and trust that I feel as though you are about as near being a perfect young man as could be." Often Louie enclosed pressed flowers with her letters as tokens of her love, a practice Joseph reciprocated. "Thank you for the flowers you sent," wrote Louie on another occasion. "You did not tell the names but the pansies I knew and Mama knew the others." But neither had to rely on pressed flowers to know of the mutual love they shared, for their words left no room for doubt. "There are a great many things to write about," she continued, "but somehow I like best to write 'I love you'. I sometimes think I could write it over, a thousand times, and still wish to write it again." And Joseph was also buoyed up by letters from his parents as well as from Louie's father. "I have always felt," wrote Lewis Shurtliff on one occasion, "that you would fill a glorious mission and gain an experience that will fit you for the exalted station that you are destined to fill in the future."

Not all news from home was good news. "I received letters from my father and my wife this evening containing the sad information of the death of my sister Alice," he wrote on May 11, 1901. "It is a dreadful blow to us all. I did not realize the seriousness of her illness, although I knew she was sick." After commenting on the hope for a reunion hereafter, which the gospel provides, Joseph, as he often did, offered a prayer in his diary: "May I always walk in the path of truth and honor the name I bear, that the meeting with my kindred may be to me indeed most sweet and everlasting, is my humble prayer."

About the same time Joseph received word of Alice's death, he learned that President George Q. Cannon had passed away April 12, 1901, in Monterey, California. With the passing of President Cannon, Joseph Fielding's father had become the ranking apostle behind President Lorenzo Snow and the one next in line for the prophetic office. The last step to that high place would be taken by President Joseph F. Smith only a few months after the release of his son and namesake from the British mission.

Meanwhile, Elder Smith continued to plug away at his clerical and missionary work. To go month after month without a convert was depressing. Neither his diary nor his letters home revealed the depth of his discouragement. Only years after his release did he disclose the extent of his sense of futility and failure at the time. He once told his son Joseph that conditions were so bad and the people so uninterested that he reached a frame of mind where he thought that he could not continue. One night he lay awake thinking of the need to work for passage home." (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 92.) He never allowed such a thought to take root, however, and soon dismissed it as being unworthy of one who bore the name Joseph Fielding Smith.

As Elder Smith and his companions considered ways to make their work more effective and enjoyable, they hit upon the idea of organizing a quartet. And to give the quartet a touch of distinction, they gave it the name "The Sagebrush Singers." While Joseph Fielding had a good singing voice, he was always self-deprecating about it. So when Louie inquired about his singing, he painted a dark picture. "Well, I have no voice in the first place," he explained to her, "and what I have . . . is like a file." As to the performance of the quartet, he later explained, "After listening to us sing, people were glad to hear us talk."

Despite Elder Smith's comments, the quartet undoubtedly enlivened their street meetings and added entertaining variety to the meetings of the Nottingham branch. And singing the songs of Zion with his missionary companions could not have failed to lift his spirits.

Other diversions broke the monotony of their seemingly unproductive proselyting work. The elders competed now and then in sports activities and occasionally attended English football or soccer games. And in September 1900, Joseph joined his brother, Richards, and seven other British missionaries on a two-week "vacation" to visit the world's fair then in progress in Paris, France. This diversion may be surprising to those who are acquainted with the present restrictive policy governing missionary travel. The change in policy results mainly from the changed circumstances. In the earlier days, when international travel was so difficult and expensive and when such a relatively few traveled abroad, it was felt to be wise to allow missionaries to see things of historic or cultural importance, things they might never again have the chance to see and that would broaden their understanding. That rationale applied with added force to this outing, since the world fair in Paris was a once-in-a-lifetime event.

Because London was on the route to Paris, the elders were also allowed to spend some time there, visiting the sites of historic interest. For someone like Joseph Fielding, whose ancestry traced to England and who had such a lively interest in history, the visit to London may well have been more significant to him than the visit to the Paris world fair. Here he was excited by Westminster Abbey, where he "saw the graves and tombs of many of the rulers and prominent men and women of England." Of special fascination in the Abbey was the ancient coronation chair on which the monarchs of Great Britain had been crowned for centuries. And beneath it was the famous Stone of Scone, reputed by ancient legend to have been the "pillow upon which the Patriarch Jacob rested at Bethel when he beheld the vision of angels." According to the legend, the stone was brought to the British Isles about 700 b.c. by an Israelite prophet, was first used in Ireland and then in Scotland in the coronation of their kings, and finally was brought to England and used for the same purpose. The stone, lying beneath the coronation chair, was said to symbolize the union of the Scottish and English kingdoms.

The predominant impression of Westminster Abbey on the elders was one of age and tradition. Salt Lake City's most prominent building, the temple, was dedicated only seven years before. But here was a more ornate building that counted its age in centuries, not years. And that same impression remained as other old buildings and sites were visited. At the White Tower they inspected a vast array of ancient armor, helmets, breastplates, greaves, cuirasses, shields, and gauntlets used by combatants of old to protect the vulnerable parts of the body. Here too were numerous artifacts and displays featuring significant campaigns or incidents in British military history. "We saw the blanket," wrote Joseph in his diary, "upon which General Wolfe died at the Heights of Abraham in Canada."

Leaving the White Tower, the elders walked through the storied parade grounds where for centuries royal troops, attired in their military regalia, had passed in review or engaged in jousts for the entertainment of the monarch and the royal entourage. At the nearby Beauchamp Tower, Joseph and his companions inspected the quarters where persons of rank were once imprisoned; and just outside they were shown the site of the old scaffold and the spot where Anne Boleyn and other persons of royalty had been beheaded.

At the Wakefield Tower, the elders saw the crown jewels of many of the monarchs of England, "including Victoria's, the grandest of all." The queen passed away only a few months after Elder Smith visited london. "We received the news tonight" he wrote on January 22, 1901, "of the death of Queen Victoria which occurred at 6:30 this evening. The newsboys are shouting and running to and fro selling their papers." In appraising the impact of her long reign, Joseph believed that under it England had "reached to the height of her glory" in "her Golden Age."

Crossing the channel, the missionaries traveled by train to Paris through the countryside of Picardy, dotted with prosperous farms whose well-tended fields had been cultivated for centuries. Many had a picture postcard beauty, bordered with neatly trimmed hedges or attractive stone walls. In the French capital, the missionaries were surprised to find many other elders from Utah who were serving in different parts of Europe. Among those from Germany was Elder Thomas E. McKay, a future General Authority and a younger brother of David O. McKay.

The fair that had attracted the elders to Paris showcased the scientific, technological, industrial, and artistic development of the French nation. On display in the numerous pavilions and halls were examples of French ingenuity and skill. After spending many hours looking at the various exhibits and displays, Joseph Fielding expressed satisfaction at what he had seen and pronounced the fair to be a huge success. Then, perhaps betraying a trace of national bias, he wrote that while the Paris World Fair was outstanding, "it was not as grand as the Chicago Fair."

While the fair was the main object of interest for the missionaries, there were many other things in beautiful Paris to claim their attention. Because the automobile was still in its infancy, the streets were not crowded with the crush of honking, hurrying taxis that in the decades ahead would give Paris still another claim to fame. Automobiles there had reached only about the same minimal level of density that the elders had observed on the Brooklyn Bridge. In the place of the cabs they found numerous carriages drawn by horses, whose rhythmic clopping on the paved or cobbled streets added an interesting and not unfamiliar din to the hum of the city. And while such a horde of horses created some problems of metropolitan pollution unknown in Paris today, they eliminated the blighting blanket of automobile exhaust that now chokes the world's major cities.

Joseph and his companions were impressed with the city's broad, tree-lined boulevards, the languid yet effusive manner of Parisians seen in the numerous sidewalk cafÃ©s that dotted the city, and the beauty of the Seine River as it flowed majestically through the capital. Because Joseph had never before been among people who spoke a language other than English, he was both amazed and mystified by the ability of Frenchmen to understand each other. "It seems strange," he wrote, "to be in a land where you cannot understand anyone or make them understand." And he was delighted with the numerous fruit and flower stands that seemed to be everywhere. "I have eaten more fruit today," he wrote the day of his arrival in Paris, "than I have had all the while I was in England."

The elders walked whenever possible, but they soon found that the things they wanted to see were scattered over a wide area of the city. So Joseph and the other British missionaries and sixteen elders who were working on the continent pooled their money and "hired a 'drag' for the day and visited points of interest in Paris."

While Paris, like London, impressed the elders with its age and traditions, the most pronounced impression it left upon them was the influence of the River Seine that snakes its way through the center of the city for eight miles. For young men raised in the desert, the sight of so much water with the surrounding greenery—the trees and shrubs bordering the cobbled quays at the water's edge and the line of graceful trees at the street level—impressed an image not to be forgotten.

Among the first stops on their tour was a visit to the Ile de la CitÃ©, the small, ship-shaped island in the middle of the river. Here, at the heart of the ancient city, the early Roman governors had built their palace and their administrative offices. And here the Gallo-Roman boatmen had built an altar to Jupiter. The site of this ancient pagan altar later became the site of the famous Cathedral of Notre Dame, which Joseph and his companions inspected with great interest. Like Westminster in London, this impressive chapel counted its age in centuries, not in years, like the Salt Lake Temple with which the elders were prone to make comparisons.

In turn, the elders visited, among other landmarks, the site of the Bastille, the ancient prison whose capture on July 14, 1878, became the symbol of the French Revolution; the Eiffel Tower; the Arch of Triumph, commissioned by Napoleon in 1806; the vast museum at the Louvre, which contained such masterpieces as the Venus de Milo and the Mona Lisa; and Napoleon's tomb, located in the Chapel of Saint Louis, part of the Hotel of the Invalids, founded by Louis XIV to shelter aged or crippled veterans.

During the day, the elders crossed many of the bridges that span the river, including the 200-year-old Pont Neuf, which is decorated with numerous grotesque masks and on which street vendors had set up their stands as they had done for many decades. They also rode through many of the parks that dot the city, whose thousands of trees, added to those bordering the river and lining the streets, created a luxuriant garden effect.

On another day, Joseph and several of his companions traveled to Versailles, a short distance from the city, to tour the ancient palace that had been occupied by many of France's monarchs and by Napoleon.

Leaving Paris, Joseph and the other British elders retraced their steps, returning to England and their respective conferences where they again took up their missionary labors. For Joseph, the two-week interlude was a time of refreshment and renewal. He returned to his duties with new enthusiasm and a sense of purpose. By this time, he had begun the last leg of his mission, which would end within a few months. During that time, he busied himself with the daily office duties, preparing correspondence, managing the conference office, handling and receipting for the tithing paid by members in the conference, preparing reports, shepherding the elders who passed through Nottingham, and acting for the conference president when he was out of the city. Interspersed with these duties was the usual round of tracting, street meetings, and supervision of activities in the Nottingham Branch. In all of this, much was simply boring routine, made worse by the absence of baptizing success. Yet, in the resolute discharge of his duties, performed under difficult circumstances, Elder Smith developed qualities of character that were vital to the prophetic role he would ultimately play, the qualities of discipline, patience, and persistence. And with these came a greater spirituality, enriched by the emergence and growth of the gift of healing, which had been promised to him in his patriarchal blessing. The members of the Church in the areas where he served, perhaps sensing this special quality in Elder Smith, called on him for blessings of health or comfort. The most dramatic example occurred in the case of Georgie Lord. This young English boy was seriously ill with a respiratory infection that so constricted his breathing that his face had turned a bluish red. Following the administration, he was restored to health, suffering no ill effects from his illness. At that time, and in that place, where medical skills were either minimal or unavailable, members were more inclined to seek divine help in time of illness than to turn to medical doctors.

As Elder Smith's term of missionary service wound down in the spring of 1901, word was received in Nottingham that Elder Francis M. Lyman of the Twelve had been appointed by the First Presidency to replace Platte D. Lyman as the mission president. Later Elder Stephen Walker and Joseph were invited to attend a special meeting on May 25 at Bradford in the Leeds Conference, where the outgoing and incoming mission presidents counseled with the leaders from several conferences about the change in administration. Joseph's brother, Richards, who had served his entire mission in the Leeds Conference, was present, as was their friend William Armstrong, who was then president of the Grimsby Conference.

While at Bradford, Joseph received a letter from his father asking that before leaving for home, he go to Toppesfield in Essex County, the ancient home of the Smith clan. There he was to search for genealogical information about his ancestors. Since President Lyman had informed Joseph he would sail for home on June 20, there was no time to waste. He hurriedly returned to Nottingham, where he spent several days training Elder J. S. Dixon, his replacement, in the duties of conference clerk, packed a few clothes in his stick grip, and caught the train to London.

What a difference two years can make! The well-dressed, dignified man who traveled alone by train from Nottingham to London in early June 1901 differed markedly from the frightened, homesick young elder who had traveled alone from Liverpool to Nottingham two years before. Now Elder Joseph Fielding Smith was quite at home among these strangers who spoke English with such a curious accent. Nor did he seem intimidated by them nor reluctant to identify himself to them. Having experienced almost every known form of verbal abuse and personal rejection for two years on the doorsteps and street corners of England, Joseph was prepared to deal with any contingency that might arise between him and his fellow passengers. Moreover, the errand that would take him to Toppesfield was cause for exhilaration, as was the knowledge that within a matter of weeks he would be reunited with Louie and other members of his family.

Joseph easily made the transfer in London to the train that took him eastward to the quiet village that had nurtured his ancestors for generations. There he presented himself at the rectory of the parish priest, the Reverend H. B. Barnes, requesting permission to examine his parish records. The priest granted the request, and Joseph spent many hours poring over these old records, extracting names, dates, and places that helped fill the gaps in his family pedigree. This valuable information would later be used by members of the family to perform vicarious ordinance work for these ancestors.

Little did Joseph Fielding realize that in fulfilling this assignment made by his father, he had been introduced to an aspect of Church work that would loom large in his future apostolic career; for thirty years he would serve as the president of the Genealogical Society of Utah and in the presidency of the Salt Lake Temple, either as a counselor or as the president.

It is easy to surmise that the short time Elder Smith spent in Toppesfield on this occasion was, perhaps, the high point of his two-year stay in England. To visit the ancient church where his ancestors had worshiped, or had been christened, baptized, and married, or where their funeral rites had been performed likely gave him a new feeling of kinship toward them. And to see their names in the old church registers, written long ago by ancient scriveners who knew these forebears, who were acquainted with their appearances and personalities, doubtless converted them in his mind from mere names on paper to real people to whom he owed a debt for his very physical existence.

When Elder Smith returned to Nottingham from his short stay in Toppesfield, he was ready to go home. Only a few things remained to be done. He carefully cleaned, ironed, and packed his clothes; delivered a farewell address to the members of the Nottingham Branch; and, on June 19, 1901, left for Liverpool. There, later in the day, he met Richards, who had traveled there from Leeds. The following afternoon, Thursday, June 20, the Smith brothers were accompanied to the Mersey River pierhead by members of the mission office staff. There they boarded their ship, the Commonwealth, which was destined for Boston. The return voyage differed little from the one that had taken them to England, except that the Commonwealth had considerably more zip than the Pennland and covered the distance in only eight days.

The missionary brothers were greeted at Boston by their father, who had adjusted his busy schedule to be there when they arrived. With him were Richards' mother, Sarah, and two sisters, Minerva and Ina. The decision to allow Sarah rather than Julina to accompany President Smith on this trip likely was dictated by a desire to help ease Sarah's grief at the recent death of her daughter, Alice.

The Boston area held a special attraction for the Smith family. Five ancestors, on lines other than the Smiths, were aboard the Mayflower, which landed at nearby Plymouth in 1620. And, as already noted, the first Smith ancestor, Robert Smith, arrived only eighteen years later to establish the family name and reputation on New England soil. So while they were there, President Smith and the other members of the family toured the area for several days, visiting places of historic interest. The party then traveled to Buffalo, New York, where they visited the Pan American Exposition that was in progress there. Since Buffalo was so close to Niagara, the party made a side trip there and spent several hours viewing the falls before catching a train west. They arrived in Salt Lake City on Tuesday, July 9.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
