Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Six

Foundations for Family and Career

The Salt Lake depot was more crowded than usual this July 9, 1901. The increment was caused chiefly by the presence of the numerous Smith clan, which had turned out en masse to welcome home President Joseph F. Smith and the family members traveling with him. Most conspicuous among these were the two returning missionaries, Richards and Joseph Fielding, who were special objects of the ritualistic hugs and kisses for which the family had become so widely known. The Smith who especially caught Joseph Fielding's eye, however, and who received more than a perfunctory embrace and kiss on the cheek was Louie Smith, who was there with a contingent of Shurtliff in-laws from Ogden.

After visiting briefly with his mother and other members of the family in Salt Lake City, Joseph accompanied Louie to Ogden, where she had been living with her parents. There they spent a few quiet, unhurried days, enjoying each other's company, catching up on the news, and laying their plans for the future.

As they assessed the situation, two items emerged at the top of their agenda of needs: housing and a job. The first was easily solved when Joseph's parents invited the young couple to take up residence again in the Old Family Home on West First North in Salt Lake City. Donnie and David A. had both married while Joseph was in England, so there was ample room in the house. The second was more difficult. Job hunting first took Joseph back to ZCMI, where he had worked for several years. The only job available was in the wholesale department doing the same kind of drudging work he had done before. This he declined. Since no other prospects opened up immediately, he gratefully accepted a temporary job in the Salt Lake County Clerk's office, which he obtained through the influence of his new brother-in-law, Alonzo Pratt Kesler, Donnie's husband. While working there, he received an offer of permanent employment as a collector of excise taxes in several western states; this would have required periodic visits to establishments that sold beer and liquor. In thinking over this offer, Joseph conferred with his father, who counseled against accepting it. "Remember this, son," he told Joseph, "the best company is none too good for you." Soon after came a job offer that was ideally suited to Joseph Fielding Smith's temperament and interests. Anthon H. Lund, a member of the Twelve who had succeeded Franklin D. Richards as the Church historian while Joseph Fielding was in England, offered him a job as a clerk in his office. Joseph accepted with alacrity and soon became absorbed in a work that would dominate most of the remaining years of his long life.

In the Historian's Office, Joseph Fielding found him-self surrounded by a group of men who would challenge his abilities and discipline to the utmost. The first, of course, was the fifty-seven-year-old historian, Anthon H. Lund, who had been a member of the Twelve for twelve years. A kind, scholarly man, who would later become a counselor to Joseph Fielding's father in the First Presidency, Elder Lund took a paternal interest in his new twenty-five-year-old employee, going out of his way to train and motivate him as if he were a son. Joseph reciprocated these feelings and, in demonstration, once forcibly removed a man from his home who persisted in berating his benefactor. By way of explaining or, perhaps, justifying this unusual conduct, Joseph said afterward, "I would not listen to any criticism of my beloved President Lund." Next was forty-six-year-old Orson F. Whitney, an assistant historian and longtime bishop of the Eighteenth Ward in Salt Lake City, who, within five years, would be called to the Twelve. Elder Whitney, who was the author of a multivolume history of Utah, stood foremost among the literary stylists of his day. He later composed a Mormon classic entitled Elias, an epic poem in the style of Homer and Virgil, which portrays the plan of salvation in dramatic form. He was also a biographer, having written a biography of his grandfather, Heber C. Kimball.

Another assistant historian, Brigham H. Roberts, forty-four at the time, was an even more prolific writer than Orson F. Whitney. A member of the First Council of Seventy, Elder Roberts left a rich literary legacy in his major contributions to the compiling and writing of both the Documentary History of the Church and the Comprehensive History of the Church. He was also a biographer, having written a biography of one of his heroes, President John Taylor. Finally, there was assistant historian, Andrew Jenson, the compiler and writer of the monumental multivolume LDS Biographical Encyclopedia.

One can imagine the excitement and enthusiasm with which Joseph Fielding took up his new duties, surrounded by men of such character and accomplishment. There can be little doubt that the example of these men and the stimulus of working with them day by day provided a powerful motivation to Joseph Fielding Smith to improve his skills and to increase the volume of his own literary output.

It is not often that a man is so blessed as to make his living doing the thing he enjoys most and for which he has a natural aptitude. Joseph was one of these fortunate ones. From the time his mother introduced him to the Millennial Star when he was only a boy, he had loved Church history. Now he had access to all of the original documents and the artifacts pertaining to the history of the Church from the very beginning. He was studious and analytical, and he knew how to work. The habits of discipline and patience he had developed in the mission field would now be valuable tools in the career that lay ahead of him, as would his clear and precise literary style, honed as he had faithfully kept his diary and struggled with the voluminous correspondence in the Nottingham Conference House. The promising young man with the famous name was now on the path that would ultimately lead him to the prophetic office as president of the Church.

Within days after Joseph Fielding began working in the historian's office, an event occurred that made his name even more famous. On October 6, 1901, his father was sustained as first counselor to President Lorenzo Snow, filling the vacancy created by the death of George Q. Cannon. At the same time, Rudger Clawson was sustained as the Prophet's second counselor. But neither counselor was ever set apart. On October 10, 1901, eighty-seven-year-old Lorenzo Snow quietly and unexpectedly passed away. His death dissolved the First Presidency, which had been sustained only four days before, and resulted in the automatic release of his two counselors. His death also left Joseph F. Smith as the ranking apostle and, therefore, the actual head of the Church. According to precedent that was by then well established, Joseph F. Smith was ordained soon after as the president of the Church at a meeting of the Twelve in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple. That action was later ratified at a Solemn Assembly on November 10, 1901.

Because of these historic actions taken within weeks after Joseph Fielding Smith began working as a clerk in the Historian's Office, his father and namesake stood as the sixth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The father's change in status cast a reflected prominence on the son and opened many doors of opportunity to him that otherwise would have been closed. And, judging from diary entries that expressed concern about living up to his name, it imposed powerful pressures upon him to conduct himself in a way that would reflect nothing but credit on his father and on other ancestors who bore the name Joseph Smith.

But other important changes at this time also affected Joseph Fielding Smith. Joseph Fielding's friend and benefactor, Anthon H. Lund, was sustained as the second counselor in the First Presidency; and his brother, Hyrum Mack Smith, only four years older than he, was sustained as a member of the Twelve. These circumstances, added to the fact that his cousin, John Henry Smith, was already a member of the Twelve, were calculated to give Joseph Fielding a sense of security, freeing his mind of any concern about his employment and opening the way for him to establish his family life on a solid foundation.

With an assured income, Joseph's and Louie's most pressing need was permanent housing for themselves and the children whom they confidently expected would be added to their family. That expectation took on more meaning when, a few months after Joseph Fielding began to work in the Historian's Office, Louie conceived her first child. The knowledge that fatherhood was imminent spurred Joseph Fielding into activity to make his and Louie's dream of owning their own home a reality.

At the time of their marriage, Joseph's parents gave him and Louie a lot at 165 North Second West as a wedding gift. It was just around the corner from Joseph F. Smith's home at 333 West First North. Such close proximity would make it convenient for Joseph to work on the new home while he and Louie continued to live in the Old Smith Family Home. They were comfortable there, more so than before, because after Joseph F. Smith became president of the Church, he and Julina and their unmarried children vacated the old home and moved into the Beehive House, then the official residence of the president of the Church. But Joseph and Louie felt the need for a place of their own where they could live independently and establish their own agenda and family traditions.

To reduce expenses, Joseph Fielding did much of the work himself, contracting out, piecemeal, the kind of work he felt incompetent to perform or did not want to perform. Since there was an old foundation on the lot where a previous home had stood, it was necessary to clear this away before the work on their own home could commence. Joseph did most of this preparatory work himself, laboring in the evenings or on Saturdays as time would allow. He then contracted with George Nebeker to help prepare a cellar, purchased a set of architectural plans, and employed Mathew Noal to do the carpentry work. The building permit was issued on June 17, 1902. The house was sufficiently completed in a year so that Joseph and Louie could move in. "Today is Louie's 27th birthday," Joseph wrote in his diary on June 16, 1903. "I moved the cook stove into the new home this evening; David and Wesley helping me. The carpet men from the Co-op Furniture Company also laid a carpet." It took only three days to complete the move so that the Smiths were able to celebrate Independence Day in their new home.

It was a two-story brick house that faced east. In the style of the day, it had a large front porch. On the main floor were a parlor, dining room, kitchen, pantry, bedroom, and bath. Aside from the cellar, this was the only part of the house that was finished off; the second floor was uncompleted. Later, additional bedrooms, a study for Joseph, and another bathroom were added there.

By the time Joseph and Louie moved into their new house, their family had grown to three. Their first child, Josephine, was born September 18, 1902, in the old Smith home just a few months after work on the new home had commenced. Louie had had a difficult time carrying her baby, and the birth was prolonged and complicated. She had spent many weeks of her pregnancy in Ogden, where her mother could take care of her. At times they feared she might die or suffer a miscarriage. But she had endured the pain and discomfort and was rewarded for her suffering with the gift of a bright and beautiful baby who was given the female version of her father's name.

The move into their new home did not entail a transfer to another Church unit, so the Smiths retained their membership in the Sixteenth Ward of the Salt Lake Stake. Here the young couple became exceedingly active again as they had been in the early months of their marriage. Because of his experience in Nottingham, Joseph Fielding was called as a home missionary soon after his return from England, a position in which he served for nine years, being released only because of his call to the Twelve in 1910. His orientation toward missionary work also resulted in his call as one of the presidents of the Twenty-fourth Quorum of Seventy in the same year he and Louie moved into their new home. His duties there included service as the quorum instructor. About the same time, he was called as a member of the general board of the YMMIA, a call for which he was well qualified because of his service on the Salt Lake Stake YMMIA board prior to his mission. In this position, which he filled for sixteen years, he would work closely with his father, who was the general superintendent of the organization, and with Elder Heber J. Grant of the Twelve and Elder B. H. Roberts of the First Council of Seventy, who were his father's assistants in the superintendency. And as a guarantee that he wouldn't get into mischief in his off hours, Joseph Fielding was also called as a member of the high council of the Salt Lake Stake in 1904, the year following his and Louie's move into their new home. His brother, Hyrum, set him apart to this position and at the same time ordained him a high priest.

With these significant ecclesiastical responsibilities at the general, stake, and ward levels, and with his role in the Historian's Office, Joseph Fielding Smith was in the process of receiving a thorough, overall training and indoctrination in the policies and procedures of the Church and in the practical application of its doctrines, a training that was vital for him to receive. And perhaps more important to him than any of these in terms of the role he ultimately played was his continuing behind-the-scenes role as his father's unofficial secretary and confidant. As his letters to Joseph Fielding in the mission field indicated, the father appreciated the son's spirit and attitude. He seemed to have no sense of pride or arrogance, nor did he seem to have any aspiration to office. Instead he showed a modest deference to his father's wishes and an eager desire to serve and to please him. Notwithstanding these qualities of character, Joseph Fielding had a healthy desire to become better qualified to serve in whatever position he might be called to fill. He also had a healthy self-confidence, was not reluctant to express his views, and openly manifested a desire to gain more wisdom and understanding. Given such a combination of characteristics and circumstances, President Smith seemed completely comfortable in taking the son into his confidence and making him privy to the inner workings of the Church at the highest level.

But the Prophet used his son not only to handle his official and personal correspondence and as a sounding board for his ideas and plans but also as an emissary in conveying or receiving messages. Occasionally Joseph Fielding was even sent to fill speaking assignments for his father. One notable example occurred when the Prophet, unable to fill a commitment to dedicate a chapel in Brigham City, Utah, sent Joseph Fielding as a substitute without telling the stake president, Oleen H. Stohl, of the change. There are differing versions of President Stohl's reaction and comments when he met the train to find that the Joseph Fielding Smith who had arrived was not the Joseph Fielding Smith whom he expected and wanted. The version most often told, and certainly the funniest, has President Stohl saying, "I could bawl. We were expecting the President of the Church and we get a boy instead." Flashing his wry sense of humor, Joseph, in another version, is reported to have answered, "I could bawl too."

Many of the assignments Joseph Fielding received from his father were strictly personal and pertained only to him or the family. Apparently satisfied with Joseph Fielding's genealogical research in Toppesfield, England, President Smith also sent him to Essex County, Massachusetts, to gather further information. The son left in July 1902, when Louie was having great difficulty carrying her first baby. With him was Licurgus A. Wilson, whom President Joseph F. Smith had employed to help compile the family genealogy. The pair was gone for almost a month. In addition to searching records at Salem, Massachusetts, they visited Robert Smith's old farm at Boxford and the Asael Smith farm near Topsfield. While browsing through the Topsfield cemetery, they found a monument honoring early Smith ancestors erected in 1873 by George A. Smith, then a counselor to President Brigham Young. George A. was a descendant of Asael Smith through "Uncle John" Smith, a brother of Joseph Smith Sr.

The information gleaned during this trip not only formed the basis for Joseph Fielding Smith's first book but also confirmed or corrected basic facts necessary to link up branches of the Smith clan that had grown from their first American ancestor, Robert Smith. And that record, added to the information Joseph Fielding Smith uncovered at Essex County, England, further fleshed out the family tree.

This trip was the first of several Joseph Fielding took in the early years of his employment in the Historian's Office. The next one, in the summer of 1904, was to Missouri to gather data for the Church archives. He was accompanied on this occasion by his father-in-law, Lewis Shurtliff. The pair met James G. Duffin, president of the Central States Mission, at Independence, Missouri; he served as their guide. Between Independence, the location of the temple site, and Adam-ondi-Ahman to the north, were places of great historic interest, both to the Church and to Joseph Fielding Smith personally. As he visited them, the future Church historian made copious diary entries about the things he saw and the people he interviewed. It was at Richmond that his grandfather Hyrum Smith and the Prophet and others were temporarily imprisoned in a home before being moved to the nearby Liberty jail. At that house occurred the well-known incident when Joseph Smith rebuked the vulgar soldiers who were guarding them. And in Richmond were to be seen the graves of Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, two of the three witnesses who were shown the golden plates by the Angel Moroni.

At Liberty was the cramped and dingy jail where Joseph and Hyrum had been illegally incarcerated for many months. There the Prophet Joseph demonstrated his family deference to Joseph Fielding's grandfather by insisting that Hyrum, the eldest of the two, always sit at the head of the dining table at mealtime. And it was there the martyrs received a visit from their wives, Mary Fielding Smith and Emma Hale Smith, who traveled in a springless wagon from Far West while Aunt Mercy Thompson tended Mary's baby, Joseph F.

Joseph Fielding's visit to Far West was especially significant. As he stood on the temple site, he could see the lot just across the street where once had stood the house in which his father was born. "My father was born there November 13, 1838," wrote he, "just 11 days after his father was carried off a prisoner by the mob." It was a source of amazement that there were no buildings in sight to identify this place as the site of a once-thriving community. "Today the evidence of a settlement has all disappeared," he noted, "and the land has been converted into farms and pastures." Notwithstanding, Joseph Fielding recognized its potential as the site for a city. "It is one of the most beautiful spots for the location of a city in the world," he wrote. With the customary care of a historian, he also noted that the temple lot stood "on the highest rise," that the cornerstones were still in place, and that the public square was "now a field." "It was on this square," Joseph continued, "that the Saints were forced at the bayonet point to sign away their property to defray the expenses of the mob which drove them from the state."

These and other similar events imbued Joseph Fielding with a sense of outrage that was never completely extinguished. He could not speak or write about them without showing the contempt and disdain he had for those who had so brutally treated his people.

At Gallatin, Joseph Fielding interviewed blind, eighty-three-year-old Joseph McGee, a lifetime resident, who was seventeen years old at the time of the Mormon expulsion from Missouri. He remembered many of the events during that dark period and, responding to questions, related them in detail. He saw Joseph Smith before his imprisonment, whom he characterized as "a powerful man," and told of a wrestling match he had witnessed when the Prophet defeated John Brassfield, "the champion wrestler of the county" in the first two falls of a three-fall match. He also said John Brassfield was one of the guards at the Liberty jail accused of aiding the Smith brothers when they escaped in the spring of 1839. He reported the locals were so angered by the escape that they rode the chief jailer, sheriff William Morgan, on an iron bar "so violently that he died shortly after."

Mr. McGee served as a major in the union army during the Civil War until 1864, when he was blinded. With such a background, he provided interesting commentary about the residents of Missouri. "The Missourians were mostly from the Southern States," he reported, "principally Kentucky and Tennessee. They were hospitable and would feed a stranger and lodge him, yet they were a rough, uneducated class, very quarrelsome and delighted in fighting even among themselves." During the war, therefore, he said "the whole section of country in and around Missouri was terribly divided, neighbors fighting neighbors, sons against fathers, in opposing armies. Especially in Jackson County was the suffering great." In this, Joseph Fielding saw a fulfillment of predictions made by the Prophet about retributions that would be visited upon Missouri and its people for wrongs committed against the Latter-day Saints.

At Adam-ondi-Ahman, Joseph Fielding found that the altar of stones there had been partially destroyed by some of the local residents while digging for gold, which, according to false reports, had been buried there by the Latter-day Saints. He noted that this altar "was built on the highest portion of a bluff or mound on the north bank of the Grand River." From that vantage point, he and his companions could see the fertile valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, lying to the southwest, through which the river lazily snaked its way. This valley was sacred to Joseph Fielding and the Latter-day Saints as the place where Adam convened a family council before he died and where, as part of the winding-up scenes, a grand priesthood council would meet under Adam's direction. While in Missouri on this occasion, Joseph Fielding took in still another fair when he and his father-in-law went downriver to visit the exposition and fair then in progress at St. Louis.

On returning to Salt Lake from Missouri in the late summer of 1904, Joseph Fielding took up a task that had occupied much of his time during the previous months. He helped gather material to submit to the United States Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections, which was then holding hearings to determine whether Reed Smoot should be allowed to continue to serve as U.S. senator from Utah. Senator Smoot, who was a member of the Twelve, was elected to the Senate in January 1903. He took his seat two months later. In noting that fact, Joseph wrote in his diary on March 5, 1903: "Honorable Reed Smoot took his seat as United States Senator from Utah today." He added that the ministers of Salt Lake City had "tried to stir up an opposition that he may be denied his seat," and that "many false reports" had been circulated. Indicating he felt nothing would come of these charges, Joseph Fielding noted that they were "all to no effect." This feeling that the controversy would blow over was buttressed when on May 29, 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt visited Salt Lake City to appraise the situation, following which he spoke out openly in favor of Senator Smoot. However, even the support of one as popular and influential as President Roosevelt was insufficient to thwart the campaign of vilification mounted by the senator's enemies.

Since Reed Smoot had never been a polygamist, that charge, which had been successfully used to deny B. H. Roberts a seat in Congress several years before, was unavailable to his detractors. Nor did there appear to be any character flaws or lack of personal qualification that would disentitle him to serve. In these circumstances, the thrust of the senator's enemies was to attack the Church, attributing to him as a member of the Twelve any supposed shortcomings of the Church and its hierarchy. It was charged, among other things, that the Church had taught disloyalty to the government and its laws and was therefore treasonous. Moreover, it was asserted that the Church, through its leaders, continued to teach and sanction plural marriage. Because of the broad nature of these charges, the implications of which extended to almost every aspect of the controversies between the Church and its enemies from the beginning, the Historical Department was asked to ferret out any documentary evidence that would help answer them. And so, Joseph Fielding and the other clerks in the Historian's Office had been busily involved searching through the records to find anything that might assist those who were defending Senator Smoot before the committee.

The work of this committee became very personal to the Smith family when, in February 1904, President Joseph F. Smith was subpoenaed to testify before it. Joseph Fielding carefully followed the news reports of the proceedings, making pointed diary entries about them and about his father's interrogators. While the questions delved into many aspects of President Smith's career as a General Authority, they focused chiefly on his role as a polygamist and on whether he had continued to teach plural marriage or to perform or authorize the performance of plural marriages after the Manifesto. President Smith openly admitted that he had continued to live with his wives after 1890. He denied, however, that he had taken other plural wives after that date, or had performed plural marriages thereafter, or had authorized others to do so, and he denied that he had continued to teach or advocate polygamy. Some of the questions that elicited these denials were very personal and suggestive. Joseph Fielding was infuriated by them and by the lack of respect shown toward his father. "The 'siege' in Washington continues," he wrote on March 4, 1904, "with my father on the stand. He has been forced to answer all kinds of questions which have been asked by moral lepers who are unworthy to unloosen his shoes, and some of these vile creatures are, too, members of the committee."

The committee continued its hearings for more than two years after President Smith testified, and in June 1906, by a vote of eight to five, it recommended that Senator Smoot be deprived of his seat. However, the full Senate rejected this recommendation several months later, which allowed him to continue to serve, a distinguished service that would extend another twenty-five years.

In the aftermath of his testimony before the committee, President Joseph F. Smith, with the concurrence of his brethren, issued what has since been known as the World-wide Manifesto. Its purpose was to make clear that the original manifesto of 1890 was intended to apply to all members of the Church in all lands and to eliminate any questions of the kind raised during the lengthy Smoot hearings.

When he wrote his father's biography many years afterward, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith analyzed the Smoot hearings and his father's participation in them. There he pointed out that the chairman of the Committee on Privileges and Elections, Senator Julius C. Burrows of Michigan, who was among the most biased of its members, was the nephew of Sylvester Smith, an excommunicant from the Church. Sylvester Smith, no relative to Joseph Smith, was once a secretary to the Prophet as well as a member of Zion's Camp. He later became embittered toward the Church and made scurrilous accusations against the Prophet and other leaders. It was Joseph Fielding's belief that Senator Burrows had been strongly influenced in his attitudes by the example of his uncle, and that his roughshod treatment of President Joseph F. Smith during the Smoot hearings was a kind of unreasoning attempt to strike back, through a descendant, at those whom he believed had wronged his uncle.

In the forefront of the public media that drummed up opposition to Reed Smoot during the Senate hearings was the Salt Lake Tribune. Owned by Thomas Kearns, a wealthy Utahn who had made his fortune through mining, the Tribune carried on a relentless smear campaign against Senator Smoot and other Church leaders, chiefly President Joseph F. Smith. The blunt articles and editorials in this paper, which reflected the hatred of its owner, were mostly written by a skilled and bitter apostate, Frank J. Cannon. Both Thomas Kearns and Frank Cannon were former United States senators from Utah. Both seemed to feel that their fall from political prominence was the handiwork of the hierarchy of the Mormon Church. And both seem to have selected President Joseph F. Smith as the chief target of their animosity. So angered were Joseph Fielding and other sons of President Smith at the treatment their father received in the columns of the Tribune that they once decided to go down to the Tribune office and give Frank Cannon a good "thrashing." They were stopped by their father, who had learned about the plan. Joseph Fielding then turned to a more peaceful and effective way to respond. He wrote an article defending the Church and President Smith that was published in the two major newspapers in Ogden, Utah. In explaining his actions, Joseph wrote on March 18, 1905: "For a long time past a very bitter anti-Mormon feeling has existed against the President of the Church, and the 'Mormon' people. Frank J. Cannon is the most bitter anti-Mormon . . . and as an editor of The Tribune made many vicious assaults on the presidency of the church."

These attacks by the Tribune coincided with similar attacks made by leaders of the Reorganized Church. On January 28, 1905, the Daily Star of Toronto, Canada published an interview with Richard Evans, a counselor in the presidency of the Reorganized Church, which, Joseph Fielding wrote, was a "wilful misrepresentation of the doctrines of the Latter-day Saints." In response, Joseph again took up his pen to write another letter, this one to the editor of the Daily Star, answering point by point the charges made in its article. He also wrote directly to Mr. Evans, which opened up a correspondence between the two, in which they discussed the differences of interpretation and understanding between the two churches. The main point of difference that emerged was that of plural marriage. It was the contention of Mr. Evans and the Reorganized Church that the practice of plural marriage among the Latter-day Saints was commenced by Brigham Young, not the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The manner in which Joseph Fielding went about responding to this issue demonstrates a key quality of his character that would appear frequently throughout his life. Since this involved only an issue of fact, he wanted facts to support his position. This led him to conduct a series of personal interviews with women then living in Salt Lake City who had been polygamous wives of Joseph Smith or who knew of his involvement in plural marriage; the researcher obtained many statements or affidavits from these women. In late May 1905, he visited Peter Lott with his uncle, John Smith, the Church Patriarch. There they examined the family Bible of Cornelius P. Lott, which contained an entry showing that the Prophet Joseph Smith was married to Melissa Lott. A month later he interviewed his aunt, Lucy Walker Smith, who confirmed that she, too, was married to the Prophet and also said she "knew personally and positively that the Partridge sisters and Sarah and Maria Lawrence were also the Prophet's wives." Finally, in late September of the same year, Joseph Fielding and his mother visited Catherine Phillips Smith, who affirmed that the Prophet Joseph Smith sealed her as a plural wife to his brother, Hyrum Smith, Joseph Fielding's grandfather.

Armed with these facts obtained from original sources, Joseph Fielding wrote and had published a booklet entitled Blood Atonement and the Origin of Plural Marriage.

During this same period the other counselor in the presidency of the Reorganized Church, Frederick M. Smith, became involved in the controversy. Frederick was a grandson of the Prophet Joseph Smith and a counselor to his father, Joseph Smith III, the president of the Reorganized Church. Frederick visited Salt Lake City in the summer of 1905 at the invitation of President Joseph F. Smith to attend a Smith family reunion, held in conjunction with a celebration commemorating the 104th anniversary of Hyrum Smith's birth. While he was in Salt Lake City, Joseph Fielding served as Frederick's host, showing him around the city and inviting him to his home for dinner. During this visit, Frederick added fuel to the controversy and greatly annoyed Joseph Fielding when he published an open letter in the Salt Lake Tribune addressed to the people of Royalton and Sharon, Vermont, protesting the plan of the Mormon Church to construct a monument there in memory of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Frederick's grandfather. In it, according to Joseph Fielding's diary entry of June 30, 1905, "He accused the leaders of the church of all manner of wickedness, called them law breakers and declared that they . . . were not worthy the fellowship of honorable people."

After such a scathing denunciation, Joseph Fielding was surprised when Frederick called on him the next day "to see how he felt about his article in the morning paper." Joseph minced no words in telling his cousin he was annoyed, especially because no mention was made of these charges when Frederick was a guest in his house. There followed a spirited discussion about the introduction of plural marriage among the Latter-day Saints. Joseph showed his cousin writings from his own church publications that admitted that the Prophet Joseph Smith had introduced this doctrine. At this, Frederick "became very excited and had to retract some statements that he made." He also "declared that if his grandfather introduced plural marriage—which he practically admitted that he did—that it only lessened him in his [Frederick's] estimation."

Following this confrontation, the dialogue between Joseph Fielding and his cousin heated up. In collaboration with Frank J. Cannon, Frederick later wrote an article published in the Saints Herald, the Reorganized Church's newspaper, in which he repeated and embellished the charges made in the Tribune article. Joseph Fielding responded promptly. "I wrote a reply to a vicious attack on the authorities of the church," he noted in January 1906, "which appeared in the Saints Herald. Again, he supported his arguments with a citation of facts that could not be denied or ignored.

Undoubtedly, Joseph Fielding's spirited and able defense of the Church and its leaders loomed large in the action taken at the general conference in April 1906. At that time, he was sustained as an assistant Church historian. This advancement elevated him to a level of official prominence that lifted him from the ranks of clerical anonymity, added weight to his words, and opened doors to research and writing opportunities that had previously been closed. The appointment coincided with the call of Orson F. Whitney to the Quorum of the Twelve which, in terms of authority and responsibility, placed Joseph on a par with B. H. Roberts, Andrew Jenson, and Amos Musser, the other assistant historians, all four of whom reported directly to the Church historian, Anthon H. Lund.

Because of his new position, the notoriety he had received from his writings, and the multiple positions he had held at the ward, stake, and general levels, Joseph Fielding came to be much in demand as a speaker. Not long after the controversy between him and Frederick M. Smith arose, he was invited to give a lecture at a special meeting in Ogden, Utah. In preparation, he assembled the pertinent facts about the schism that had resulted in the creation of the Reorganized Church. He then wove them into a clear and convincing narrative. Later, encouraged by his father-in-law and others, he expanded the scope of the subject treated at the lecture and prepared a booklet for publication entitled Origin of the Reorganized Church: The Question of Succession. Still later, he broadened the scope of this booklet and published a second edition that received a wide distribution.

In preparing the booklets on plural marriage and succession in the presidency and the earlier one about Asael Smith, Joseph Fielding proved himself to be an able, articulate advocate for the Church and its leaders and a convincing exponent of Church history and doctrine. This, added to his name and important family connections; his solid service as a missionary; his exemplary role as a son, husband, and father; and his penchant for hard work gave him an aura of success and an expectation of future prominence. It also increased confidence from others, who sought his assistance in matters of sensitivity and importance. These factors were doubtless influential in his appointment in January 1907 to a prestigious committee whose purpose was "to prepare data for a defense of the church against assaults made upon it by its enemies." Included in the membership of this committee were three General Authorities, Elders Orson F. Whitney and David O. McKay of the Twelve and Elder B. H. Roberts of the First Council of Seventy. Others of special prominence on the committee were James E. Talmage, president of the University of Utah and a future member of the Twelve, and General Richard W. Young, a son of Brigham Young. Over the long period this committee functioned, Joseph Fielding Smith, its junior member, was in frequent contact with these men of prominence and ability who were able to gauge his character and competence and the depth of his knowledge and commitment. He seems to have been accepted by them as an equal, as one qualified to stand with them in the front ranks of Church leadership. His service on this committee also led Joseph to an even more detailed study of the voluminous documents in the Church's historical archives, a study that helped fill any gaps in his knowledge about the origin and the development of the Church and the character and accomplishments of its leaders. All this would be of vital importance in fulfilling the heavy responsibilities that would come to him in the future.

Meanwhile, in addition to these responsibilities and many others, Joseph continued to serve his father in the unofficial capacity of a private secretary. Indeed, his expanded knowledge of Church doctrine and history and his understanding of the critical issues facing the Church better equipped him to render such service. So, the Prophet began to look more and more to his son and namesake to handle both his private and official correspondence and to serve as a personal emissary, as a sounding board, and as a traveling companion. As to the latter, Joseph Fielding accompanied his father on an extended trip into Old Mexico in September 1905. There they visited the Mormon colonies in Dublan and Juarez, holding meetings with the members and leaders of the Church in this remote area. This was the first time Joseph Fielding met Anthony W. Ivins, the stake president in the Mexican colonies, who, two years later, would be called to the Twelve and who, later still, would be called as a counselor to President Heber J. Grant. Judging from favorable diary references made to him, Joseph Fielding had great admiration for President Ivins, with whom he would share the apostleship in the years ahead. And, of course, Joseph Fielding would later share this special status with his father, as during this trip he shared the pulpit with him. This was the first time President Smith and his son Joseph Fielding had been together, speaking to the Saints in an official capacity, the father as the president of the Church and the son as a member of the general board of the YMMIA.

There were two main purposes for this trip to the Mexican colonies. The first was to dedicate an LDS academy at Juarez. This was another of a string of similar Church-owned schools that extended from Canada to Old Mexico. The second was to confirm the scope and the effect of the World-wide Manifesto, which had been published the previous year following the Smoot hearings. Because the original manifesto of 1890 had grown out of restrictive legislation enacted in the United States, some members and leaders had erroneously assumed that it was not intended to apply to areas outside the United States. Thus some plural marriages had been performed in Old Mexico after 1890. During this trip, the Prophet made it plain that all plural marriages were unauthorized and void. It is significant that two members of the Twelve, John W. Taylor and Mathias F. Cowley, who had mistaken views about the manifesto, resigned from the Twelve on October 28, 1905, the month after President Joseph F. Smith and his son visited the Mormon colonies in Old Mexico.

President Smith again demonstrated his philosophy about the education of his children when he took Joseph Fielding to California on the return trip to Salt Lake City. There the son saw the Pacific Ocean for the first time. He and his father also visited Santa Catalina Island, a resort lying several miles off the Pacific coast.

Less than three months after the trip to Mexico, Joseph Fielding joined his father and a large group on a chartered train to New England for the dedication of the new monument at Sharon, Vermont. The party left the Salt Lake City depot on Monday, December 18, 1905, and arrived at South Royalton, Vermont, on Friday. The dedication was scheduled the following day, which would mark the one-hundredth anniversary of the Prophet's birth. Since the visitors arrived early on Friday, Joseph Fielding and other members of his family had time to travel to nearby Tunbridge, where his grandfather Hyrum Smith was born. The area was covered with a heavy blanket of snow, so they had to travel by sleigh. With his father and his older brother Hyrum, Joseph Fielding visited the Tunbridge town clerk's office to check for genealogical information. In a few hours they were able to gather valuable data that enabled them to fill gaps in their family records and to tie into information Joseph Fielding had obtained in Toppesfield, England. Especially important was confirmation of the dates of the marriage of Joseph Smith Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith and the births of Alvin, Hyrum, and Sophronia.

On Saturday, the visitors were driven to the monument. The day was gray and cold, and its bleakness accentuated the rugged appearance of the surrounding terrain. The monument and a modest bungalow that had been constructed nearby stood in a sheltered cove that had once been part of a farm owned by Solomon Mack, Lucy Mack Smith's father. The Church had purchased the site in May 1905. Pursuant to a resolution adopted at the general conference in April 1904, the original plan was to erect a monument honoring both Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Later considerations caused a change in plan to commemorate only the Prophet Joseph Smith, although a plaque on one side of the monument alluded to the martyrdom his brother had shared.

Many local leaders and curious residents were present to witness the unveiling of the monument. Joseph Fielding likely expressed the feelings of the family and other Church members who were there: "I felt that I was on sacred ground," he wrote, "a place dear to me, one which I had desired to see." The brief services, which were conducted by President Smith, included remarks by Junius F. Wells, who chaired the planning committee, and by the Prophet, who then offered the dedicatory prayer. After the congregation joined in singing "Praise to the Man," Edith A. Smith, the oldest member of the Smith family present, unveiled the monument. The solid granite shaft, thirty-eight and a half feet high to symbolize the years of Joseph Smith's life, and the two granite bases on which it stood weigh almost a hundred tons.

After the formal ceremony, Joseph Fielding joined other members of the family and a few close associates in the cottage, where President Anthon H. Lund presented the Prophet with a gold watch, chain, and locket. In a rare show of emotion in public, Joseph Fielding's father wept as he accepted the gift. "My heart is like that of a child," he said. "It is easily touched, especially with love. I can much easier weep for joy than for sorrow."

After the dedication, some members of the official party from Salt Lake City returned home while Joseph Fielding and his father and several Smith relatives left South Royalton to visit other places in New England of significance to the family. They traveled first to Boston, where meetings in Deacon Hall were attended by members and missionaries. On Christmas day, they went to nearby Topsfield and Boxford to visit Robert Smith's farm, where many of his children were born. While there, they refreshed themselves with a drink from the old well, whose water, Joseph Fielding reported, was "clear and cool."

Next on the itinerary was a stop in Palmyra, New York, and nearby Manchester Township, where they visited the farm and home owned by Joseph Fielding's great-grandfather, Joseph Smith Sr. Seeing the rooms where Joseph Smith Jr. had lived and the grove where he had received the vision of the Father and the Son brought into clearer focus events in the early history of the Church. Other early events seemed clearer too when the party visited the Hill Cumorah, where President Smith offered a special prayer and the group sang An Angel from on High.

Leaving Palmyra, they traveled to Cleveland, Ohio, by train and on to Kirtland by team. Here the temple and the old home of Hyrum Smith were of special interest. Seeing the inscription on the temple that the Reorganized Church was in succession "by decision of the court. February 1880," President Smith is reported to have said, "No order of the court could transmit the succession of the Holy Priesthood or of the spirit and power and religious rights of the church established by revelation from God."

Joseph Fielding traveled East again in May 1907. With him was his younger brother, David A. Smith. Their purpose was to meet four other brothers who were returning from missions abroad. Alvin and Chase had served in Great Britain, while George and Willard had been sent to Scandinavia. During George's two-year absence, Joseph Fielding had substituted for him as the treasurer of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir. After meeting in Boston where the returning missionaries landed, the six brothers duplicated the tour that had been made by President Smith's party in December 1905.

Six months after the return of the six brothers, another of President Smith's sons was called to the ranks of the General Authorities when, on December 11, 1907, David A. was set apart as the second counselor in the Presiding Bishopric. Three years younger than Joseph Fielding, this brother had shown unusual skill in business matters. So Charles W. Nibley had selected him to serve as his second counselor when Bishop Nibley was called to replace the ailing William B. Preston, who had served as the presiding bishop for twenty-three years. David A. Smith's service in the presiding bishopric would cover thirty-one years, spanning the entire tenure of Bishop Charles W. Nibley and Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon.

At the time of Joseph Fielding's return from the trip to meet his missionary brothers, an epidemic of spinal meningitis was raging in Utah. Only two months before, the daughter of his cousin, Albert J. Davis, had died of the disease. Joseph and Louie were concerned for their two young daughters, four-and-a-half-year-old Josephine and her fifteen-month-old sister, Julina, who had been born February 5, 1906. The parents were anxious to provide security and opportunity for their children in the same way their parents had provided for them. This desire had led Joseph and Louie to commence a renovation project on their home three months after Julina was born. It entailed finishing the second story to provide an extra bath, additional bedrooms, and a private study for Joseph. The project was necessary because of the growth of the family, which the couple expected would continue, and it became financially feasible when Joseph received a modest increase in salary at the time of his appointment as an assistant historian in April 1906. The private study for Joseph was becoming an urgent necessity as his personal library grew and as he required the space and seclusion necessary for his research and writing projects. Here, in the early morning hours, or at night after the children were in bed, he could work without interruption, leaving his papers on his desk or working table, ready for easy access when he returned. He soon learned that his young children had little regard for the importance of his working tools. If the door to the study was open or unlocked, they felt no reluctance to enter and to handle or even carry away his papers and writing equipment. This created special problems when the father occasionally brought home documents from the Historian's Office. On this account, Joseph soon began to lock the door to his study, allowing the children to enter only when he was present. To youngsters growing up, this practice cast an aura of secrecy, even of mystery, around this room. Only when they married and had inquisitive children of their own and appreciated better the significance of their father's work did they fully understand why that part of their home was off limits.

With a lovely home, two beautiful daughters, supportive families, a host of friends, rewarding church activities, and secure, enjoyable employment for Joseph, this young couple seemed to have everything necessary for supreme happiness and contentment. That this was a reality for them is suggested by Joseph's diary entry of November 1, 1907. "With Louie, I spent the greater part of the day in the Salt Lake Temple," he wrote, "one of the happiest days of our lives and the most profitable to us."

1992 Deseret Book Co.
