Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Seven

Shadow and Light

The cyclical nature of life was demonstrated to Jo- seph Fielding the month following his happy ex- perience in the temple with Louie. On December 23, 1907, his great happiness was replaced by deep sorrow when his sister Leonora Nelson died from complications of a stillborn birth a few days before. The unexpected passing of this beloved sister, fondly called Nonie, cast a shroud over the holiday season. "Christmas day was spent by the family in sorrow," Joseph noted in his diary. The funeral was held the day after Christmas.

Nonie's death reminded the entire family of the tenuous nature and short duration of life and doubtless prompted the action taken the following month. On January 21, 1908, Joseph Fielding and his brother David A. went to the city cemetery to look for a Smith family burial plot that, Joseph wrote, "would be of use for at least a century where all our dead could be buried together." Later President Smith went to the cemetery with his sons to help decide which plot to purchase. When the decision had been made, David A., who had recently been called as a counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, was asked to petition the city council for a reduction in the price of the plot selected. Joseph Fielding noted that the site consisted of fourteen lots, "one of which belongs to Joseph Nelson and it is there that my sister Leonora is buried."

Little did Joseph Fielding realize that in less than three months his wife and sweetheart would be buried there also. Louie was expecting again at the time and was having difficulty carrying her third child, just as she had had in carrying Julina. The main problem was her inability to keep anything on her stomach. Those with medical skills whom she consulted, including her mother-in-law, Julina Smith, diagnosed her ailment as "pernicious vomiting." But the diagnosis did not include a prescription for her recovery. As a result, she became progressively weaker as her system was regularly robbed of the nutrients so necessary for the health of herself and the baby she carried. Lacking a medical solution for Louie's problems, the concerned couple resorted to the only other source of help they knew—they prayed. They prayed separately and together, both vocally and in secret. They enlisted family and friends to join them in their fervent pleadings. Louie received priesthood administrations, all to no avail. In mid February, her name was placed on the prayer role in the Salt Lake Temple, where the First Presidency and the Twelve offered up special prayers in her behalf. Nothing happened except that her condition continued to worsen. By March the situation was critical. "During the remainder of the month," wrote Joseph, "I spent my time . . . principally at home where I felt that I was needed." Then betraying the highly developed sense of responsibility he felt toward his work, he added, "I felt also, that I was justified in neglecting all other duties and in devoting my time and attention so far as possible to my sick wife and our babies."

The vigil was "one of constant anxiety and worry." Joseph's principal concern was for Louie, who suffered "most excruciating pain for three or four weeks." And the ordeal took an enormous emotional toll on her husband, who had to stand by helplessly as he watched his sweetheart dwindle toward death. "I have passed through trials and experiences of the deepest and most painful kind," wrote he.

The end came on Monday, March 30, 1908, when Louie Shurtliff Smith slipped quietly away, leaving behind her husband of ten years and two small daughters, Josephine and Julina, ages five and two. The funeral service was held on April 2. The speakers Joseph Fielding invited to participate were John Watson—Louie's former bishop in the Ogden Fifth ward—and three members of the Twelve, his cousins John Henry Smith and George Albert Smith and his friend David O. McKay, who had been one of Louie's classmates at the University of Utah.

His wife's death was a terrible blow to Joseph. He had depended on her for so many things. She had made their home a haven from the storms of life. There he had always found peace and contentment and encouragement. Above all others, Louie was confident that in the future her husband would occupy a high place in the leadership of the Church. She seems to have devoted herself to help him prepare for the day when the call would come. This willingness to subordinate her personal desires and aspirations to the mission of her husband was, no doubt, a source of great strength to Joseph. And the loss of that constant support left a great void. Yet these were not the main reasons why Joseph mourned Louie's passing; he mourned mainly because he loved her dearly. In a real sense, she was part of him. Their unity was symbolized in the two little girls who derived qualities of character and appearance from each of their parents. To sever that relationship caused grievous wounds that time would heal but that, for the moment, brought deep mourning. Joseph turned to his diary to express his sense of loss, his feelings of love and admiration for Louie at her passing, and his need for help to continue without her. "With a sick heart," he wrote, "I acknowledge the Lord and trust in Him for His help and comfort, for in Him only can I trust securely." He then offered this eulogy: "A purer, nobler, truer companion and mother there is not to be found in the whole earth. . . . She was constantly engaged in doing good. She loved her husband and babies dearer than her life and for them she laid it down. . . . She sacrificed self and her own comfort for those she loved and her example is one to be emulated by her children and all her loved ones." Then looking to their future, he implored, "O my Father in Heaven, help me, I pray Thee, to so live that I shall be worthy to meet her in eternal glory, to be united again with her, never again to be separated, throughout the countless ages of eternity." Finally, the future prophet turned to matters of an entirely personal nature. "Give me wisdom and knowledge of heavenly things," he wrote, "that I may have power to resist all evil and remain steadfast to Thy truth. O Lord, help me, grant unto me eternal life in Thy Kingdom. Guide my footsteps in righteousness, give unto me Thy Whole Spirit."

What Joseph Fielding aimed for here was nothing less than perfection. And twenty-three years after being called to the Twelve, he would publish a book entitled The Way to Perfection, in which he clearly outlined the path to be followed by anyone who aspired to reach that goal. To fully understand the life and works of President Joseph Fielding Smith, one must realize that to him this was a realistic, attainable goal, worthy of one's best efforts applied consistently throughout life. It was no passing fancy. Nor was it something deserving of only lip service. This was the lodestar of his earthly existence, the ultimate goal toward which he strove and around which he ordered every aspect of his life.

It is doubtless true that Louie's death, which followed so soon after the death of his sister, Nonie, was the first time in his young life that Joseph Fielding Smith fully grasped the meaning of the principle he had often taught, that it is necessary that there be an opposition in all things. The reality of death and the short duration of life brought into clearer focus, and made sweeter, experiences such as the one he had had with Louie in the Salt Lake Temple the previous November. And now that she was gone, he wanted to build on that sacred relationship through the lives of the daughters who had blessed their home. "Help me to rear my precious babies," he pleaded, "that they shall remain pure and spotless throughout their lives, and when we have finished our course, take us unto Thy Celestial Kingdom, we pray Thee."

Joseph Fielding soon learned that rearing two little girls alone while holding down a full-time job was an impossible task. He tried it with the aid of a babysitter during the day, but that didn't work for long. The little girls sorely missed their mother and seemed to cry almost incessantly for her. This robbed the father of much needed sleep, which reduced his efficiency at the office and created additional tension at home. A few weeks of this convinced Joseph of the need to accept the invitation of his parents to move into the Beehive House to live with them. So, he closed his home temporarily and for several months lived in Brigham Young's old home across the street from the Historian's Office. Being so close to the girls, he was able to stop to see them during the day and to help his mother and sisters in their care. But while Grandma Smith and their aunties were kind to the little girls and did everything possible to comfort and help them, it was not like home where all of their playthings were nearby and where they were the center of attention of their solicitous mother, the mother whom they at last began to realize would not return. Under these circumstances, the girls never really settled comfortably into the routine of their grandparents' home. They were often cross and moody, given to frequent crying and to persistent pleading to be taken to their own home.

Joseph soon saw that the best solution lay in his remarriage. Yet he was reluctant to take steps in that direction too soon after Louie's death out of concern that it might be misinterpreted as a sign of disloyalty. Apparently sensing Joseph's reticence to take an action that was essential to the well-being of all, President Smith finally counseled his son that he take steps promptly to find a wife. When Joseph learned that Louie's parents were of the same opinion, he resolved to do it.

Making the decision to find a wife was easy. The hard part was how to go about it. Yet it turned out not to be difficult at all. By now, Joseph was a mature man of thirty-two who had been trained and disciplined in the principles of his religion. It was only natural, therefore, that he would rely on those principles in making what would be one of the most important and far-reaching decisions of his life. Therefore, Joseph prayed. He prayed that the Lord would indicate to him the one who would be a congenial and loving companion and also a kind and caring mother for his children. His prayers were answered.

It is somewhat incredible that Joseph Fielding Smith, bearing the name of his father and working in the Historian's Office, as his father had done, would find his wife there as President Smith had found Julina. The answer to Joseph's fervent prayers came in the person of Ethel Georgina Reynolds, an attractive eighteen-year-old girl who was employed as a clerk in the Historian's Office. Aside from her physical beauty, Joseph Fielding seemed to be attracted to Ethel chiefly because of her kind and gentle nature, her keen intelligence, and her industrious habits. Moreover, she belonged to a prominent and dedicated Mormon family, which was of critical importance to Joseph Fielding, who was anxious that his children be well born. Ethel's middle name, Georgina, was given to her in honor of her father, George Reynolds, who was a member of the First Council of Seventy. Elder Reynolds's distinguished career had included service as a private secretary to President Brigham Young, as a longtime member of the Sunday School general board, as a legislator and editor, and as the author of a concordance of the Book of Mormon. He wrote this monumental work over a period of more than twenty years, including several months of incarceration in the Utah penitentiary under the Federal anti-bigamy law of 1862. His case had been deliberately structured to test the constitutionality of that law. The supreme court's affirmance of his conviction in the landmark case, U.S. v. Reynolds, had memorialized Elder Reynold's name among the Latter-day Saints for his courage in volunteering to serve as the sacrificial lamb in this famous litigation.

All these circumstances were important to Joseph in his decision to seek Ethel's hand, although the final and determining factor was the spiritual impression that he should do so. But after that critical decision had been made, there still remained the delicate task of how to go about it. His strategy of courtship began when he invited Ethel to join him and the two little girls on an outing at Wandamere Park on July 6, 1908. He was anxious to make sure that the personal chemistry was right between her and his daughters as it was with him. The outing proved to be a huge success. It was the final day of a three-day holiday to celebrate the Fourth of July. A festive aura filled the park, where the midway rides, the food stalls, and the side shows were a delight to the little girls. Meanwhile, the relaxed atmosphere afforded opportunity for Joseph and Ethel to visit companionably, to exchange ideas, and to explore areas of common interest and concern.

With this ice-breaker out of the way, Joseph felt more comfortable and confident about how to proceed in courting Ethel. Consistent with his conservative character, however, he proceeded with caution, waiting ten days before making his second move. Then he invited her on a date, just the two of them. His niggardly diary entry provides little insight into how things were developing. "Spent the evening with Miss Ethel G. Reynolds," he wrote succinctly. And they were together again three days later, July 19, Joseph Fielding's thirty-second birthday. That evening, a Sunday, Ethel accompanied the assistant Church historian to a sacrament meeting of the Murray Second Ward. There he answered the recent charges of a minister of the Reorganized Church that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had deviated from the doctrines taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Afterward the couple went to the Reynolds home for refreshments. There in the family parlor, Ethel gave Joseph a two-volume set of the essays of Ralph Waldo Emerson as a birthday gift.

During the following month, the courtship followed a normal course with the young couple spending much time together in the evenings and working together at the Historian's Office during the day. In the process, they came to know each other very well, reaching a common ground of understanding on vital issues and, presumably, developing a romantic involvement about which Joseph furnished little detail. A diary entry of August 20 clearly indicates that the couple had reached an understanding and that their marriage was imminent. "Ethel G. Reynolds went through the temple for her endowments today, at my request," wrote Joseph significantly. Two days later he took Ethel and the two little girls to the cemetery to visit Louie's grave.

Although fourteen years separated the couple in age, in maturity and perception Ethel seemed more nearly the age of Joseph. She was musically talented, having served as ward organist since age eleven; was well read; possessed poise and self-confidence beyond her years; and shared Joseph's convictions about the Church. Having been raised in the home of an author, Ethel was aware of the time demands involved in literary pursuits. And because her father was a General Authority, she shared with Joseph an understanding of the special challenges and restrictions such a status entailed. Moreover, Ethel's employment at the Historian's Office gave her a good insight into Joseph's work and a shared knowledge about the foundations and the growth of the Church. In retrospect, this combination of circumstances, added to their congenial personalities and physical attraction for each other, suggests that it would have been difficult to find a couple more ideally suited for each other. Years later, Joseph confirmed this when he wrote to Ethel: "You do not know how often I have thanked the Lord that I made no mistake when I needed a companion. You were sent to me. You just had to come for I know you belonged to me."

The marriage and sealing were performed in the Salt Lake Temple on November 2, 1908. The brief report Joseph made of the event hardly revealed the love and gratitude he had for his new bride: "This forenoon, in the Salt Lake Temple at 11:30, Miss Ethel G. Reynolds was sealed to me for time and all eternity, by my father."

Under the circumstances, the happy couple decided to forgo a honeymoon. So they moved into the home at 165 North Second West, where they began their married life together. The two little girls, Josephine and Julina, seem almost instantly to have developed a bonding love for Ethel. Shortly after the marriage, while Josephine was in school, Ethel took Julina to the Beehive House to be tended while she went to a shower in her honor. But Julina would have none of it. She cried and clung to her and refused to be comforted by her grandmother and aunties. At last, Ethel gave up the idea of leaving the little girl at Grandma's and took her along to the shower. And Julina's attitude toward her new mother was shared by Josephine. They both stuck to her like glue, following her everywhere. They were seemingly concerned that if she got out of sight, she might disappear as Louie had done.

Once the courting and nuptials were behind them and they had made the personal adjustments that are always entailed in a new marital relationship, Joseph and Ethel settled into a happy, rewarding routine. Ethel's musical ability, intelligence, gospel knowledge, and family connections smoothed the way for her enthusiastic acceptance into the life of the Seventeenth Ward. As for Joseph, his schedule was already filled with family and church responsibilities. But there was still room for a little more. This year he became the librarian and treasurer of the Genealogical Society of Utah, adding to his responsibilities as a member of the board, a position to which he had been appointed the previous year. Following his appointment as librarian and treasurer, he and a companion made a tour to inspect libraries in the eastern United States to generate ideas for the development of the society's library, which was then in its incipient stages. Out of this tour came several important recommendations that were adopted by the board. One of Joseph's key suggestions was that the society publish a genealogical magazine similar to the one published by the New England Society. When this proposal was discussed and approved, the board decided that the person best qualified to spearhead the work was Joseph Fielding Smith, who, accordingly, was appointed as the first editor and business manager of the Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine.

Building a new publication from scratch was no easy task, especially for an editor on a limited budget and with no previous experience. And the ideas obtained in New England were of limited value and application because of the different focus of the Utah Society, whose purpose was to advance the aims of the Church in its mission to help redeem the dead, a concept that likely had never occurred to the New England editors. So, Joseph plowed ahead with his project, gathering or writing informative or inspirational articles designed to stimulate members of the Church to perform the labor called by Church leaders the most important work of all. When unexpected problems arose, he improvised and maneuvered around them. In the process, he learned many valuable lessons about organization and management that he had never encountered before. Previously his assignments had been in structured situations where his duties and goals had been carefully defined by others. Now he had to strike out on his own, charting the course for the infant publication and bearing ultimate responsibility for any success or failure it might realize.

There can be little doubt that this represented one of the most critical challenges Joseph Fielding had faced in his career. In a sense, his reputation was on the line. Failure would convey the negative idea that in a difficult and stressful situation, he lacked the will or the capacity to perform, illustrating the maxim that there are many thoroughbreds who never win races. On the other hand, success would mark him as a young man of promise who could be relied on in the crunch, and who would bear watching as a future leader.

Joseph acquitted himself well in this test. While he was completing the first issue of the magazine, his family was placed in quarantine because Julina had contracted scarlet fever. Working alone and under time pressures, he completed the manuscript in his study at home, applied an antiseptic to the document to guard against transmitting the disease, and left it in the mailbox by his gate. There it was picked up and taken to the printer, who set it in type and returned galley proofs to Joseph for final editing. That completed, he fumigated them and returned them for publishing. Under these difficult circumstances, the new magazine was launched. For the next thirty years, it was published regularly, providing helpful hints and suggestions for those engaged in genealogical research. In 1940, the magazine was discontinued as part of a revision and consolidation of Church programs and publications.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
