Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Eight

Call to the Twelve

Although the Church genealogical magazine con- Atinued for thirty years, Joseph Fielding Smith's Adirect connection with it continued only a few Amonths. A series of events after the first issue was published created a major revolution in his life, changing forever the direction in which it would go. The first of these was the death of John R. Winder, first counselor in the First Presidency, on March 27, 1910. The second was the call of Anthon H. Lund as the new first counselor. And the third was the call of John Henry Smith, a member of the Twelve, as the new second counselor. Joseph Fielding did not learn about the last two events until later. Their effect, of course, was to create a vacancy in the Twelve.

As always, there was much speculation among members of the Church about who the new member of the Twelve would be. And there was much discussion among the First Presidency and the Twelve about the same subject. Prior to the April general conference in 1910, President Joseph F. Smith had invited members of the Twelve to make nominations about filling the vacancy. As the Brethren met in council in the upper room of the temple to discuss the matter, there was no clear indication as to who the new apostle should be. At length, President Smith excused himself from the meeting and retired to a private room, where he implored the Lord for guidance in making the choice. At that time it was revealed to him that his son, Joseph Fielding Smith, was to be called to the Twelve. But while the revelation was clear, it was not an easy step for the Prophet to take. His son Hyrum and a cousin George Albert Smith were already members of the Twelve; his son David A. was a member of the Presiding Bishopric; his brother, John Smith, was Patriarch to the Church; and his cousin John Henry Smith was now his counselor. There had been a furor when the other sons were called, and he knew an even greater hue and cry would be raised with the call of his namesake. Nevertheless, he presented the matter to his brethren, who unanimously approved.

According to the procedure followed at that day, Joseph Fielding was not informed of his call prior to the time it was announced from the stand of the Tabernacle. The April general conference in 1910 started on April 3 and continued through April 6 with a recess on Tuesday the 5th. Joseph Fielding was pleased that at the morning session on Wednesday, his father-in-law, Lewis W. Shurtliff, offered the invocation. Also at that session, his friend Ben E. Rich, whose brother was the first husband of President Joseph F. Smith's wife Alice Kimball Rich Smith was the first speaker.

Between the morning and afternoon sessions, Joseph Fielding went to his office on East South Temple to eat a sandwich and to check on some of the matters pending there. Shortly before 2:00 p.m., and as yet unaware of what would take place at the afternoon session, he left the Historian's Office and walked west on the south side of South Temple until he reached the middle of the block across from Temple Square. As he started across the street to enter the south gate of the square, Ben E. Rich approached him and, putting his arm around Joseph's shoulder, asked whether he would "take his place on the stand" that afternoon as one of the Council of the Twelve. Caught off guard, Joseph responded as best he could, explaining that his brother was already a member of that quorum and that he had no expectation of being called. He had barely recovered from the shock of Ben Rich's embarrassing question when a doorkeeper at the entrance to the Tabernacle said to him in an insinuating way, "Well, Joseph, who is the new apostle to be?" Somewhat irritated by the implication of the question, Joseph answered abruptly, "I don't know. But it won't be you and it won't be me." Entering the Tabernacle, Joseph took his seat on the lower level of the stand reserved for him as an assistant Church historian.

Still oblivious to what lay ahead, Joseph heard his father call the meeting to order, announce the opening hymn "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," and designate Elder Brigham H. Roberts to offer the invocation. The Prophet then announced a special number by the Tabernacle Choir, "The Spirit of God Like a Fire is Burning," following which Elder Heber J. Grant of the Twelve was designated to present the General Authorities of the Church for sustaining vote. As Elder Grant stood to read the names, an air of quiet expectation settled upon the audience. Still, Joseph Fielding was unaware of the coming announcement that would change his life forever. But, as the speaker read down the list of names of the members of the Twelve, there suddenly came to him the strong impression that the new name to be added to the roster of the Twelve was his own. Nevertheless, when, following the name of Anthony W. Ivins, Elder Grant read "Joseph F. Smith, Jr.," Joseph Fielding was completely incredulous. "I was so startled and dumfounded," he wrote later, "I could hardly speak." And when Joseph was invited by Elder Grant to take his place with the Twelve, he rose from his seat at the side of Andrew Jenson and, with all eyes riveted upon him, walked self-consciously up the stairs and took his place at the side of Anthony W. Ivins, who would be his seat-mate for eleven years until Elder Ivins was called as the second counselor to President Heber J. Grant in 1921.

No mention was made of the new apostle during the remainder of the meeting, nor was he given the opportunity to respond to his call. His maiden address in the Tabernacle as a member of the Twelve would be delayed until the following October. But while Joseph Fielding was not mentioned directly during the remainder of the meeting, the sermon of Elder David O. McKay seems to have been directed toward the consequences that might be expected to follow from Joseph's call. Elder McKay took as his text the admonition of James about the evils of gossip and a loose tongue. "And the tongue is a fire," read he, "a world of iniquity; so is the tongue among our members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell." (James 3:6.) In commenting on this scripture, Elder McKay said, "My brethren and sisters, let us go from this conference determined to control our tongues. That isn't much, is it? And yet James says that he who can control that little member has control over his whole body." (Conference Report, April 1910, p. 110.)

Most members heeded Elder McKay's admonition and remained silent, even though privately the thought might have occurred that having seven Smiths among the twenty-six General Authorities was extreme. Yet any such thoughts would have been stifled by the faithful members because of their conviction that the Church was led by a Prophet. Such as these would have seen divine purpose in this anomaly. And any members who continued to harbor negative thoughts about the matter likely would have been placated to learn that within ten years, death would reduce the seven to three, and that two of these three would ultimately be elevated to the prophetic office.

It is ironic, though not surprising, that the loudest criticism of what took place came from nonmembers and apostates, those who had no vested interest in the outcome. And the most shrill and articulate of the critics were the Salt Lake Tribune and its acerbic editor. In an editorial entitled "The Church of the Smiths," Frank J. Cannon gave full sway to his fertile talent for vituperation and insult. "Joseph F. is losing no time unnecessarily in his well defined purpose and process of Smithi-sizing the Mormon Church," he began. After referring to Joseph Fielding's call and "the brilliant galaxy of Smiths that now adorn the controlling body," he wrote: "One may turn to the right or to the left, move to the front or back up, and one will bump into an official Smith. Gaze where one may in the hierarchy and the sight taken is a front or rear elevation of a Smith." From ridicule and mockery, the writer then turned to bitter accusation of fraud and thievery. "There isn't a single Mormon pie but there is a Smith finger in it," he continued. "The Saints pay allegiance to Smiths, they contribute money to Smiths, the Smiths spend that money and they are Smiths who tell tithe payers to mind their own business if asked what they do with the funds. It is a system of nepotism seldom witnessed in history—everywhere the omnipresent, robbing, non-accounting, lawbreaking Smiths, until the Mormon people actually begin to look and feel Smithy."

Joseph Fielding recognized this as the bitter railing of a man who had been disappointed in his expectation of personal preferment and gain. Once a United States senator from Utah and an agent for the Church in Washington, D.C., Frank J. Cannon, a son of President George Q. Cannon, became embittered after Church leaders withdrew their political support and denied him rich fees from a Church bond issue that he had expected would be handled by Eastern financiers with whom he was affiliated. He blamed President Joseph F. Smith for the loss of the bonding fees; as a counselor to President Lorenzo Snow, Joseph F. persuaded the Prophet to negotiate the bond issue through Western bankers. Senator Cannon also appears to have been angered by the decision to terminate the lease of the Deseret News to President George Q. Cannon and his sons. These incidents alienated Frank Cannon from the Church and its leaders. And following the death of his father in 1901, this alienation flowered into a consuming hatred that found expression in vicious Tribune editorials like the one that followed the call of Joseph Fielding Smith to the Twelve.

As an assistant Church historian, Joseph was well acquainted with these and other facts that helped explain Frank J. Cannon's motivation for attacking the Church leaders and especially the Smith family. Between the April conference in 1910 when he was called to the Twelve and the October conference that year when he delivered his first apostolic address in the Tabernacle, Joseph Fielding had ample opportunity to mull over the serious charges that had been made, charges he obviously felt should not go unanswered. So in his maiden address in the Tabernacle, he undertook to respond to Frank Cannon and the Tribune, although he did not mention them by name. "It seems to be the heritage of the ungodly, of the bigoted, and of those who love iniquity," said Joseph Fielding, "to sit in judgment and to place themselves as dictators, saying what shall be done and what shall be said by the authorities of the church. They accuse the brethren of all manner of iniquity, dissimulation, falsehood and try to cause a division between them and the people over whom they preside. They take unto themselves the prerogative of saying what shall and what shall not be the doctrines of the church, what shall and shall not be the government of the church, when it concerns them not at all." (Conference Report, October 1910, p. 39.)

Whatever else Frank J. Cannon and the Tribune learned from this speech, they surely learned that Joseph Fielding Smith was his own man, that he was articulate, and that he was bold and fearless. In it, he served notice that any attack upon him, his family, or the Church would not go unchallenged. Here was a young warrior, a defender of the faith, a combatant who had the temperament and the skills to act as a Church spokesman and advocate. Indeed, this speech of itself did much to confirm the inspiration of his call to the Twelve. And behind the speech was a man of substance and promise. Here was a man, reared in the home of a Prophet, schooled in Church doctrine and procedure through service abroad and at home, steeped in the knowledge of Church history, clean in thought and deed, and tested in the crucible of personal trial and tragedy. There can be no doubt that he was prepared and worthy for the call that came to him, and that the call was based upon his own merit and upon inspiration to the Prophet. The fact that the one who called him happened to be his father is irrelevant, especially in view of the long and distinguished apostolic service he later rendered, culminating in his succession to the prophetic office.

Joseph's call to the Twelve effected a major change in his life, heavily influencing his wife and the children. The manner in which he broke the news of his call to Ethel best demonstrates this. He told her, "I guess we'll have to sell the cow." When asked why, he explained, "I haven't time to take care of it anymore." The accuracy of this statement would soon be borne out as Joseph was indoctrinated into his new duties.

It took some time for Joseph to fully grasp the impact of his call to the Twelve. Days later, in lengthy diary entries, he attempted to articulate the feelings it evoked. "The reading of my own name as an apostle," he wrote, "came to me, as to the entire assembly, as a most sudden and to me unexpected shock, and left me in complete bewilderment from which I have not in days recovered. I feel extremely weak and pray to my heavenly Father for strength and guidance in my great responsibility that I shall not falter nor fail to perform all that is required of me." Then followed another of the personal, fervent prayers often found in Joseph Fielding's diaries, prayers that reveal the depth and sincerity of his character. "Oh my father," he pleaded, "help me, guide me in Thy truth and fit and qualify me, for I am weak, that I may indeed be Thy servant and have Thy Holy Spirit to guide me and direct my feet in the path of wisdom as one of the special witnesses of Thy Beloved Son, who died that I might live and be numbered among His chosen people through faithfulness to His Gospel and obedience to His laws. Give me strength and courage and buoy me up that that I may be worthy to bear Thy name and labor in Thy Kingdom and in the knowledge and testimony of the truth for I know the gospel is true and through obedience thereto is salvation through the name of Jesus Christ whose servant I am called to be."

Here we find a window into the heart and soul of a man destined to become God's mouthpiece on earth. Here we find no evidence of vanity or pride at having been elevated to such an exalted station. Here we see no posturing, no pretense or dissembling, and no boastfulness. We see only a sincere, humble man, convinced of the reality and power of God and desiring to receive the spiritual light and strength that would enable him to measure up to the requirements of his apostolic office.

Many people had sensed that Joseph Fielding Smith would one day be called to the Twelve, and some had expressed that feeling to him. He had always found it difficult to respond to such an expression. To brush it off abruptly would offend one whose mention of it showed a special love for him. But to acknowledge it, or to imply by word or action that Joseph expected it, might be misinterpreted as a presumption. So he usually responded in a neutral or jocular way as he had with Ben E. Rich and the doorkeeper at the Tabernacle. And, now that he had been called, confirming the predictions of these well-wishers, Joseph pondered over them and commented on some of them in his diary: "At the close of the afternoon session of conference and the adjournment of six months," he wrote, "I received the following note from Sister Susa Young Gates, who has always been a true friend to me and for years has hoped and prayed for me that I might some day be an apostle. 'My Beloved Joseph F. Jr. Let me ease the fulness of my joy by telling how grateful I am to God for this beautiful thing. Don't you see now that God is pleased with your earnest, modest labors—and most especially has He not thus indicated His own approval of the grand cause which you have so eloquently espoused? I have felt this coming for some time. I am so happy. Your Aunt Susa." After noting that he had received many other letters and telegrams of congratulation, he added: "Ben E. Rich, President of the Eastern States Mission, who has always been a friend to me, and one who years ago predicted that I should be called to this great responsibility, was one of the first to give me the hand of fellowship and his blessing, faith and constant prayers. May the Lord bless him." Joseph also reported in some detail on a conversation he had had with Francis M. Lyman, who was then president of the Twelve: "He said he had watched me for a number of years and while on the trip to Vermont, both going and coming and while there, he had watched me and felt at that time in his heart that I should some day be an apostle." Joseph added that similar predictions had been made by others, which, he wrote, "I received lightly and without thought of their fulfillment."

The day after he was sustained, Joseph went to his office early to handle some of the matters that had accumulated during the conference. Then shortly before ten, he walked to the temple, going directly to the fourth floor, where he entered "the upper room," where the Brethren meet regularly in their council meetings. Assembled there were the First Presidency and all the members of the Twelve except Elders Reed Smoot (who was in Washington, D.C., serving as a United States senator), George Albert Smith (who lay gravely ill in St. George), and Charles W. Penrose (who was in England serving as president of the European Mission). Also present was Patriarch John Smith, Joseph Fielding's uncle, who, fourteen years before, had given him the blessing whose promises were now beginning to unfold.

Joseph had seen the upper room many times during the nine previous years as he had attended President Anthon H. Lund's prayer circle that was held in an adjoining room on the fourth floor of the temple. But he had never seen it as he did on this day with the leading brethren who were in attendance, attired in their temple robes. As Joseph Fielding was welcomed into this select circle, a circle to which he would return regularly during the next sixty-two years, he was given the apostolic charge by his father. In accepting the charge, the new apostle committed himself to a lifetime of dedicated service as a special witness of the Lord Jesus Christ, agreed to subordinate all other responsibilities to those of the apostleship, promised to hold in confidence the sensitive matters discussed in the council meetings, and obligated himself to uphold and promote all the decisions of the council, even though during the discussions leading up to them he may have expressed a contrary view. As to this last matter, he was encouraged to express his views freely so that the council could enjoy the benefit of his experience and wisdom.

Following Joseph's acceptance of the charge and prayer at the altar, he was seated in a chair at the center of the room. All of the other brethren gathered around him in a circle, placed their hands on his head, and, with his father acting as voice, ordained him an apostle and set him apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. In that ordination, as with the other apostles, he was also given all the keys and authority necessary to serve as the president of the Church should that calling someday come to him.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
