Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Nine

Early Apostolic Service

Joseph Fielding's jocular statement to Ethel that he no Jlonger had time to milk the cow had more truth in it Jthan he had imagined. Until he was indoctrinated into Jhis apostolic duties, he had no conception of the demands on his time, energy, and emotional resources they would entail. When he was called to the Twelve, the Church had sixty-two stakes and twenty-one missions, with a total membership of less than four hundred thousand. Compared to today's church of more than seven million members in more than sixteen hundred stakes and two hundred missions, this would not appear to have been an overwhelming assignment. Yet in appraising the load borne by the General Authorities in that day, we must remember that four instead of two stake conferences were held each year and that the Brethren attended these conferences in pairs instead of singly. Moreover, the slow and often tedious means of travel added immeasurably to the burden. Automobiles were hardly more than a toy at the time, and trains reached only the communities that lay directly on the line of the railroad. So when a General

Authority received an assignment to visit a stake in a remote area, the time spent in teaching and training local leaders and members often represented only a small part of the time he was away from home. And when Joseph Fielding was at home, he had a full agenda of headquarters assignments. He continued to serve as an assistant Church historian, was the secretary and a member of the board of the Genealogical Society, and served on the General Board of Religion Classes. Moreover, his new role as a member of the Twelve made Joseph Fielding even more valuable to his father as he could now help with various sensitive and confidential matters. All this left little time for personal writing projects or his family.

Ethel, too, was now almost overburdened. Notwithstanding the joy with which Josephine and Julina had welcomed her into the family, there had been a period of readjustment during which Ethel became accustomed to being an instant mother and the girls adjusted to the different ways in which their new mother did things. Following closely on this period, Ethel became pregnant with her first child, Emily, who was born August 9, 1909. And at the time of her husband's call to the Twelve in April 1910, even though Emily was hardly toilet trained, Ethel was carrying her second child, Naomi, who would be born in November 1910. Added to her motherly duties, Ethel continued to serve in the auxiliary organizations of the Church and now assumed responsibility for many family matters that had previously been handled by her husband or shared with him.

In time, as other children joined the family, Ethel developed a marvelous skill in directing and nurturing her children and in managing the Smith household. She bore a total of nine children, raised Josephine and Julina, and, years later, took into the home and raised a young boy, the son of a man who had been killed while washing windows. When someone asked how it was possible for her to assume the responsibility for still another child when she had so many of her own, Ethel responded simply that "one more does not make any difference," thereby defining her relaxed and effective philosophy of child-rearing.

As Joseph Fielding prepared to attend stake conferences and conduct mission tours, he received special instruction from the president of his quorum. "President Francis M. Lyman instructed me in the duties of my calling," wrote Joseph Fielding, "and told me that I had been called by revelation from the Lord." President Lyman, who had been a member of the Twelve for thirty years, was a close friend of Joseph Fielding's father, having served under him as a missionary in England when Joseph F. presided over the European mission in the mid 1870s. President Lyman, whose father, Amasa, had also been a member of the Twelve, was serving as the president of the Tooele Stake when he was called to the Twelve in 1880. Therefore, he was well schooled in Church organization and procedure and eminently qualified to give pertinent instruction to the new member of the Twelve. During the remaining six years of President Lyman's life, Joseph Fielding had many opportunities to travel with him and to observe in practice the principles of leadership he had taught. And in the process, he also had many memorable experiences with him, some poignant and sad, others amusing and lighthearted. Of the latter, Joseph Fielding remembered two in particular. Once while the two were traveling to a conference assignment in a springless wagon, President Lyman asked the driver several times to avoid the ruts in the road, which severely jolted the passengers. Soon afterward, the wagon struck an especially large rut, giving the apostles a severe jolt and almost throwing them off the wagon to the ground. President Lyman looked accusingly at the driver who, not quite knowing how to respond, said half apologetically and half triumphantly, "Well, I hit it didn't I?" The other experience involved President Lyman's love for thick cream, which he used liberally on almost any food. On the occasion that gave rise to the story, Joseph Fielding had accompanied his quorum president to a stake where lived a family who, in the past, had furnished President Lyman with an abundance of thick cream. Remembering this, the president insisted that Joseph stay at the home of the stake president while he would go to the other home where he expected to again be given his favorite delicacy. He was bitterly disappointed. The next morning, he asked Joseph whether he had had cream for breakfast. When he said yes, President Lyman complained that he had had none and insisted that they trade places the next night! In the interest of priesthood subordination, Joseph complied.

The new apostle's first stake conference assignment was to accompany Elder George F. Richards to the Bear River Stake, whose headquarters were at Garland, Utah, a small farming community about eighty miles north of Salt Lake City. On Saturday morning, April 16, 1910, the two apostles traveled by train to their assignment, where they were met by the stake president, Milton H. Welling, who, prior to the creation of the Bear River Stake in 1908, had served as the president of the Malad, Idaho, stake. An educator by profession, President Welling, who was the same age as Elder Smith, became the patriarch of a large and distinguished family.

The visitors were driven directly from the train depot to the chapel in a horse-drawn carriage. There they commenced a procedure that Joseph Fielding would follow hundreds of times in the future. They first met with the stake presidency, high council, and bishoprics to receive reports and give instruction. It was in this meeting that the visitors were able to make a real impact on the administration of the Church in the area, for there were assembled all of the key priesthood leaders in the stake. Later in the day, quorum and group leaders also came for instruction. Saturday evening Joseph remained in Garland to counsel with local leaders and members, while Elder Richards traveled by carriage to nearby Fielding, a small community named after Elder Smith's maternal relatives, to visit a sister. The following day, the apostles joined to hold three major meetings: two general sessions, one in the morning and one in the afternoon, and a special meeting for auxiliaries held Sunday evening. Joining them was Lyman R. Martineau, a representative of the MIA general board.

Elder Smith delivered his main discourse Sunday morning when he and President Milton H. Welling were the only speakers. "He reported conditions in the stake," Joseph wrote, "and I spoke on the sacrament meetings and temple work including the genealogical society." It is a safe assumption that on this, Joseph's maiden apostolic speaking assignment at a stake conference, he relied heavily on the scriptures. This would have been consistent with his usual speaking style as it developed over the years and would have affirmed a statement attributed to him: "I never did learn to deliver a discourse without referring to the scriptures."

With variations, Elder Smith's first stake conference at Garland, Utah, was a prototype for the hundreds of stake conferences he would attend during the following six decades. Their value was incalculable. They provided a mechanism to train and direct local leaders, to receive input from those on the firing line, and to provide motivation and uplift to the members. They also served an important personnel purpose by bringing him into frequent contact with leaders throughout the Church in a setting where their character and personal life, their skills, and their potential for future service could be appraised.

During the remainder of 1910, Elder Smith attended twenty-four of these stake conferences in various parts of Utah, Idaho, Colorado, Wyoming, and Oregon. This represented almost 40 percent of all the stakes in the Church at the time. Thus, within a very short while after his call, he had become personally acquainted with all of the principal leaders of the Church serving in organized stakes. This provided him with an important insight into the mechanics of the Church, the spiritual and intellectual qualities of its members, the physical conditions under which they lived, and their social and cultural development. It also gave him an intimate knowledge of the physical environment in which Mormon communities were located, given the means of transportation he sometimes had to employ. Typical of some of the assignments he received during the first year of his service in the Twelve was the one to Castle Dale, Utah, in August 1910. His companion was Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Twelve. The pair left Salt Lake City by train Friday morning, August 5, and arrived at Price in mid-afternoon. They were met at the depot by their teamster, a Brother Leonard, who drove them in a buggy to the town of Huntington, where that evening they held a meeting with the Saints living there and nearby. Early Saturday morning, they were driven by team to Castle Dale, where, during the remainder of the day and Sunday morning, several meetings were held. On Sunday afternoon, Brother Leonard drove them to Cleveland, where an evening meeting was held. And at 4:00 Monday morning, they left by team for Price, where they arrived in time to catch the 8:00 train to Salt Lake City. The leisurely means of travel between these towns provided an insight and perspective into the area one could never gain driving at high speed over surfaced highways.

The continual round of these trips, some taking as long as ten days, left little time at home. And when Joseph Fielding was at home, his agenda of official and personal responsibilities was overcrowded. His historical and genealogical responsibilities were never ending. And those responsibilities multiplied the number of people who came to him for counsel or instruction. So, on Monday, August 15, 1910, Joseph spent most of the day with John R. Haldeman of Independence, Missouri. Mr. Haldeman was president of the Hedrikite Church, also called the Church of Christ, and he had come with his wife to obtain information about the early history of the Church. The following day, Elder Smith had a clerk in the Historical Department help Mr. Haldeman in getting excerpts from The Evening and Morning Star for his use and information.

The meetings of Joseph's quorum, and of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, while serving as a forum of instruction and inspiration, required a substantial investment in time and sometimes imposed heavy and unwanted burdens of trauma and responsibility. Within months after his call to the Twelve, for instance, Elder Smith participated in two cases that resulted in the excommunication of prominent Church members for their involvement in plural marriage. The first was the scion of a family prominent in Church history whom the Twelve excommunicated on September 28, 1910, for "illegally entering into a plural marriage contrary to the rule of the church." Three days later, Joseph spent another full day with the Twelve considering the second case, which involved a patriarch who lived in northern Utah who was excommunicated on October 3 "for violating the rule and regulation of the church in that he performed plural marriages since the Manifesto." That it had been twenty years since the Manifesto was issued and six years since President Joseph F. Smith had published the World-wide Manifesto suggests the great inertia of a small minority of the Latter-day Saints in accepting and following the admonitions of the Church leaders.

This internal inertia was more than matched by the external pressures that were being exerted on the Church at this time. Mention has already been made of the incessant attacks upon the Church by the Salt Lake Tribune. This was accompanied by subtle and sometimes not-so-subtle attacks by the local protestant clergy, which for decades had carried on a campaign of criticism and verbal abuse. All this had stirred up such bitter antagonisms and resentments that less-stable members of the community were occasionally led to make actual physical assaults against the Church. Joseph Fielding recorded one such incident the day after returning from his first stake conference assignment. "This morning we returned home," he wrote on Monday April 18, 1910, "and I spent the afternoon at the Historians Office and learned that early this morning an attempt was made by dynamiters to blow up the steel work of the Utah Hotel; great damage was done and the windows in the neighborhood were broken. This is the second attempt of this kind."

Meanwhile, there were occasional agitations both on earth and in the heavens that drew Elder Smith's special attention. "This morning about 7:30," he wrote on May 22, 1910, "a severe earthquake shock was felt throughout Salt Lake City. My house was shaken violently, but no damage was done." And nine days earlier, while in Durango, Colorado for a stake conference, Elder Smith noted that he "had a good view of Halley's comet which extended over one-third of the heavens." Joseph Fielding was specially interested in physical phenomena of this kind as it related to signs in the heavens or movements of the earth that would precede the Millennial reign.

As Elder Smith settled into his new responsibilities, grasping for the first time the full scope of them, he did not neglect what he knew was the responsibility of greatest personal importance. This, of course, was his family. Like his father, Joseph loved his family above all else on earth. Although he was now severely limited in the time he could spend with them, he made that time count. He and Ethel were careful to note each birthday and other special event affecting the children and to celebrate them with appropriate gifts. Sunday, September 18, 1910, marked a signal day in the life of Elder Smith and his family. "This morning at 9:15," he wrote on that day, which was Josephine's eighth birthday, "I baptized Josephine in the Salt Lake Tabernacle font and confirmed her. My mother and my wife and babies were present, also Joseph S. Peery." The "babies" to whom he referred were four-year-old Julina and thirteen-month-old Emily. What the proud father did not mention was that Ethel was then carrying her second child, who would be born within two months.

Because Ethel worked hard in managing the household and caring for the three little girls, while carrying still another one, Joseph was solicitous to give her a respite whenever possible by attending social functions with her. The kind they preferred above all others was to mingle with the leaders of the Church and their wives, or with other members of their families. An event that gave them special pleasure was a dinner party at the residence of the Prophet following the October general conference in 1910. "In the evening," wrote Joseph under date of October 10, "The First Presidency, the Apostles, the Patriarch and Presiding Bishopric and their wives met at the Beehive House where they spent a very enjoyable evening and partook of an excellent supper. Remarks were made by each of the brethren and the Spirit of the Lord was with them." In November, Joseph and Ethel returned to the Beehive House for another party when, during the afternoon and evening of Monday the 14th, the entire Smith family gathered to celebrate President Joseph F. Smith's seventy-second birthday. Two days later, Ethel gave birth to her second child, another daughter, who was named Naomi. The birth had complications, and for a while the parents feared she would not survive. Joseph noted gratefully that the little one "was saved through the power and prayer and administration after it appeared that breath could not enter her body." In gratitude, Joseph and Ethel chose Thanksgiving Day, Thursday, November 24, as the day for her blessing. "This afternoon," Joseph noted on that day, "at my request, my father blessed our baby. We gave her the name of Naomi."

Elder Smith's last conference assignment for the year 1910 was to the Sevier Stake on the weekend of December 16. His companion was President Francis M. Lyman. The pair traveled to Richfield, Utah, the headquarters of the stake, on Friday the 16th, where they were met by the stake presidency. They were then taken to the home of a counselor, James M. Peterson, where they stayed over the weekend. After freshening up following their long train ride, the pair went immediately to a meeting with the stake presidency and high council where they heard reports and gave instruction until a late hour. On Saturday, lengthy report meetings were held, both in the morning and the afternoon. In the evening, the Primary presented an entertainment at Richfield's Opera House. On Sunday, general preaching sessions were held in the morning and the afternoon; the attendance, respectively, was 825 and 788. A special MIA session was held in the evening. And in between the sessions Sunday, the visiting apostles ordained seventies and high priests and set apart members of a bishopric. Exhausted from a full weekend of wall-to-wall meetings, the pair spent most of Monday traveling back to Salt Lake City. On his arrival home, Joseph found his family in turmoil with little Emily sick and Ethel weary from nursing her new baby around the clock while taking care of the home, supervising the older children, and doctoring Emily.

By now, Joseph understood that being a member of the Twelve involved much more than the public perception of that office. It meant much more than having a reserved place at general conference on those upholstered red seats in the Tabernacle, more than giving sermons and traveling to new places, and certainly more than receiving the admiration and respect of Church members everywhere. What it meant was a total subordination of himself and his family to the demands of his calling. It meant constant and often uncomfortable travel in every kind of weather. It meant irregular meals and diet, different beds at night, and sometimes the uncomfortable feeling of imposing on generous Saints who wanted to give the visiting apostle the best of what they had, regardless of the deprivation it might cause them. It also meant imposing on the family heavy burdens of responsibility that ordinarily would have been borne by a husband and father who was not constantly on the road. These burdens could have been mitigated had Joseph Fielding possessed independent means, or had his living allowance been sufficiently large to enable him to provide household help for his family. But neither of these conditions existed. As a result, Ethel was forced to struggle alone in her husband's absence to care for the household and their young family with only such help as relatives and neighbors might voluntarily provide.

As traumatic as these things might have been, there were other aspects of his calling that likely influenced Joseph Fielding's peace of mind. There was the constant pressure of preparing for the seemingly endless train of meetings and interviews. And aside from the strictly intellectual demands these imposed, there was also a spiritual dimension that was sometimes unsettling. This was a subtle, satanic influence he saw at work in various aspects of his ministry, an influence he persistently sought to combat by his teaching and example. He was fearless in speaking out against any words or conduct that were contrary to the doctrines and the policies of the Church.

As Christmas approached in 1910, Elder Smith enjoyed the first let-up in his hectic schedule since his call eight months before. He took advantage of it to relieve Ethel of some of the household chores that had become more burdensome with the arrival of Naomi. He revived his cooking skills, which had largely fallen into disuse since his missionary days, preparing meals for the family. He also helped with the housecleaning and child tending, providing Ethel with the chance to get away from the house to visit her family and friends. And he helped comfort and nurse the children when they were sick. "My baby Emily is not well," he wrote on Tuesday December 20, 1910. So he stayed home all morning to tend her and to help bathe and diaper baby Naomi. Three days later, Joseph Fielding took Josephine and Julina Christmas shopping; and that evening, he and Ethel attended a party at the Social Hall—a reunion of those who had gone to Vermont five years earlier for the dedication of the Joseph Smith monument. Although it was a special evening, the infirm condition of the family robbed it of much of the joy it would otherwise have brought. "I am suffering from a cold," Joseph wrote on December 23. "Ethel is also, and all the children have been ailing with colds." Emily seems to have been worse than the others; and the poor little girl had hardly recovered from this ailment when she was stricken with another. "Emily now has the measles and is quite sick," her father wrote on February 11. "I have held her most of the day," he wrote the following day. And on Monday, February 13, he noted, "I was home nearly all day nursing my baby Emily who seems to have a hard case of measles. She did not break out well at first and has suffered considerably."

Meanwhile, following the none-too-peaceful respite during the Christmas holidays, Joseph Fielding returned to the routine of attending stake conferences. Several assignments in January, February, and March took him into northern Utah and southern Idaho, where heavy snowstorms made it necessary to travel by horse-drawn sleigh. So in mid-February, Elder Smith, accompanied by Elder Joseph W. McMurrin of the First Council of Seventy, traveled to the Bannock Stake. "We were met at Oxford, Idaho, by a young man named Bevins," he wrote on Friday, February 17, 1911, "who drove us in a sleigh to Thatcher where we arrived in the evening, a distance from Oxford of 25 miles." Sunday afternoon, after holding meetings in Thatcher, the visitors were driven by sleigh to Grace, Idaho, where another meeting was held in the evening. The following morning, their hosts drove them by sleigh to a rural station at Alexander, where they flagged a train that took them home via McCammon, Idaho.

Two weeks later, Joseph returned to Idaho for a conference at Preston. He took his brother Wesley with him. At Logan, Utah, the Smith brothers were joined by Elder Charles H. Hart of the First Council of Seventy; he also accompanied them to Preston for the usual round of stake conference meetings. The following weekend found Joseph at the Bear Lake stake in southeastern Idaho, where again most of the travel was by sleigh. On this occasion, his brother David A. Smith of the presiding bishopric was his traveling companion. Elder Smith's experiences during this his first winter as a General Authority may have convinced him there was a germ of truth in the rumor that junior members of the Twelve were always assigned to the cold places in the winter and the hot places in the summer.

Occasionally when they were well enough to go and when the distances made it feasible to do so, Elder Smith took Ethel and the children with him on stake conference assignments. Such an incident occurred on March 26, 1911, when the entire family went by train to nearby Ogden, Utah, where Joseph presided at the conference of the North Weber stake. "We had a very pleasant and instructive conference," he wrote. An apparent reason why the family accompanied him on this occasion was to enable the Shurtliffs to see their granddaughters, Josephine and Julina, who were fast growing into young womanhood, and to visit with Joseph and Ethel and their other children. The Shurtliff family continued to show a keen interest in Joseph Fielding's career.

On Tuesday, April 4, 1911, Elder Smith received still another assignment when he was sustained as the secretary to the Council of the Twelve "in the stead of Hyrum M. Smith, who was honorably released from that position." As its secretary, Joseph kept the minutes of the meetings of the Twelve and followed up as to matters decided by the quorum. Because he occasionally served his father in a similar capacity, Joseph Fielding thereby became even more intimately acquainted with the inner workings of the Church, which not only enabled him to perform his apostolic duties more effectively but also served as a valuable preparation for the later roles he would play, either as the president of the Twelve, or as the head of the Church.

The eighty-first annual general conference of the Church convened on Thursday, April 6, and continued through the following Sunday, with a break on Saturday. The general priesthood meeting was held on Friday evening. During the Sunday morning general session, Joseph Fielding presided over an "overflow" meeting held in the Assembly Hall. He was the concluding speaker, having been preceded by two stake presidents, John F. Tolton of the Beaver Stake and Alonzo A. Hinckley of the Millard Stake, and two mission presidents, John I. Herrick of the Western States Mission and Charles A. Callis of the Southern States Mission. In his remarks, Elder Smith admonished those present to keep the commandments. Specifically, he focused on the need to observe the law of tithing, to obey the Word of Wisdom, to pray always, and to keep the Sabbath Day holy. As to the latter, he deplored the proliferation of Sunday amusements and chastised elected officials for their failure to adopt appropriate restrictive ordinances. He alluded to an "aviation meet" then in progress near the Great Salt Lake where "men with machines of marvelous construction [were] flying in the air." He expressed the hope that no Latter-day Saint would be found there on Sunday and noted that two of the principals involved in the meet, Orville and Wilbur Wright, "will not take part nor permit those who represent them to take part in any such exercise on the Sabbath day, thus setting an example to others." (Conference Report, April 1911, p. 87.) Perhaps to support the Wright brothers and to satisfy their curiosity about these newfangled machines, Joseph Fielding and others had gone to the lake the previous day to see the air show. "Saturday afternoon with the presidency and a number of brethren and sisters," he wrote on April 8, 1911. "I went out to the lake and saw four biplanes, or flying machines, manipulated by Eugene B. Ely, Charles Willard, Philip Phormlee and Walter Brookin, perform remarkable feats in the air. Two of the machines were of the Curtiss type and two were Wright machines." With this experience, Joseph Fielding Smith's interest in aviation was irrevocably kindled, an interest that, more than fifty years later, would culminate in his becoming an honorary brigadier general in the Utah National Guard. Joseph loved flying, and from the time of the first tentative flights of the Wright Brothers and other pioneers until his death during the jet age, he was an enthusiastic supporter of aviation and air travel.

But the comfort, convenience, and speed of air travel lay in the distant future as Joseph Fielding began the second year of his apostolic service. A three-and-a-half week trip he took into remote areas of Colorado, New Mexico, and Arizona, during May and June underscored the crude nature of transportation facilities that existed then compared to the sophisticated aircraft that would exist fifty years later. The trip commenced on May 17, 1911, when Joseph Fielding and his companion, George F. Richards, left Salt Lake City. The first part of the trip was comparatively peaceful and easy as they traveled by train through Denver and the San Luis Valley in Colorado and Santa Fe, New Mexico, to the little town of Bluewater, New Mexico. There they were provided with a wagon and horses to begin a two-week trip through desolate parts of New Mexico and Arizona to hold meetings with the Saints who lived there in isolated communities. The first day, the party traveled twelve miles to a campsite in the mountains. "Here we had the misfortune to lose one of our horses," Joseph wrote, "which I had ridden most of the way." Since a brother Tietjen took the horse Elder Richards was riding to try to find the lost horse, the apostles transferred to the springless wagon for the trip on to Ramah, New Mexico. They had traveled but a few miles when they "lost a wheel and were consequently delayed and under the necessity of obtaining another wagon." Joseph explained that this was a farm wagon, "which was too heavy for our harness, and the horses were small." Later, as they went down the west side of the Continental Divide, Joseph explained that "the road was very rough and rocky; at places there was no road at all, the bed of the canyon stream—now dry—being used, and barely wide enough for our wagon, managed to break our tugs, which caused another delay, while we wired them up." Arriving at Ramah in the late afternoon, the apostles "had a chance to clean up a little" before holding a meeting that lasted until ten o'clock. Among those present were David K. Udall, the president of the St. Johns Stake, and his second counselor, William D. Rencher, who had come to meet the visitors and to accompany them to St. Johns.

The travelers left Ramah early the next morning. "We had a good team and spring wagon with which to complete the journey," wrote Joseph. These had been provided by President Udall. But he failed to provide suitable weather for the two-day trip. "All day Thursday the wind blew fiercely in our faces," Elder Smith noted. And with the wind came clouds of dust that blinded and choked the travelers and saturated their clothing and bedding. "We have had a difficult time trying to get the dust out of our clothes," Joseph wrote on Saturday May 27, the morning after their arrival in St. Johns.

The affairs of the stake were no less chaotic. "There were not many present," Joseph wrote of the Saturday morning meeting. "Many stake and ward authorities were absent and those who came were not on time." Among the absentees were seven members of the high council who were in town but who failed to attend. The attendance at the afternoon session was also sparse. And afterward a controversy surfaced in which several members had petitioned for the removal of the local magistrate from his Church position. These circumstances prompted Elder Richards to mildly reprove the brethren at an evening meeting "for their indifference and apparent lethargy so apparent during the conference."

Wanting to get at the root of the problem, the two apostles met with the stake presidency and high council the following morning where it was learned that several of them did not observe the Word of Wisdom and that animosities had developed over a dispute involving the construction of a reservoir and canal. "We labored with them until meeting time," wrote Elder Smith, "and again after meeting until nearly two o'clock and again in the afternoon at the close of meeting until 7:00 p.m. before matters were adjusted." Because of their efforts to resolve these difficulties, the apostles were ten minutes late for the evening meeting, which was to have been devoted to the MIA. It suddenly ended shortly after they arrived. "The MIA meeting in the evening was adjourned after a very brief session," explained Elder Smith, "because the gas light failed us."

In the experience of Elder Smith and his companion at St. Johns, one sees how the leaders of the Church were able to maintain a spirit of unity and cohesion among the Latter-day Saints in remote rural communities extending from Canada to Old Mexico. Since they recognized and were submissive to the ecclesiastical authority the General Authorities possessed, the local leaders were amenable to the instruction and counsel the visitors gave. In this manner, through frequent, periodic visits, the Salt Lake brethren were able to monitor local conditions, to detect and resolve problems as they arose, to instruct the Saints in the doctrines and policies of the Church, and to motivate them to attain the objectives defined by the leaders.

After leaving St. Johns, the two apostles visited a string of other small communities that contained clusters of durable Latter-day Saints who lived tenaciously on the outer fringes of the Church: Eager, Lund, Nutrioso, Alpine, Luna, Snowflake, Taylor, Woodruff, and St. Joseph. Transportation between these towns was by horse-drawn wagons or buggies. Usually, the hosts of the next town would meet halfway to pick up the visitors and then, after meetings were held, take them halfway toward their next destination. At each stop, the travelers counseled with local leaders, laid at rest any difficulties, and preached to the members.

St. Joseph, the last stop on their itinerary, was on the main line of the Santa Fe railroad. There the two apostles caught a train to Williams, Arizona, a distance of about a hundred miles. Their purpose was to enable Elder Smith to see the Grand Canyon for the first time. Traveling several miles through a sparse pine forest, they suddenly came in view of this wonder of the world. The only words Joseph could find to explain this phenomenon and the impression it made on him were "a remarkable and awful chasm." Returning to Williams, the apostles took the Santa Fe train west to Los Angeles, where they made connection for the trip to Salt Lake City. As they had several hours before their train left Los Angeles, the travelers "went out to Long Beach and had a bath in the ocean."

One might have thought that after an arduous three-and-a-half week trip away from home, sleeping in a different bed almost every night, traveling much of the time on horseback or in horse-drawn conveyances, and under the pressure of numerous, sometimes stressful meetings, that Joseph would have taken off a day or two to recuperate and recharge his batteries. But what do we find? "Arrived home Friday morning at 6:30, June 9th," he wrote, "and was home all forenoon. In the afternoon I was at the Historian's office, also the president's office." The next day, Saturday, he spent all morning in the Historian's Office. In the afternoon, he went to the farm with David, George, and Wesley "and worked weeding beets." Finally, on Sunday, he got a day of rest—of sorts. "I tended the babies," he wrote, "while Ethel went to meeting." This would have included four-year-old Emily and seven-month-old Naomi.

While this kind of a schedule may seem hectic, if not exhausting, to others, Joseph seems to have taken it in stride and, indeed, to have thrived on it. At the time he was only thirty-five years old and in the prime of health. Therefore, travel of this kind would not have been a burden. On the contrary, it would have been interesting if not exciting to him as he saw new places and met new friends. This reaction is suggested by an entry he made in his diary on May 25 during the two-day trip from Ramah to St. Johns. "On our way," he wrote, "we spent a short time at the Zuni Pueblo Village, which was quite a sight." This was the first time Joseph had visited an Indian village, and the experience was fascinating to him, as this brief entry clearly implies.

On the other hand, the circumstances that provided Joseph Fielding with the opportunity to see and learn new things, to grow in his knowledge of people and events, and to increase in spiritual stature were the very circumstances that imposed heavier burdens of household and family responsibility upon Ethel. She was thereby deprived of needed assistance she would otherwise have had around the home. And it prevented her from devoting any appreciable time toward self-development or caring for her own needs. Such conditions provide greater understanding of diary entries such as this one made by Elder Smith on September 2, 1911, during his visit to Lovell, Wyoming, for a stake conference. "I received a letter from Ethel of a rather gloomy nature," he wrote, "but informing me that the children were all well."

Both Joseph and Ethel were fully aware of the strains on the family, and especially upon Ethel. And they were aware also of any subtle, perhaps unexpressed, anxieties Josephine and Julina may have had, knowing that their natural mother was dead. So, the parents made special efforts to bridge over these difficulties and concerns, thereby increasing the love and unity in the family.

On Friday, June 16, 1911, Joseph noted, "Today being Louie's birthday anniversary . . . with Ethel and the children, I went to the cemetery with flowers." A month later, on July 14, the whole family went to Liberty Park for an outing. And the next Sunday, Joseph attended sacrament meeting with the family at the 20th ward. "The babies, Emily and Naomi," he explained, "would not permit me to remain inside, they disturbed the meeting, so I remained on the outside most of the time and let Ethel attend the meeting as she gets fewer chances than I do."

It addition to allowing Ethel to enjoy sacrament meeting whenever possible, unencumbered with tending the children, Joseph accompanied her to the occasional social functions held by the family, the ward, or his quorum and occasionally attended the theater. The plays seen there were usually staged by traveling dramatic companies that would come to town with their own cast and scenery, remaining for a few days or weeks depending on the popularity of the show. So on September 29, 1911, Joseph and Ethel went to the theater to see Henry Miller in The Havoc. A few months later, they attended a comedy entitled Get Rich Quick Wallingford. And on Ethel's twenty-third birthday, October 23, 1912, the Smiths celebrated by attending a play at the new Colonial Theatre—"The first time I was ever there," Joseph reported in his diary.

By now, it was even more difficult for the couple to get away for an evening of entertainment, since their family had grown to five girls with the birth of Lois on March 26, 1912. Ethel experienced some difficulty in giving birth to this her third child, who was several weeks premature. Relieved that both mother and child were healthy and strong, Joseph poured out his gratitude in this diary entry: "The Lord bless her and her mother and preserve them both from harm. May our little one and all our children grow to be good, honorable, Latter-day Saints, to labor in the service of their Heavenly Father, be protected from all harm, and be an honor to the name they bear. May I and their mother be blessed to teach them the truth that they may walk in the ways of the Lord and never depart from the truth which has been revealed. The Lord has been merciful to me—may I be worthy of all his blessings."

Only a few months before the birth of this newest member of the Smith family, another member of it died, full of years and crowned with accomplishment. On November 6, 1911, Church Patriarch John Smith passed away. "Uncle John was born in Kirtland, Ohio, September 22, 1832," Joseph Fielding noted in his diary on that date, "and was ordained to the office and priesthood of Patriarch by President Brigham Young, February 18, 1855. His first blessing was given August 17, 1856, to Samuel Knight, son of Newel and Lydia Knight, and his last patriarchal blessing was given October 30, 1911, to Alma Joseph William Gardner, who was born July 19, 1862, in Yorkshire, England. He commenced recording his blessings in book 'A' and went through the alphabet and was recording in book 'BB', in which there were 47 blessings at the time of his death. In all he gave 20,659 blessings."

Included among this vast number of blessings, of course, was the one given to Joseph Fielding in 1896, fifteen years earlier. Already the promises made there were beginning to unfold since from the time of his ordination to the apostleship he had been fulfilling his "duty to sit in counsel" with his brethren. The fulfillment of the promise that he would "live to a good old age" still lay far in the future, as did the one that he would "preside among the people." And one as obedient and faithful as was Joseph Fielding Smith would not have failed to take to heart the significant reminder in that blessing that God "will reward according to merit" and the admonition that he should "strive to inform thy mind and be prepared for events to come." As the grandson of the patriarch and martyr, Hyrum Smith, and the great-grandson of Joseph Smith Sr., the first Patriarch to the Church, there can be little doubt that Joseph Fielding was profoundly influenced by this blessing and would have been anxious to do everything necessary to obtain the promises it contained.

In time, indeed, within three years after his call to the Twelve, Joseph Fielding felt the need for more patriarchal guidance than was contained in the blessing given him by his Uncle John. Perhaps he had become more acutely aware of the vast scope and demands of apostolic service and the reality that the crowded schedule of travel, conferences, and consultations would dominate the rest of his life. Also there are hints that another circumstance weighed heavily in his quest—the blatant charges of nepotism that had surrounded his call to the Twelve. For one as sensitive, serious, and sincere as Joseph Fielding Smith, such charges would have wounded deeply. And while the loud furor over his call had subsided, lingering remnants of the feelings it had produced were manifested in snide remarks made by some, or in patronizing words or attitudes that implied that Joseph occupied his office only through the influence of his powerful father. Such attitudes would have been intensified after Joseph's call when his father began to use him in a consulting capacity in preference to others with greater seniority and experience than he. It is easy to understand, therefore, why this sensitive, able young man would have wanted to receive some spiritual clarification about his status and the role he was destined to play in the Church.

For whatever reason he sought it, Joseph's desire for a second patriarchal blessing was fulfilled at the little town of Scipio, Utah, on May 11, 1913. He and his companion, Joseph W. McMurrin, had traveled there two days before in connection with a conference of the Millard Stake. Joining them in Scipio was stake president Alonzo A. Hinckley, who, twenty-one years later, would join Elder Smith as a member of the Twelve. Also present for the conference was the stake patriarch, Joseph D. Smith, a native of England, who apparently was not related to the Asael Smith family. The only reference Joseph Fielding made to the incident that would have such a profound influence upon him was this short sentence: "While in Scipio, I received a blessing from Patriarch Joseph D. Smith."

The opening sentence of the blessing confirmed the reasons why it was sought and given. "I seal upon you a patriarchal blessing," it reads, "as it is the desire of your heart to know what the Lord requires of you." After declaring Elder Smith's lineage and referring to his convictions about the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the patriarch made a statement that was to have a lasting effect upon Joseph Fielding. Said he, "You have been blessed with the ability to comprehend, to analyze, and defend the principles of truth above many of your fellows, and the time will come when the accumulative evidence that you have gathered will stand as a wall of defense against those who are seeking and will seek to destroy the evidence of the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith: and in this defense you will never be confounded, and the light of the Spirit will shed its rays upon your heart as gently as the dews that fall from heaven, and it will unfold to your understanding many truths concerning this work that have not yet been revealed." (Copy of blessing in Church Archives). That Elder Smith attached special significance to this statement is evident from the fact that he copied it verbatim in the back of his journal for the year 1937. Nor is it coincidental that during this year he was compiling the material for his book The Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, which was published the next year.

Other key provisions of this second patriarchal blessing provided Elder Smith with important insights: "You were called and ordained before you came in the flesh as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ," said the patriarch, "to represent his work in the earth." And as to the ultimate role he would play during mortality, the blessing was no less explicit: "You will indeed stand in the midst of this people a prophet and a revelator to them for the Lord has blessed you and ordained you to this calling, and it will come upon you as naturally as the night shall follow the day." And on a purely personal level, the blessing contained these words of comfort and solace: "Your family will grow up and bless your name, and your influence with your sons and daughters, in connection with your wife, will hold your children in the gospel path and not one shall be lost."

1992 Deseret Book Co.
