Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Ten

Gaining Apostolic Stature

The receipt of his second patriarchal blessing seems to have marked the end of Joseph Fielding Smith's introduction to the work of the Twelve and to have opened the door to the remaining fifty-seven years of apostolic service that lay ahead. During the first three years, he had visited most of the stakes in the Church, thereby becoming acquainted with its principal leaders personally. In turn, the general Church membership had been exposed to this the youngest apostle and had been able to gauge the depth of his knowledge and his spirituality. They had found in him an earnest, sincere young man, well informed about Church history and doctrine, precise and analytical, who chose his words with care and who was deliberate and unemotional in his delivery. And those who had mingled with him personally had found him friendly and approachable, interested in the welfare of others—even sometimes jovial, though never loud or intrusive. At the same time, they detected in him a certain reserve tinged with self-confidence, although it lacked any arrogance or self-importance. Rather, his demeanor conveyed an inherent nobility of character as one who was precisely where God had always intended him to be.

After the incident in Scipio, Joseph Fielding seems to have pursued his calling with increased enthusiasm and diligence, although on the face of it the routine appears unchanged. The two succeeding weekends found him in Idaho, first at Blackfoot and then at Malad, farming communities where he found the winter wheat and spring plantings growing profusely. Although he was born and reared in the city, Joseph felt a special affinity for farmers because of the work he had performed on his father's farm over the years and because his ancestors for generations back had tilled the land. There was a faith and toughness about these people that commanded admiration. They planted in full confidence that the seeds would sprout and grow. And the intermittent ravages of flood, drought, and insect invasion, or the perverse fluctuations of the market, did not deter or dishearten them in their persistent plantings.

The week following the Malad conference provided Joseph with an interesting variation in his customary routine. On Thursday, May 29, 1913, he and Ethel traveled to Provo, Utah, to attend the graduation exercises at Brigham Young University. It was the first time he had attended such a convocation since Louie graduated from the University of Utah several years before. On this occasion, however, he was more than a mere spectator. A few months before, he had been appointed as a member of the Board of Trustees of BYU. So he and the other board members had an official function to perform. And following the exercises, he participated in a board meeting where a variety of matters affecting the university were handled. This was the beginning of a fruitful relationship between Joseph Fielding Smith and Brigham Young University that would extend for many decades. By 1939, he had been elected chairman of the executive committee of the board, a position he would hold until 1970 when, as president of the Church, he became chairman of the board. In these positions, Joseph exerted a dominant influence on the philosophy, policies, and procedures governing this distinctive institution. His views carried great weight in matters of finance, administration, faculty, athletics, student affairs, and the religious curriculum. It was his influence that swung the pendulum in favor of a new science building when others on the board felt it was too expensive. It was Joseph Fielding Smith who broke ground for the new fieldhouse on campus; and it was he who dedicated the beautiful building of fine arts. And whenever his busy schedule permitted it, he could be found at athletic events, enthusiastically cheering on the BYU teams, or at cultural or social programs on campus. He became one of the university's most vocal, enthusiastic, and influential supporters, never missing an opportunity to plug, publicize, or promote it. His aspirations for BYU were outlined in a letter to university president Ernest L. Wilkinson: "Brigham Young University [will] grow and become very great," he wrote on December 4, 1951, "with an expansion that will cover all fields that are of value to the members of the church, including, of course, the teaching of faith in God, and in the mission of our Redeemer, also that of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I can see where this school can become a great power for good, not only to members of the church but to all good people throughout the world." (Wilkinson Presidential Papers, BYU.)

Joseph's unabashed boosterism for BYU may be traced in part to the fact that he never had the opportunity to attend a university, let alone graduate from one. In a sense, therefore, his avid support of the school may have represented, in part, a vicarious attempt to compensate for his youthful deprivation of the chance for higher education. And later, at age seventy-five, any suppressed desire he had for a diploma, the symbol of academic achievement, was satisfied when in 1951, Brigham Young University awarded him an honorary Doctor of Letters for "Spiritual Scholarship."

This academic honor lay almost forty years in the future when Joseph Fielding attended his first BYU convocation as a member of the school's board of trustees. The day was special, not only because of the events pertaining to the university but also because Ethel was with him. It was a rare occasion when she was able to accompany him on a trip out of town. So the young couple savored the day as they enjoyed the hospitality of the president of the university, who hosted the board members and their wives at the special functions connected with the graduation.

This delightful interlude ended two days later when Joseph hit the road again on the stake conference circuit. He first went north to Garland and then south to St. George, the scene of his first "church assignment." It had been thirty-six years since his last visit, when, as an infant, he had accompanied his parents there for the dedication of the temple. With no recollection of that first visit, Joseph really saw this charming community for the first time, the heart of Utah's "Dixie," set in the midst of rainbow-hued hills. Even then, St. George had become a favorite hideaway for many from up north who sought refuge from the snow, ice, and biting winds of winter. But now in mid-June, it was unpleasantly hot for Elder Smith and his companion, Joseph M. McMurrin, who, following a successful though poorly attended conference, left for home. "Bro. McMurrin and I returned," reported Joseph, "leaving at 4 a.m. Monday morning and arriving home Tuesday morning June 17th after a very dirty ride." The following weekend found Elder Smith in Ogden with Elder George F. Richards. There the two apostles organized the Ogden 11th Ward, which was carved out of the old Ogden 1st Ward. They installed Nathan A. Tanner as the ward's first bishop.

Joseph's last stake conference assignment before the summer break was to the Salt Lake Stake. "In the morning," he wrote on Sunday July 6, "I attended the opening session of the Salt Lake stake conference and the balance of the day I spent with my father." These private sessions with the Prophet became ever more frequent as Joseph Fielding matured and became better acquainted with the inner workings of the Church. His principal function in the role of a confidant to his father appears to have been to serve as a sounding board for the Prophet's plans and ideas. The father had full confidence in the son, and knew he would not divulge to others the things they discussed. That this confidence was not misplaced is seen in the fact that Joseph Fielding Smith's diaries and journals do not appear to contain a single reference to sensitive matters he had discussed with his father.

During the last part of July, Joseph enjoyed a respite from his demanding labors. He took advantage of the opportunity to strengthen his family ties, spending as much time as possible with Ethel and the children and enjoying some diversions. Not all of their outings were recreational, however, as on July 17 Joseph took his family to Holladay to pick fruit. The day following this outing, he accompanied his mother to Ocean Park, California, to help his sister Donnette and her children move back to Salt Lake City. They had spent some time in a beach cottage there for the health of one of Donnette's children who was "afflicted." On returning home, Joseph spent the rest of July following a relaxed schedule at the office and at home.

August 1 found Elder Smith on the road again when he and Elder David O. McKay traveled to St. Anthony, Idaho, for a conference of the Yellowstone Stake. This pair also teamed up the following week when they attended the Ogden stake conference together. Since the stake included wards in the Upper Ogden Valley, Huntsville, Eden, and Liberty, the apostles split up on Sunday, Joseph attending a meeting in Huntsville Sunday morning while David O. was in North Ogden. Then in the afternoon they switched, with Joseph speaking at the chapel in North Ogden while Elder McKay spoke in Huntsville, the place of his birth, where his father had served for so many years as a bishop.

The following week found Elder Smith in Bancroft, Idaho, for a stake conference. His father accompanied him, and it was one of the few times they attended a stake conference together in an official capacity. Also with them was Elder Charles H. Hart of the First Council of Seventy. One can imagine the stake president's anxiety at having three General Authorities attend his conference, including the president of the Church and his son and namesake who was a member of the Twelve. And one can also imagine the mutual sense of pride and joy father and son would have felt in each others' presence as they bore testimony and instructed the people.

The instructions the General Authorities gave at stake conferences in outlying areas varied according to the local conditions. They focused on the things they felt the people needed, not only to satisfy their spiritual needs but also to enable them to live happier, healthier, and more productive lives. Typical was the instructions Joseph Fielding gave at Escalante, Utah, in August 1913. "During the conference," he reported, "we spoke of ward teaching, missionary work, tithing [and] the need of [a] water system for the town of Escalante and other towns." Elaborating on this last item, he added, "The people in those towns in the eastern part of Garfield County live in rather primitive conditions in some respects which are unnecessary. Their water facilities are very poor."

Two days later in nearby Tropic, he "spoke of sanitary conditions, etc." By way of explanation, he added, "Here the people dip up water from the ditches for culinary purposes, pour it into barrels, let it settle, and then use it. When they dip it up it is like chalk in color, due to the clay." Elder Smith was quite astonished at the reason given by local leaders about why they did not remedy this situation. "Only three miles away there is a good spring from which water could be piped to town," Joseph recorded, "but it is not done for lack of enterprise and for fear the water would 'corrode the pipes.' " The regular instruction and encouragement given by Joseph Fielding and other leaders to the Saints living in remote rural areas helped unify the Church organizationally, preserve its doctrinal integrity, and help lift the members to a higher level of social and cultural development.

While at Escalante on this trip, Joseph Fielding had an experience that occurred with increasing frequency as he traveled around the Church. He met another cousin! And as it often happened, this one was concealed under a different name. This new-found cousin was Ernest A. Griffin, bishop of the Escalante Ward, whose mother was Sarah Smith Griffin, the daughter of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith by his first wife, Jerusha. Jerusha bore six of Hyrum's children, five of whom lived to maturity. The numerous progeny of these children, added to the progeny of Joseph Smith Sr. and uncle John Smith, provided Joseph Fielding with an extended family of almost astronomical proportions. He loved and cherished all these cousins and was always happy to find a new one, as he was happy to find Bishop Griffin.

Bishop Griffin's ward had a baseball team that had challenged the brethren from Panguitch to a game on Saturday afternoon during the stake conference. Apparently short-handed, the Panguitch team was bold enough to recruit one of the visitors from up north to fill in. "Between meetings in the afternoon," wrote Joseph Fielding on August 30, 1913, "I played ball with the Panguitch brethren against Escalante." That the new recruit was an apostle presumably was a matter of indifference to these brethren from Panguitch, so long as he knew how to play the game. They would soon learn that this agile, thirty-seven-year-old was no slouch with either the bat or the glove. The skills he had acquired while he was a mainstay on the old Sixteenth Ward team years before were intact, albeit a little rusty. And the Escalante team may have been surprised to find that the competitive fires still burned brightly in this mild-mannered apostle, who liked to win. Indeed, the fact that he neglected to mention the score may imply that his team did not win!

The backward conditions Joseph Fielding found in Escalante and Tropic may have been magnified in his eyes because of their contrast with the progressive spirit of enterprise and development that infused Salt Lake City at the time. The new Bishops' Building and Deseret Gymnasium were completed during the year Elder Smith was called to the Twelve; the Hotel Utah was completed the following year; the Latter-day Saints Hospital was doubled in size in 1913, the year of his visit to Escalante; and at that time, the new Church Administration Building was in the planning stage and would be completed in four years, thereby providing the General Authorities with quarters some thought were unnecessarily lavish. The wide disparity between these modern facilities and the primitive kind found in communities like Tropic was a chief factor in the thrust of Elder Smith and the other General Authorities to stimulate a more forward-looking attitude among the Saints in these rural areas.

With the completion of the Hotel Utah, Joseph Fielding and Ethel periodically enjoyed the luxury of its appointments. In defending the decision to allow a bar in the hotel on the ground that nonmembers who visited Salt Lake City would "want something to 'wet up' with once in a while," President Joseph F. Smith called the Hotel Utah "one of the most magnificent hotels that exists on the continent of America, or . . . the old continent either." (Conference Report, October 1911, p. 129.) This attitude seems to have been shared by most members of the Church, so that an evening out at the Hotel Utah was considered a signal event, deserving of special note. Such an occasion occurred two weeks after Joseph returned from Tropic when he and Ethel were the guests of Bishop Charles W. Nibley at a dinner in the hotel given in honor of Hyrum M. Smith, who had been called to preside over the European Mission. Also present were most of the other General Authorities and their wives. They enjoyed this special occasion with good food and conversation interspersed with musical numbers and remarks by the guests of honor and others called on by the host, Bishop Nibley.

On the day of Hyrum's departure for England, two days after the banquet, Joseph Fielding noted in his diary, "I was appointed to take charge of his prayer circle during his absence." This entry reflects a practice followed by some members of the Twelve for many years. An apostle would invite selected persons to join him in a prayer circle that would gather periodically in the Salt Lake Temple. There doctrinal instructions and briefings about current Church affairs would be given as a prelude to a special prayer in which, in addition to the customary subjects of a prayer, there would be pleadings for guidance in particular problems or for blessings of health and protection. It was not uncommon when a prominent person was ill that all of the prayer circles would be asked to join in imploring God for a blessing of health upon the one afflicted. Special loyalties and common interests were nurtured by membership in these prayer circles. And it was these Hyrum sought to keep alive by asking his brother to carry on the meetings of his circle during his absence.

A few days after Hyrum's departure for England, the eighty-fourth semiannual general conference of the Church convened on Temple Square in Salt Lake City. On Sunday afternoon, October 5, 1913, Joseph Fielding again found himself in charge of an overflow session in the Assembly Hall. At the same time, Elder George F. Richards of the Twelve presided at a second overflow meeting held outside adjacent to the Bureau of Information. Joseph Fielding was the concluding speaker at the meeting in the Assembly Hall. During the course of his remarks, he mentioned two subjects that he frequently emphasized during the remainder of his ministry. The first related to the need for personal revelation to help the Saints find their way safely through life. "We are walking in the knowledge and the understanding of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ," said he, "and are entitled to that inspiration which will warn us of danger and guide us in the path of duty, and give us power to resist and overcome evil. We have the right to call upon the Lord in prayer and in faith for help, guidance, for assistance of his Holy Spirit and we will receive it." The second related to the need for personal integrity in our relationships with the Lord and with each other. "I pray," he continued, "that we may be true to our covenants, true to each other; that we will cast out of our hearts all that is evil, that we will not speak evil one of another, or be given to backbiting or contention or strife, for the spirit of wickedness destroys faith and tends to divide and separate instead of uniting and strengthening the people."

In these words, uttered only three years after his call to the Twelve, we already see the qualities of mind and character that were so evident in the man who would later become president of the Twelve and president of the Church. The man Joseph Fielding Smith ultimately became was anxious to be led constantly by the Spirit. And he was equally concerned about observing with exactness the covenants he had made with the Lord and maintaining a loving relationship with his brethren and sisters.

A month after the general conference, Elder Smith missed his first assignment since being called to the Twelve; he had to be excused from attending the Juab stake conference. "I was unable to fill my appointment," he wrote on November 8, 1913, "being confined to bed with a high fever and headache. A very severe sore throat also developed which distressed me." He had recovered sufficiently to attend the Jordan stake conference the following weekend, however. Four days later, he left on a trip to Arizona that would take him away from home for more than three weeks. With him were Horace H. Cummings, the superintendent of Church schools, and Hyrum G. Smith, Patriarch to the Church. The Patriarch, who was three years younger than Joseph Fielding, had succeeded his grandfather, John Smith, having been ordained by President Joseph F. Smith on May 12, 1912. This trio traveled by train through Colorado and New Mexico to the Santa Fe line and thence to Holbrook, Arizona. From this small railroad town on the Little Colorado River, they were driven "in an auto over muddy roads and in a rainstorm to St. Johns." Their route of travel took them through the heart of the Petrified Forest, the clay soil of which caused them "some delays." Arriving after dark on Friday, November 21, the three travelers were accommodated in the home of stake president David K. Udall.

Over the weekend, Joseph presided at the usual meetings of a stake conference, where he "imparted such instructions as we were led to give." He was even busier on Monday following the conference, when he wrote, "I accompanied Bro. Cummings to the Academy where I addressed the students in a devotional exercise and attended one of the classes. In the afternoon we were busy administering to the sick and afflicted; and I assisted Hyrum G. in the giving of blessings, writing for him." Leaving St. Johns the following day, the visitors traveled to nearby Concho, where they held meetings; the day after that, they went on to Snowflake, walking part of the way.

At Snowflake, the three brethren were met by a party from Salt Lake City led by President Joseph F. Smith. The party included the president's wife Edna and two daughters, President Anthon H. Lund, Elder George Albert Smith, and Bishop Charles W. Nibley and his wife. In addition to participating in a conference of the Snowflake Stake, this large party from Salt Lake City had come to this remote area for a special purpose explained by Joseph Fielding: "Services were held in the new Academy building," he wrote on November 27, "and the building was dedicated, President Smith offering the prayer. Three years ago the Snowflake Academy was destroyed on thanksgiving day, and the new building, which is much better, was dedicated on thanksgiving day." This building, like many other similar structures erected at the time, was used both for school and church purposes.

President Smith and his party traveled from Salt Lake City on a private railroad car that had been left on a siding at nearby Holbrook. Returning there Sunday afternoon, an evening meeting was held in the courthouse. And the next morning, the President's party, augmented by Joseph Fielding and his two companions, left on a journey that would take them ultimately to Arizona's southernmost communities. Along the way, they passed through small villages founded by Mormon colonists, such as Joseph City, Brigham City, and Sunset; and they enjoyed the beautiful pine forests surrounding the San Francisco Peaks and the spectacular vistas of the Grand Canyon, where they remained a day and a half. Later the journey assumed the aspect of a triumphal march as at Douglas Station, the train was met "by the Mayor and a number of leading citizens," and at Phoenix, the state capital, it was met "by Governor George W. P. Hunt and Col. Massie, his chief of staff, and the Mayor of Phoenix and others." Here the party left the train and were driven by automobile to nearby Mesa. The governor attended the dedicatory services for two new chapels in Mesa, speaking at one of them, and, according to Joseph Fielding, he praised the Latter-day Saints in Arizona "very highly."

The next day, Joseph Fielding accompanied his father and others on a trip to inspect the new Roosevelt Dam, which was a key element in the long-range plans to develop the water resources of the Salt River Basin. "The dam is a wonderful piece of engineering skill," Joseph Fielding wrote, "and will mean a great deal to the people of this part of Arizona."

The following weekend, the visitors attended various meetings connected with the Maricopa stake conference held in Mesa. One of these Joseph Fielding presided over separately when he was sent to nearby Chandler to organize a new ward. There he called and ordained Henry L. Peterson as the bishop.

Leaving Mesa, the visitors traveled to the Gila Valley in southeastern Arizona, where they held a series of meetings in Thatcher and Safford. The leading Latter-day Saint in this area was President Joseph F. Smith's brother-in-law, Andrew Kimball, the twin brother of his wife Alice. Included among Andrew Kimball's children was an eighteen-year-old son, Spencer W., who, a few months later, would receive a call from his uncle, President Smith, to serve as a missionary in the Swiss German Mission. And thirty years later, Spencer Kimball would be called to share the apostleship with his cousin by marriage, Joseph Fielding Smith. The Salt Lake visitors then traveled to Tucson, Arizona, where they were "entertained by a number of leading citizens, and visited places of interest in and near Tucson, including the San Xavier Mission . . . and had lunch at the Tucson Commercial Club."

Because of a special anxiety, Joseph Fielding left the other travelers at this point to return home. His concern was Ethel, who was in the last stages of pregnancy, and he wanted to be near when she gave birth to the baby. He arrived home on Friday, December 13; five days later, Ethel gave birth to her first son. "The baby was born at 2:10 p.m.," wrote the father on December 18, 1913, "and on account of [Ethel's] sickness, I did not attend the regular meeting of the Council in the temple today." Then, in a pensive mood, he reflected on the implications of the birth of his first son, who would be given his father's name, Joseph Fielding Smith Jr. "I feel thankful to the Lord for this blessing," wrote the father, "and hope and pray the boy may grow to be an honorable man in the service of the Lord. And I pray my Heavenly Father to help me to so teach him and all my children that they may be true to the Gospel and love to do the will of the Lord." Elder Smith lived to see this blessing fulfilled. Without exception, all of his eleven children grew to maturity, faithful and obedient to the teachings of their father. All five of the sons filled missions for the Church, as did the husbands of the six daughters. All the children were sealed in the temple to worthy companions, except Lewis, who was killed before he could marry. No achievement Joseph Fielding attained in life and no honor bestowed upon him could impart the sense of joy and achievement he experienced in seeing his children faithfully follow his teachings and emulate his life.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
