Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Eleven

The Shifting Tide

The first four years of Joseph Fielding Smith's ap- ostolic service was a time of extraordinary personal growth. His reputation as an apostle, a historian, a scripture scholar, and a successful family man was firmly established during this period. No longer was he looked upon by some critics merely as the son of the president of the Church who owed his high position to an accident of birth. He was regarded rather as a man of intelligence and discipline, careful and precise in speech, and faithful and prompt in service. He was also seen to be a man of strong opinions who was forthright in speaking his mind and fearless in admonishing the Saints about what they should do. This quality of character, which became more evident as he grew older, is clearly reflected in the talk he delivered at the general conference in April 1914. After commenting on the past achievements of the Church and its members, he cautioned that there was much room for improvement. "There are many among us who are not living up to their duties," he warned. "There are many among us who fall short and fail in various ways in keeping the commandments of the Lord." Indicating that it was to this class his remarks would be directed, Elder Smith read as his text verses 26 through 29 of the 58th section of the Doctrine and Covenants. He emphasized that Latter-day Saints should not have to be commanded in all things, that men should be "anxiously engaged in a good cause" and should "do many things of their own free will." He said, "Let every man set his house in order and see that his family is taught the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ." Specifically, he admonished "that they keep the word of wisdom; that they abstain from the use of strong drink, from the use of tea, from the use of coffee, tobacco and other stimulants and narcotics which tend to destroy and to break down rather than to build up the system." He also urged parents to teach the principle of faith in their homes, to obtain knowledge and understanding, and to "walk uprightly and justly before the Lord and keep the commandments as they have been given to us." (Conference Report, April 1914, pp. 91, 92.) These themes would find their way into Joseph's sermons throughout his apostolic career. Invariably they would be buttressed with pertinent scriptures and reinforced with personal admonitions. His sermons were never anecdotal or trivial but were always solid and immovable like the man himself.

Four months after this sermon was delivered, a massive political upheaval occurred in Europe, underscoring the need for the kind of virtues taught by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith. His diary entry for July 31, 1914, sets the stage for this violent commotion, whose rippling effects would ultimately be felt in America. "For several days," he wrote, "there has been ill feeling manifest in Austria Hungary against Serbia because of the assassination of Archduke Francis Ferdinand which resulted in a declaration of war by Austria against Serbia. The papers this morning declare that Germany has declared war on Russia and has invaded France." Then, in a spirit of foreboding, he added, "There is great commotion in the world and at present it appears that other nations will be drawn into the conflict." Joseph's

concerns proved well founded; four days later he wrote, "It is reported that Germany has also made war on Belgium and England is involved and has issued an ultimatum to Germany." The next day he noted that England had declared war on Germany, which had retaliated by sinking a British ship; that Europe was in an uproar; and that "all the nations [were] mobilizing their forces." Against this bleak background, Elder Smith speculated whether all this portended that the millennial reign was imminent. Wrote he, "It begins to look like the commencement of the great destruction and conflict preceding the end, which I hope is the case, preparatory to the coming of the reign of peace."

The comparative remoteness of the conflict and the imperative demands of Joseph's church and family responsibilities soon lowered the priority of the European war on his agenda of personal concerns. More immediate and pressing were the continual round of stake-conference assignments and the infinite variety of choices and challenges facing a family of six children ranging in age from twelve years to eight months. Joseph had four conference assignments during the month following the outbreak of the war in Europe—to the Boise, Nephi, Young, and Rigby stakes. The travel entailed in attending these conferences and the marathon schedule of meetings during the weekends represented the largest block of Elder Smith's available time. Next came the hours he spent at his office during mid-week. And Ethel and the children got what was left over. Ethel understood the reasons for this and fully approved of her husband's priorities. She knew of the constraints on his time dictated by the apostolic charge he had accepted. And when the children reached the age of understanding, they were taught this so they came to accept without question why their father had little time to spend with them. Indeed, when the full significance of his calling was brought home to them, his role in the Church and the restrictions it imposed on him and the family became a point of personal distinction if not of pride for them.

Joseph understood well the hazards to family unity and harmony that his preoccupation with church work entailed. He was careful, therefore, to squeeze in a family activity whenever possible. This entry illustrates a typical way he was able to do this: "In the evening," he wrote on August 28, 1914, "I took my family to see the 'wizard' parade and later left for Rigby to attend the Rigby stake conference." During the week following his return from this conference, he noted, "Took my family out for a short ride once or twice during the week." These rides were in the family's new Model T Ford, which Joseph had purchased the day before leaving for Rigby. Since this was the first car he had owned, the novelty of it undoubtedly accounted for the initial frequency with which he and the family used it for the mere recreation of riding around town. When the novelty of owning a car wore off, however, the frequency with which it was used merely for pleasure declined. Yet, this remained as an occasional source of diversion and recreation for Joseph's family; and for him personally, it was something he enjoyed for the rest of his life.

Notwithstanding Elder Smith's commitment to his Church assignments, occasional emergencies reversed these priorities. A case in point was the illness of two-year-old Lois. "Most of the day I was at home," he wrote on September 9, 1914, "Lois being sick." Two days later he stayed home from work again "on account of Lois' sickness." She had had a fever for several days. "I was excused from going to Rexburg to attend conference," he explained, "and remained home Saturday and Sunday, nursing my baby girl." He stayed home for two more days, hovering over the child. By Tuesday evening, he was able to report with obvious relief, "Lois was much improved." So it was that sickness or other emergencies at home always elevated the family to the top of his personal agenda, subordinating everything to that until the problem had been solved. Meanwhile, if a family incident or situation was not an emergency, he would merely sandwich it in with his church duties as best he could. So, three days after Lois' recovery, Joseph wrote: "Josephine's birthday anniversary—she is 12 years old. I left with Seymour B. Young for Elsinore to attend the Sevier Stake Conference."

This trip to Elsinore was Joseph's last out-of-town assignment before the 1914 October general conference. "All through the rest of the month," he recorded on October 1, "I was at the office and engaged in meetings, including the quarterly meeting of the Twelve." It was four days later, at the Monday morning general session of the conference, that Joseph Fielding Smith delivered the most significant sermon of his comparatively young apostolic career. In it he focused on the Savior, decried those Christian ministers who deny the divinity of Christ, affirmed that implicit faith in Christ is a characteristic of Latter-day Saints, explained that the scriptures abound with testimonies of the Savior's divinity and resurrection, and cited the experiences of Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and Sidney Rigdon, who had seen the Savior in vision in the latter days. Having laid that groundwork, he proceeded to the heart of his discourse, which had special relevance to his hearers. "We have an individual testimony," said he, "given through the Spirit of the Lord to all who have lived in accordance with the Gospel. . . . We are not dependent upon the testimony of anyone else for this knowledge for we know through the Spirit that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of the world." (Conference Report, October 1914, p. 98.) Then, reading from the second chapter of 2 Nephi, he emphasized the limited scope of the redemption effected by the Savior's sacrifice as it applies to the individual transgressor. "Behold, He offered Himself a sacrifice for sin," quoted Joseph, "to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered." Finally, Elder Smith read verse 8 from that chapter, underscoring the vast envangelical responsibility resting upon the Church. "Wherefore," he read, "how great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth, that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah, who layeth down His life, according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit." This evangelical responsibility, resting upon the Church as a whole, is magnified many times over as it applies to the members of the Twelve, who comprise the general missionary committee of the Church. Joseph Fielding Smith served as a member of the Twelve for sixty years and as president of that quorum for nineteen years; thus, he bore principal responsibility for the proselyting activities of the Church longer than any other man of this dispensation. He was anxious that the message of the gospel, the message of salvation and exaltation, be given to all people. It was this responsibility that absorbed a disproportionate amount of his time during the years of his apostolic service. And the doctrines interwoven with this message and the responsibility to teach it would claim the attention and the speaking and literary skills of Elder Smith throughout his life. One need only review the titles of some of his many books to understand this preoccupation: The Way to Perfection, for instance, and his three-volume work The Doctrines of Salvation, not to mention the dozens of articles he wrote for the Church publications that elaborated on these concepts.

Several weeks after this conference, Joseph Fielding joined his father and other Church leaders on a historic two-and-a-half-week trip that would take them deep into the heart of the southern states. They left Salt Lake City on Thursday, November 19, 1914, comfortably accommodated in a private car provided by the Union Pacific Railroad. Special porters were assigned to the car to prepare meals and provide valet services. This would be the luxurious home on wheels of President Smith and his party throughout the trip.

Since their departure was late in the evening on the 19th, darkness overtook them before they reached Ogden, where their private car was hitched to the Union Pacific Mainliner headed east. The night was spent twisting and rocking through the canyons of the Wasatch up to the high plateau of southern Wyoming, where daybreak found them. This was the same train Joseph had taken years before on his way to the mission field. His upgraded accommodations on this trip paralleled the sudden rise that had occurred in his ecclesiastical status during the interval. Passing through Rawlins and Laramie, Wyoming, the train headed south at Cheyenne, arriving in Denver, Colorado, on Friday evening. Switching to another railroad line, they spent the second night and day crossing the table-flat lands of eastern Colorado and Kansas, whose autumn brown and stubbled fields bore mute testimony of a bounteous harvest. Five days later, the Prophet and his party would join all Americans in expressing thanks for the bounties of the land when they enjoyed a Thanksgiving feast in the mission home in Chattanooga, Tennessee.

Saturday evening, November 21, the travelers were met at the Kansas City depot by local Church leaders, who drove them by automobile to nearby Independence, Missouri. There the Prophet and Julina stayed with Mission President Samuel O. Bennion, while Joseph Fielding was accommodated in the home of Joseph E. Cardon, the editor of the Liahona, the Elders Journal.

The event that had drawn the Prophet and his party to Independence was the dedication of a new chapel. For weeks, President Bennion and his missionaries had worked side by side with the local members and leaders to make certain that everything was in perfect order for the president of the Church. There was last-minute painting and touching up in the interior of the building and extensive work outside landscaping the grounds. Among the missionaries who had been diverted from their customary proselyting work to help spruce up the chapel was a future president of the Church, Elder Spencer W. Kimball, President Smith's nephew. Spencer, whose original call was to Europe, had been reassigned to the Central States Mission because of the outbreak of World War I earlier in the year.

Three dedicatory sessions were held on Sunday, November 19, 1914. At each session there was a sprinkling of members of the Reorganized Church in attendance, most of whom, reported Joseph Fielding, "paid respectful attention" although "a few were heard to make abusive remarks." Because of the sensitivities involved, Independence being the headquarters of the Reorganized Church, Joseph Fielding also noted that "not one [of the speakers] mentioned by word or intimation the Reorganization."

In a further attempt to bridge differences and to lay at rest any lingering enmities between the two churches, President Smith, accompanied by Joseph Fielding and others, paid a courtesy call on Joseph Smith III, president of the Reorganized Church, following the morning session of the dedication. "We found him very feeble, blind and deaf," reported Joseph Fielding. The interchange between these two sons of the Martyrs was cordial and conciliatory at a personal level, but was restrained and distant from an institutional point of view. It was Joseph Fielding's appraisal that Joseph Smith III was a "disappointed man," a condition that could be traced in no small part to his serious physical disabilities.

Leaving Independence the next day, the travelers went to Memphis, Tennessee, where, after touring the city in automobiles, they held a meeting with the missionaries from the Tennessee and Mississippi conferences. A preaching service was held in the evening at a public hall, attended by both members and nonmembers. There, according to Joseph Fielding, "the speakers presented the principles of the Gospel in power and with the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord." Present at these meetings and at others held in the South was Mission President Charles A. Callis, who, in less than twenty years, would join Joseph Fielding as a member of the Twelve.

The party arrived in Chatttanooga, Tennessee, on Wednesday morning, November 25, having traveled overnight from Memphis in their private car. Here the local leaders took the visitors on an automobile tour of the area, which included a stop at Chickamauga Park, where, Joseph reported, "vicious and bloody battles were fought during the Civil War." An evening meeting was held at the Lyric Theatre, "which was filled mostly with strangers." The diarist also noted that at the close of President Smith's remarks, "many of the audience applauded" and later "came to the platform and shook hands cordially with the brethren."

Following their Thanksgiving dinner on Thursday in Chattanooga, the travelers entrained for Atlanta, where the following day they were given the customary automobile tour of the city, during which they made a courtesy call on the mayor, Mr. Woodward. An evening meeting was held in Taft Hall, where an audience of "between four and five hundred" had gathered to hear the visiting Mormon leaders.

Going south into Florida, the party stopped briefly in Jacksonville and then traveled on to St. Augustine, located on the Atlantic Coast, the oldest European settlement on the eastern coast of North America. Here Joseph Fielding's historic instincts were aroused as he inspected the antiquities of the 350-year-old city, founded by the Spaniards in 1565. Of special interest to the diarist were the old fort, the oldest school house, the oldest dwelling, and the open slave market, where not too many years before, human beings were sold to the highest bidder as if they were chattel. At the fort, the visitors "saw the dungeon . . .where many poor Spaniards were punished, some even to death, by the cruelest methods of torture." In contrast to these ancient reminders of death and degradation, Joseph Fielding found something at St. Augustine that was a refreshing reminder of the joys of human life. Here he met a distant relative named Dr. Simon Ewing Smith, who was "108 years of age and as straight as a young man and very active." Joseph also reported that Doctor Smith was "still riding a bicycle and was just as spry as if he were but sixty."

Returning to Jacksonville the same day, the Brethren held an evening meeting in a new chapel the Church had constructed. Joseph Fielding was the concluding speaker. The following day, a Sunday, three meetings were held, two at the small chapel and one in mid-afternoon at a public hall where seven hundred were in attendance, most of them nonmembers. As had occurred at a previous meeting, Joseph Fielding reported that following President Smith's address, "many in the congregation applauded."

Since the meetings in Jacksonville were the last ones in the South before the party headed home, Joseph Fielding wrote a brief summary of the trip and of its significance to the work. "The trip through the South has resulted in much good," he wrote, "and the results will be felt by the Elders for a long time to come. We have been entertained by the leading spirits in these communities, Mayors, Magistrates, Potentates, and many prominent men of national renown have paid their respects to President Smith. The newspapers throughout have spoken favorably, showing the great change in sentiment that has come over the people in recent years. Our trip has been most successful and encouraging to the Elders and Saints."

Leaving Jacksonville, the travelers began their long trip home, stopping in New Orleans, San Antonio, and Houston only long enough to do a little sightseeing. They found many of Houston's streets covered with two feet of water, the result of a heavy rainstorm that had deposited six inches of water on the city the night before their arrival. At El Paso, Texas, the party left the train to hold a special meeting in the local Odd Fellows Hall. Assembled there were many of the Saints who had been driven from the Mexican Colonies during the revolution. "President Smith gave the Mexican refugees some good, timely instruction," wrote Joseph, "regarding their situation and their future prospects."

Traveling on to Los Angeles, the members of the party remained there for four days, enjoying the warmth of California's winter sun and speaking at special services held on Sunday. They arrived in Salt Lake City on Wednesday, December 9.

Aside from the length of this trip, the numerous meetings held during it, and the great impetus given to the work because of it, something about the trip was very special to Joseph Fielding Smith. It was the last time he was privileged to make a lengthy train trip with his father. It was the last time he had the privilege of sharing the pulpit with him in small, informal meetings, held with the Saints and nonmembers, away from the highly structured and formalistic meetings at general conferences and in the organized states. And it was the last time he would enjoy the luxury of spending long, uninterrupted hours visiting and relaxing with him, or occasionally engaging in a spirited game of checkers as their train wound its way across the continent to the Atlantic Ocean and back to the Pacific.

The years from 1915 through 1917 saw Joseph Fielding Smith continue with his heavy schedule of stake conference assignments, headquarters duties, and family responsibilities. They also saw him venture into an area of activity that until then was entirely foreign to him. In September 1915, he was appointed as a member of the board of directors of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company, a major insurer in the intermountain area, to replace Lewis S Hills, who had died recently. "This favor," Joseph Fielding reported, "is due to the kindness and favor principally of Lorenzo N. Stohl." At about the same time, he was appointed to the board of the Zions Savings Bank and the Consolidated Salt Company. Two years later, he became a member of the board of the Inland Crystal Salt Company. These appointments were welcomed by Joseph as they broadened the scope of his knowledge, led him into contact with prominent business leaders, and provided him with extra income to help augment the slender living allowance he received from the Church. Another welcome source of supplemental income was created in January 1917: "I have been requested," he noted on the nineteenth, "by the Bureau of the Census to prepare for the government the church census of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. My commission was signed January 8 and I will proceed as soon as supplies are received from Washington." This appointment occupied a good part of Joseph's time for six months, until July 17, 1917, when he "finished and mailed the final report to the government on the church census."

Although Elder Smith did most of his own home repairs, helped Ethel pick and bottle fruit in season, and was extremely frugal in his expenditures, there never seemed to be a surplus of money during this period. The fee for handling the Church census came at a most fortuitous time. Because his immediate family had grown to nine with the birth of Amelia in June 1916, it became necessary for Joseph Fielding to purchase a new automobile. So two months after her birth, he traded in the Model T Ford on a new Reo, a seven-passenger car whose seating capacity could be increased by two or three by putting a table board across the two jump seats. The purchase of this larger and more expensive car became affordable because, reported Elder Smith, "I have just had some Deseret Building Society stock mature." Joseph did not learn how much larger the new car was until he tried to park it in his garage. It wouldn't fit. This made it necessary to enlarge his "automobile house."

The Reo was a source of great enjoyment to the Smiths. Frequently the whole family would load into the car merely to take a ride around town or to drive up the canyons of the Wasatch for picnics, fishing, or sightseeing. The car had detachable celluloid windows that could be removed during the warm months to allow for plenty of fresh air. A few idiosyncracies that developed later only made the Reo more endearing to the family—its tendency to boil over when it was driven uphill, the difficulty of patching its big-rimmed tires, and its occasional mechanical failures. Of the latter, the most dramatic and potentially dangerous occurred when a tie rod broke in downtown Salt Lake City. Because the Reo couldn't generate much speed, no collision or roll-over occurred. Afterward, one of the passengers walked alongside the car to kick the wheels straight until Joseph could maneuver it to a safe spot from where it was towed to a public "automobile house" for repairs.

The increased use of the automobile by Joseph Fielding and the other brethren as a means of transportation was dramatized a year after he bought the Reo. In September 1917, President Joseph F. Smith organized the first-ever automobile caravan of General Authorities to make a preaching tour into Southern Utah. Joseph Fielding and Ethel were invited to go along. Apparently sensing something of historic significance about the trip, Joseph kept a detailed log about it.

Leaving Salt Lake at exactly 1:45 p.m. on Tuesday, September 1, 1917, the caravan arrived in Provo at 4:00, where the members "were refreshed by a drink of sodawater." Traveling on to Payson, the group was met by stake president Jonathon Paige Jr. "and the people of the town who requested President Smith to make a few remarks, which he did." Joseph Fielding reported that at Mona, "we were met by the stake presidency and many citizens of Nephi in autos who came out to welcome us and escort us in to Nephi, headquarters of the Juab stake." The travelers seemed to ignore the clouds of dust kicked up by the procession of automobiles and were caught up instead by the novelty of the occasion and the excitement of having averaged twenty miles an hour during the ninety-mile trip from Salt Lake City.

The visitors were accommodated in the homes of the Saints in Nephi, the Joseph Fielding Smiths staying with Ethel's relative Orson Cazier and his wife. That night a standing-room-only crowd attended a preaching service in the Tabernacle, where some, unable to get in the building, stood outside, hoping to catch the drift of the speakers through the open windows and doors. And the line-up of speakers was impressive. It included all nine of the General

Authorities who were part of the caravan—President Joseph F. Smith and his counselor Anthon H. Lund; Heber J. Grant, president of the Twelve; and Hyrum M. Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith, and Stephen L Richards, members of the Twelve; Joseph W. McMurrin of the Seventy; and Presiding Bishop Charles W. Nibley and his counselor David A. Smith. The second day's trip covered the distance from Nephi to Beaver, during which brief stops were made at Levan (where Presidents Smith and Lund greeted the children who lined the streets to welcome the caravan), Scipio, Holden, Fillmore, Meadow, Kanosh, and Cove Fort. The travelers were met by local leaders and members all along the way, and in most of these towns, impromptu meetings were held where various members of the caravan spoke. At Beaver, where Joseph Fielding and Ethel stayed with the Gerrit DeJong family, old friends from the Seventeenth Ward, a three-hour preaching service was held from 8:00 to 11:00 p.m. where all of the General Authorities again spoke.

On the third day, Thursday the 13th, the travelers went on to Parowan, where stake conference meetings were held through the day. Friday morning, Joseph Fielding accompanied his father and part of the caravan to Cedar City, where special meetings were held while the remainder of the group remained in Parowan to complete the conference. That afternoon, both segments of the caravan joined for the final leg of the trip to St. George, through Leeds and Washington. Joseph Fielding reported, "At Leeds, where we arrived at about 6 p.m., we were met by the people who loaded us down with fruit, some of the best peaches and grapes that could be grown." That evening, a reception for the visitors was held at the St. George Tabernacle, following which everyone attended the county fair. "There we saw exhibits of fruits, grains and other products in abundance," reported Joseph Fielding, "and of the very first quality which we were privileged to sample."

After spending the weekend in St. George attending stake conference meetings, the travelers headed home. At Cedar City, they crossed over the mountain to Panguitch and then continued north, passing through Circleville, Junction, Marysvale, and Monroe to Richfield. "All along the way we were met by throngs of people," wrote Joseph, "and the children had the privilege of shaking hands with President Smith and President Lund." Later at Manti, Joseph noted, "The sight of the children marching on each side of the automobiles as we entered the city in the afternoon was one worthy of preservation, and we all regretted that we had no camera or moving picture machine that could permanently record the scene." While at Manti, Joseph Fielding was able to visit the temple, where he examined the records, which, he wrote "are being kept according to the plan which I prepared for the Temples three or four years ago."

Traveling on, the caravan passed through Mount Pleasant, Chester, Spring City, and Fairview, and then on to the Utah Valley via Thistle and Spanish Fork Canyon. The party arrived home on Thursday, September 20, having been on the road for nine days. In summing up the experience, Joseph Fielding wrote: "The trip was most successful and will result in much good." Perhaps one unintended benefit from the tour was the realization by Joseph Fielding and the other leaders that this relatively new means of transportation would soon be the means of simplifying and expediting their work and of binding the widespread Latter-day Saint communities ever closer together. This was indicated by President Joseph F. Smith during his keynote address at the October 1917 general conference. "We made a short visit not long ago to some of our southern settlements," he said. "It is something that we should do oftener. I am conscious of it now, more so than I have been in times past." He went on to say it was "necessary that the presidency of the church, the Twelve Apostles, the Patriarch, the Seven Presidents of Seventies, [and] the Presiding Bishopric . . . should visit as far as possible, and see the people, and be seen of them." (Conference Report, October 1917, pp. 4, 5.)

Little did Joseph Fielding realize at the time that he would never again be privileged to tour among the Latter-day Saints with his father and his brother Hyrum. The following year would see them both unexpectedly carried to their graves. As 1918 dawned, nothing even remotely hinted that such a revolution would occur in the Smith family. Although President Joseph F. Smith was seventy-nine years old, he was in excellent health. And Hyrum was a robust forty-five-year-old, just coming into the most productive years of his life.

The suddenness of Hyrum's death would produce a shock from which the father would never recover. As late as Friday, January 18, 1918, there appeared to be nothing to suggest that Hyrum's time was near. On that day, Joseph Fielding wrote in his diary: "I was at the Historian's Office most of the day. With Bro. Orson F. Whitney, I listened to Hyrum read comments on the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants and also attended the Genealogical Board Meeting." That evening, Hyrum became nauseous. By Saturday night, he was in great pain. The next day, he was hospitalized. "Early this morning," wrote Joseph Fielding on Sunday January 20, "I received a call from Aunt Edna, asking me to go to Hyrum M's, as he was ill and they were going to take him to the hospital. . . . I arrived at his home just in time to accompany him, other members of the family also being present." Examinations at the hospital revealed that the patient had severe appendicitis and that surgery was imperative. "The operation was performed by Dr. Ralph T. Richards," Joseph reported, "assisted by Drs. Stephen L. Richards and Clarence Snow." The operation revealed that the appendix had broken, which caused serious complications. Because of his brother's critical condition, Joseph Fielding remained at the hospital most of Sunday and returned with David A. early Monday morning. Learning that the patient had spent a good night, and assuming that Hyrum was on the mend, Joseph spent all day at the office and then returned to the hospital Tuesday morning with his father, Aunt Edna, and his brother Alvin. Although they found Hyrum had spent a restless night, they were told that he "was progressing favorably" and therefore gave no cause for alarm. Wednesday, Joseph Fielding spoke at the funeral of Lorinda P. Weike, a daughter of Parley P. Pratt and longtime employee of the Church Historian's Office. Stopping briefly at the hospital after the funeral, he was informed that Hyrum "was not so well." However, since his condition was not reported as being critical, Joseph attended an MIA board meeting, following which, at his father's request, he and his cousin George Albert Smith went to the hospital to administer to Hyrum. "We found him in a critical condition," wrote Joseph, "and I concluded to stay at the hospital with him and Ida during the night." Up until Wednesday, Joseph Fielding believed that his brother would recover. "I have felt that he had a mission to perform," he wrote in his diary, "and surely would be spared." It was not to be. "We did all that we could do for him," Joseph explained, "and tried to exercise faith, but it appeared that all that we and all Israel could do in faith and prayer could not avail." The end came at about 10:00 p.m. Wednesday, January 23, 1918.

The suddenness of Hyrum's passing engulfed the whole family in a dull sense of shock and disbelief. Why did this happen to one so young who had so much to offer? "The whole family is cast under a cloud of sorrow and gloom," Joseph wrote disconsolately. But this melancholy mood was short lived. The Smith family was too deeply imbued with the Mormon concepts of immortality and eternal life to be distracted for too long by the death of a loved one. So, soon after Hyrum's death, the persistent optimism typical of the Latter-day Saint mentality surfaced. "And yet," mused Joseph Fielding in his diary, "with it all, our hearts are filled with joy because of the faithful, honorable, and worthy life of our brother." The one most severely tried by the apostle's death was his father, President Joseph F. Smith. "My Father, himself stricken in years," Joseph Fielding explained, "bears up wonderfully under the sorrow, for the blow which comes to him is a severe one, indeed."

The funeral services were held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on Sunday, January 27, 1918. "The building was packed," Joseph Fielding reported, "and excellent remarks were made by the brethren who spoke." These included Charles W. Penrose, counselor in the first presidency; Heber J. Grant, president of the Twelve; three other members of the Twelve; and a family friend, Frank Y. Taylor.

Death would strike the Smith family four times during 1918. Only eight days after Hyrum's funeral, Joseph Fielding's brother-in-law, A. P. Kessler, the husband of his sister Donnette, died as the result of an accident. He was working on a scaffold from which he slipped and fell, breaking his back. He lived only a few hours after the fall. Joseph, having been called to the hospital after the accident, remained there comforting Donnette until her husband passed away. The funeral services were held in the 17th Ward chapel two days later.

When Hyrum Smith died in January 1918, his wife, Ida, was carrying a child. Eight months later, on September 18, Joseph Fielding recorded with obvious joy, "The wife of my brother, Hyrum M., gave birth this morning to a son. . . . We are all pleased that a son has come to bear his name." Yet a few days later, that joy turned to sorrow as this entry of September 24 indicates: "This morning after the temple meeting in the annex," wrote Elder Smith, "I was called to go down to Sister Ida B. Smith's as she was reported to be ill. I went immediately and found other brethren there. We administered to her. She was suffering an attack of heart failure and in a critical condition. I remained there a good part of the day, but in the afternoon returned to the Bee Hive House and went out with my folks. On our return, we received the report that Ida had just passed away, leaving her five children, the youngest only seven days of age. All was done that could be but without avail." The funeral was held on Friday, September 27, just a week before the commencement of the October general conference.

Unknown to all, this general conference would be the last one attended by President Joseph F. Smith. And his participation in it would be limited. He gave a brief but significant keynote address on Friday, October 4, 1918. "As most of you, I suppose, are aware," he began, "I have been undergoing a siege of very serious illness for the last five months." He explained that because of this, it would be impossible to say all he wanted to say, but he indicated there were a few things he must say. "Although somewhat weakened in body," he continued, "my mind is clear with reference to my duty, and with reference to the duties and responsibilities that rest upon the Latter-day Saints." He then made a veiled statement, the meaning of which would be made clear later: "I will not, I dare not, attempt to enter upon many things that are resting upon my mind this morning, and I shall postpone until some future time, the Lord being willing, my attempt to tell you some of the things that are in my mind, and, . . . that dwell in my heart." Having then aroused the interest and the curiosity of the audience, President Smith made this brief but far from satisfactory explanation of what had prompted his guarded comments. "I have not lived alone these five months," said he. "I have dwelt in the spirit of prayer, of supplication, of faith and of determination; and I have had my communication with the Spirit of the Lord continuously." It remained for the Prophet's son Joseph Fielding Smith to shed light on this mystery. "In the afternoon," Joseph recorded on Thursday, October 17, 1918, "I wrote, at my father's dictation, a revelation, or vision, he received on the 3rd." Two weeks later, on Thursday October 31, 1918, Joseph Fielding provided this further insight into the matter: "I was in council with the presidency and the twelve," he wrote that day. "My father was not present on account of his illness, but he presented to the brethren his vision in writing, which I read at the request of the brethren and which was fully endorsed by all the brethren." This extraordinary vision of President Joseph F. Smith now appears as section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

The events of this time brought Joseph Fielding and his father closer together than ever before. With the death of his son, Hyrum M., the Prophet turned almost exclusively to Joseph Fielding in all his personal affairs and, as the circumstances surrounding his vision of the dead implies, as to many ecclesiastical matters. Joseph Fielding was with his father almost daily, helping with his private and official correspondence, representing him in contracts and negotiations affecting his personal estate, and acting as his intermediary in matters involving other General Authorities. During the last few months of his life, the only time President Smith ventured outside the Beehive House was when he went for a ride in his automobile with Joseph Fielding at the wheel. A typical entry in Joseph Fielding's diary during this period is the following one for Sunday, October 27, 1918: "In the forenoon I was at home and in the afternoon took my father out for a ride."

During the week preceding this entry, Joseph was with his father every day, apparently to prepare in final form the vision, which was read to the brethren on the 31st. During this same week, Joseph Fielding also commented on the flu epidemic, which, he wrote, was "spreading," noting that there had been "many deaths." On the day before President Smith's vision was read to the Brethren, Joseph also reported that he had filled out a "questionnaire for the government selective draft for the army or military classification." And only twelve days later, the diarist reported the public reaction to the end of the World War that rendered meaningless his draft registration. "We were awakened about one a.m." he wrote on Monday, November 11, 1918, "by the blowing of whistles, which are understood to mean the unconditional surrender of Germany to the Allied Nations. The reports in the paper state that the terms were signed early this morning in France." Joseph also reported that the "German Kaizer" had abdicated and fled to Holland and that anarchy reigned in many German cities. "My father prophesied many months ago," he added, "that peace would come to the nations after those who were responsible for the war were humiliated in the dust." He added, "All day long our city has been in an uproar and the streets filled with rejoicing people who have been wild with joy."

The day before the armistice, a Sunday, all of President Smith's family gathered at the Beehive House to pay their respects to the Prophet. The day marked the seventeenth anniversary of President Smith's sustaining as the head of the Church. Joseph Fielding reported that his father participated in the sacrament while "propped up in bed." Several of the sons spoke, and the Prophet "said a few words." The following Sunday, the First Presidency and the Twelve held a special prayer circle in the Salt Lake Temple. There, Joseph Fielding reported, they "prayed for President Joseph F. Smith who has gradually been failing since the general conference." He added that his father was "suffering extremely from pleurisy" and was "very weak."

The next day, Monday, November 18, his last full day on earth, was difficult for President Joseph F. Smith. "My father is in a critical condition," wrote Joseph Fielding. "With others of the family I was at his bed side a good part of the day." In the evening when presidents Heber J. Grant and Anthon H. Lund came to visit, the Prophet "begged . . . that he might be released." Joseph Fielding and other members of the family continued the vigil through the night. "He rested easier towards morning," wrote Joseph, "but grew weaker and about 10 minutes before five, peacefully passed away. Commenting that "all Israel and many not of our faith mourn," Joseph Fielding met later in the day with some of his brothers and the Council of the Twelve to discuss plans for the funeral. "It was decided," he noted, "that we could hold no public funeral because of the influenza."

On Thursday the 21st, the meeting of the Twelve in the temple was devoted to "testimony and eulogy" of the deceased Prophet, and the following day, brief graveside services were held, attended only by the members of his family and his close associates in the leadership of the Church.

Because of the precedent set following the death of President Wilford Woodruff, it was decided that the First Presidency should be reorganized without delay after the death of President Joseph F. Smith. So, on Saturday, November 23, the day following the funeral, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles met in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple for this purpose. At that time, Heber J. Grant was ordained and set apart as the seventh president of the Church. Anthon H. Lund was set apart as first counselor and as the president of the Twelve, while Rudger Clawson was set apart as the acting president of the quorum. Charles W. Penrose was set apart as the second counselor.

The death of his father brought about vast changes in the life of Joseph Fielding Smith. From the son's earliest remembrances, the father had played a dominant role in the Church, especially during his last seventeen years when he served as its president. His influence not only traced to the ecclesiastical authority he wielded but also to the power of his personality and to his persuasive eloquence. Many people who heard Joseph F. Smith speak declared him the finest speaker the Church had produced. He was absolutely fearless and forthright and was stubbornly loyal and partial to his family and friends—especially his family. Because he bore his father's name and shared the apostleship with him, Joseph Fielding was the chief recipient among the family of the advantages and opportunities that inherently derive from a close relationship to such a man of power and influence. Because of this, doors had been automatically opened to Joseph Fielding throughout his life that were closed to others. The usual deference shown to one as eminent as Joseph F. Smith was naturally transferred to the great man's son and namesake; and when Joseph Fielding became a member of the Twelve, as has already been noted, he played a more prominent role because of his relationship to the Prophet than would ordinarily be expected of a junior member of the Twelve.

All these advantages, of course, ended with the death of President Smith. And the previous death of his brother Hyrum M., his uncle John Smith, and his cousin John Henry Smith had further diluted the influence Joseph Fielding had in the leading councils of the Church. One can only speculate, of course, about the extent to which these changes affected Joseph Fielding Smith's feelings and self-perception. There can be little doubt, however, that they did have a negative impact on him and that the passing of his powerful father, perhaps for the first time in his life, produced a sense that he stood alone, unsupported by earthly influences, and was dependent entirely upon his own character and abilities and upon those spiritual influences that more and more dominated his life. A stressful incident that occurred the day before Christmas, 1918, illustrates one facet of the significant changes that occurred in the life of Joseph Fielding Smith. "On Tuesday Dec. 24," wrote Joseph, "I received a blow to my feelings from which it will take me a long time to recover." He explained that he had accidentally overheard a conversation between a man whom he had erroneously assumed was a good friend of the Smith family and President Heber J. Grant. This man had told President Grant he understood that "Aunt Julina," Joseph Fielding's mother, intended to request permission to remain in the Beehive House until her new home was built, which she did not "contemplate building until the following spring." The informant had characterized this as "supreme gall never before heard of," adding that asking for such privileges while the Grant family occupied the house was the "greatest piece of nerve" he had ever heard of. He wanted to "forewarn" President Grant so he would be prepared to respond when the request was made. Understandably hurt by this, especially since he had thought the man was his friend, Joseph explained: "My mother has never contemplated asking for such privileges. She is anxious to get out of the Bee Hive House. The home she expects to move into is now being plastered and in the course of a week or two will be ready for her to move into." Joseph went on to reflect about the frailties of human nature and the shock of discovering a false friend who, once the Prophet was dead, felt free to openly malign his widow. It would be difficult to conceive of a more painful way than this for Joseph Fielding and his family to have discovered the revolution in their family status caused by the death of President Joseph F. Smith.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
