Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Twelve

Continuing the Course

As Elder Joseph Fielding Smith continued with Ahis ministry after the death of his father, he soon Adiscovered that false friends like the man who Ahad maligned his mother were a rare breed. He found instead a vast host of friends and supporters who honored the memory of his father and who respected the large Smith family. This was never more apparent than at the first general conference after President Smith's death. The conference was held the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd of June 1919, rather than in early April, because of the cancellation of public meetings during the flu epidemic. The first session of this conference, held in the Tabernacle on Sunday morning, June 1, was a Solemn Assembly in which President Heber J. Grant was sustained as seventh president of the Church. In his lengthy remarks following the sustaining of the General Authorities, President Grant not only eulogized President Joseph F. Smith in superlative terms but also gave instructions that the speakers at an overflow meeting in the Assembly Hall were to "devote the time and their remarks to the memory of President Joseph F. Smith." In his own eulogy, President Grant read a letter he had written to the Smith family, which included this statement: "I have said many times that no man who ever lived, with whom I have been associated, had been beloved by me as much as your dear departed husband and father." He related how Joseph F. Smith had been a surrogate father to him, taking the place of his own natural father, whom he had never known. He also told how as a young man he would leave his own ward to attend other meetings where he had heard Joseph F. Smith was to speak. "I bear witness to you," he told the Tabernacle audience, "that from my early childhood days, when I could not thoroughly understand and comprehend the teachings of the gospel, that I have had my very being thrilled, and tears have rolled down my cheeks, under the inspiration of the living God, as I have listened to Joseph F. Smith when preaching the gospel." He then added this significant appraisal of the oratorical ability of President Joseph F. Smith and his deceased son, Hyrum: "I believe that Joseph F. Smith and his son, Hyrum M. Smith, more than any other men to whom I have listened, who were born in the Church of Christ in our day, were the greatest preachers of righteousness." (Conference Report, June 1919, p. 13.)

Many other speakers during the conference eulogized the deceased prophet. Most of them focused on his superb character, his family, or his preaching ability. Elder Melvin J. Ballard, who had been sustained as the newest member of the Twelve the first day of the conference, said this of President Smith: "How I want to live to go where he is! I do not care whether the streets are paved with gold, whether there are diamonds and jasper in the walls. I do not care what kind of place it is. If I can go where President Smith has gone and be with him and men like him, it will be heaven to me; I want to be there." (Ibid., p. 71.) Elder David O. McKay, as others had done, emphasized the strength of President Smith's family. Said he: "I know of no better example than the home of our late beloved President Joseph F. Smith. His sons, his daughters, his wives, are true to the gospel, true to the truth. They loved and honored President Smith, but through that, they love and honor that which is even greater—the truth, the gospel." (Ibid., p. 79.) And presiding bishop Charles W. Nibley lauded the deceased prophet's powerful speaking ability. Said he, "As President Grant said this morning in the Tabernacle, no two preachers of righteousness like him and his son, Hyrum, has this church ever produced. I endorse that sentiment." (Ibid., p. 63.)

Amidst this extraordinary outpouring of adulation for his father, Joseph Fielding Smith did not mention his father's name in the talk he delivered at the conference. He did, however, mention him impliedly. "I realize perfectly," he said, "that time is passing, that man's probation here, or his days upon the earth, are limited, and when his work is finished, in the natural course of things it is to be expected that he will be taken home." He then revealed the positive, forward-looking attitude he had toward the work when he added: "I accept the changes that come, rejoicing in the fact that the gospel which we have received is true. Changes of necessity must come, conditions vary from day to day, and new scenes are bound to present themselves as time rolls on." Then showing his unconditional support of the new leaders of the Church, he said: "I voted with full purpose of heart and with the determination, with the rest of you, to uphold and sustain the constituted authorities, to stand by them, because I realize that they hold the power and the priesthood which has descended from the day of the Prophet Joseph Smith." Finally, he bore his testimony: "I know just as well as it is possible for me, I believe, to know in this life, that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God. There is no doubt in my mind in the least that Brigham Young was called and appointed to be his successor and that he presided over this people by the will of God and was filled with the spirit of inspiration and prophecy. So likewise it was with President John Taylor, President Wilford Woodruff, President Lorenzo Snow, and all others who have presided, and so it must be unto the end." Joseph Fielding then added this statement, which, at the time, he did not realize would have such special meaning to him: "The Lord will not permit any man to reach the presidency in this church who is not prepared, who is not worthy, and who he does not want." (Ibid., pp. 93, 94.)

With the death of his father, President Joseph F. Smith, and his brother, Hyrum M. Smith, Joseph Fielding acquired a new identity. Throughout his ministry before their deaths in 1918, Joseph Fielding had been overshadowed by these two powerful men. As the appraisals of President Heber J. Grant and Bishop Charles W. Nibley indicate, this pair had been generally regarded as the premier preachers of their day. They were eloquent, fiery, and possessed of a powerful pulpit presence. Through their speaking ability, they had the power to lift and motivate people as none of the other General Authorities could. His status as the Prophet, of course, added great weight to the words of President Joseph F. Smith. And the comparative youth of Hyrum M. and his seniority in the Twelve held out the reasonable prospect that he would one day be president of the Church, thereby increasing the attentiveness with which members of the Church listened to his words. At the time of his death, Hyrum was only forty-five; the only ones who outranked him in apostolic seniority were his father, President Anthon H. Lund, President Heber J. Grant, and Elders Rudger Clawson and Reed Smoot. Of these, Reed Smoot who was older by ten years, was nearest in age to Hyrum. In these circumstances, Hyrum was the one among President Smith's sons who drew most of the attention of the Church membership. It was Hyrum that the conventional speculation of the day surmised would one day become president of the Church, a speculation that had foundation, for had he lived, he would have been the senior apostle at the death of President Heber J. Grant.

The principal focus on President Smith and his son Hyrum inevitably diverted attention from Joseph Fielding who, in terms of public popularity, suffered by comparison with them. Joseph Fielding's speaking style was the opposite of his father and brother. While theirs was marked by a fiery, convincing eloquence, accompanied often by the use of telling anecdotes or parables, Joseph Fielding's sermons were characterized by a measured, deliberate, analytical quality, almost professorial in their tone and content. Such a style was not calculated to create excitement and enthusiasm in an audience, or to cause people to go out of their way to hear him speak. Aside from these considerations, Joseph Fielding had been somewhat in the shade from the beginning of his ministry because of the public furor at the time of his call to the Twelve. In the minds of many, therefore, his call was tainted by the charge of nepotism that had been so vigorously pressed by Frank J. Cannon and the Salt Lake Tribune.

But with the death of President Smith and Hyrum, a transformation occurred in the life of Joseph Fielding Smith. Symbolically, that change was never more evident than at the general conference of June 1919. In this the first general conference since the death of his father, he was not introduced as Joseph F. Smith, Jr., as had been done previously, but as Joseph Fielding Smith, the official name by which he would be known during the remainder of his life. However, the change in his official name was, in a sense, merely cosmetic and did not signify or adequately express the fundamental changes that recent events had wrought in Joseph Fielding Smith. In a sense, he had stepped out of the shadow of his father and brother and become his own man. Moreover, he had suddenly become the head of the extended Smith family. Because he bore his father's name and occupied high position in the Church, all members of the family intuitively looked to him for leadership and counsel, even those who were older than he. And his leadership in the family was strengthened by his role as the executor of his father's will. For months prior to the Prophet's death, Joseph Fielding had counseled with his father about his personal affairs, and the father had instructed his son how he wanted his estate to be handled at his death. Added to this, of course, was Joseph's expanding role as a husband and father, the head of a family of eight children ranging in age from seventeen to the year-old toddler, Lewis Warren, who had been born March 10, 1918. Finally, the events of 1918 seem to have caused a marked change in attitude toward him by those detractors who had said nepotism was the reason for his call. Because four high-placed members of the Smith family had died since then, and because Joseph Fielding Smith had proven himself a man of character and ability, such critics had largely fallen silent and no longer trumpeted this baseless, humiliating charge.

While the events of 1918 made vast changes in the life and status of Joseph Fielding Smith, some things did not change and, indeed, would never change for him. Chief among these was the continual round of stake conference assignments. In the weeks following the general conference in June 1919, he attended conferences in the Cache Valley, Panguitch, South Davis, St. Johns, Snowflake, Emery, Portneuf, San Luis, Moapa, and Star Valley stakes. Nor was there any change in the basic message he delivered to the Saints at these conferences. "I have considered that it has been my mission," he told the audience at the October general conference in 1919, "having been so impressed, I think, by the spirit of the Lord in my travels in the stakes of Zion, to say unto the people that now is the day of repentance and to call upon the Latter-day Saints to remember their covenants, the promises they have made with the Lord to keep his commandments, and follow the teachings and the instructions of the Elders of Israel, the Prophets of God—as they have been recorded in the holy scriptures. In all things, we should walk humbly and circumspectly before the Lord that we might be blessed and guided by his Holy Spirit. I think this is the day of warning. . . . There is a constant need of warning, teaching and calling upon the people to remember the promises the Lord has made unto them; urging them to be true and faithful in all things, to his holy word, that none may go astray, nor falter, or be overcome and trodden down and be cast back again into the world, to partake of the sins of the world from whence they came. And so I feel it is my mission to cry repentance and to call upon the people to serve the Lord." (Conference Report, October 1918, pp. 88, 89.)

Here then, expressed in his own words, is the basic statement of purpose that would govern Elder Smith throughout all the days of his apostolic ministry. He never deviated from it. It was a theme to which he returned again and again and which will be found interwoven throughout his voluminous writings and sermons over the years. Often the words changed, as did the illustrations or citations of authority, but the basic message was always the same—repent, search and ponder the scriptures, keep the commandments, be true and faithful to your covenants. And if the message did not get through to the Saints by reason of the cumulative effect of his words, repeated thousands of times over the years, it did come across through the exemplary life of this Latter-day Saint. He never ceased his quest for a more complete understanding of the holy scriptures, nor his efforts to live a perfect life.

Between the never-ending stake conferences, Joseph continued to divide his time between family affairs and his headquarters assignments. His high position provided no immunity from the normal trials and traumas of life. "In the afternoon," he wrote on New Year's day, 1920, "Ethel and I called to see my mother, who fell on the 26th and broke her arm. Lewis is somewhat improved, but far from well yet." The baby was ill during most of the month. When he was home, the concerned father hovered over the baby and several times during January stayed home from the office all day to nurse him. By the 27th he was able to report: "Lewis somewhat better." Then it was Ethel's turn. "I left Ethel sick with acute gastritis," he recorded on the last day of January as he left to attend the Curlew stake conference in Snowville. He returned two days later to find her "somewhat improved." The conferences for the first two weeks in February were cancelled because of the flu epidemic, which, he wrote, was "again raging." He spent the extra time "visiting the sick."

Later in the month, Joseph himself was almost sick with annoyance as he tried to raise money to pay the large inheritance taxes on his father's estate. "This is indeed an outrage," he fumed, "and a most unjust and vicious law." As Joseph saw it, the inheritance tax law was "a fine against a man's family for permitting him to die!"

At his office, Elder Smith was busy conducting research for a one-volume history of the Church. During the course of this work, a major change occurred in the administration of the Historian's Office that affected him significantly. Following the death of President Anthon Lund on March 2, 1921, Elder Smith was appointed as the Church Historian replacing him. In this position, Joseph would outrank Elders Orson F. Whitney and Brigham H. Roberts in historical matters despite the fact that, at the time, they had a far wider reputation as historians than he. Elder Whitney, for instance, had written and published a four-volume History of Utah, while Elder Roberts had edited Joseph Smith's History of the Church, a multivolume work, and had written a six-volume Comprehensive History of the Church. But Joseph's overall experience in the Historian's Office had been of a far broader scope than theirs, which better qualified him to give administrative direction to the work of the office. While Elders Whitney and Roberts had been engaged chiefly in the research and writing of their major works, Joseph had been working diligently behind the scenes, acquiring a detailed, firsthand knowledge of the inner workings of the department. The charter that governs the work of the Church historian was given by revelation in November 1831, in which John Whitmer, who was then the historian, was admonished to travel throughout the Church, "writing, copying, selecting and obtaining all things which shall be for the good of the church, and for the rising generations that shall grow up on the land of Zion." (D&C 69:8.)

The core element of the Church's historical archives is the Journal History, which is an ongoing chronological record of the activities and progress of the Church. Shortly after his appointment as an assistant Church historian in April 1906, Joseph Fielding was given the responsibility to compile the Journal History for the twentieth century. This comprised his major activity during the years of his service in the Historian's Office, and it provided him with a more intimate knowledge of the Church during this period than any other person as he sifted through the voluminous materials to condense what he considered the most important information to be preserved in this basic record. In addition to this primary responsibility, Joseph was involved in classifying and indexing the historical archives and in preparing summaries of ward and stake histories. He also proofread most of Elder B. H. Roberts's manuscripts, suggesting editorial changes where he thought needful. And he also provided research assistance for Elder Roberts, preparing summaries on various subjects for his use.

With this background, Elder Smith was well qualified to serve as the Church historian. He undertook his new duties March 17, 1921, and discharged them for almost fifty years, being released on February 11, 1970, nineteen days after he was ordained as the tenth president of the Church. The one-volume history he had been working on before his appointment was completed and published in 1922. Titled Essentials in Church History, this useful work has gone through more than twenty editions and has been translated into several languages, including Spanish, German, and French. As its title implies, the book does not purport to be a detailed, definitive work but rather sketches the salient points of Church history. It is written in Joseph's usual taut, unadorned style, which aims for clarity and accuracy, objectives he attained without question. No one reading this book can honestly misunderstand the author's meaning. Nor can anyone reasonably question the accuracy of the facts it states. But like all histories, Elder Smith's book reveals the bias of the author, a bias he never sought to hide or deny. His analysis and interpretation of the facts, and his emphasis, or lack of it, given to certain facts have, therefore, been criticized by some whose own biases, perhaps, cause them to question Elder Smith's objectivity. This never troubled him, however. He was willing to let the book stand on its own merits. He patiently stood by, prepared to defend against any criticisms leveled against it.

Essentials of Church History was only the first of many books on historical themes that Elder Smith published during his tenure as Church historian. In addition to these, he also wrote numerous articles for the Church publications and carried on a voluminous correspondence with persons all over the world who wrote in for information or for answers to questions. Some of these questions and their answers were published as a regular feature of the Improvement Era and were ultimately compiled in five separate volumes called Answers to Gospel Questions. These covered the whole field of gospel study and research, extending from the premortal life to the millennial reign and beyond. Like all of Joseph Fielding Smith's other writings, these were carefully crafted, lean, concise, and precise.

A month before Elder Smith was appointed Church historian, Ethel gave birth to her seventh child and third son, George Reynolds, who was born February 13, 1921. The arrival of this boy further adjusted the imbalance between males and females in the Smith family. When Reyn appeared on the scene, the score stood at six to three. Three years later, it would go to six to four. "Ethel gave birth to a fine baby boy today at 1:18 p.m.," the proud father recorded on May 5, 1924. After noting that his wife had endured "considerable suffering" in the birth, he added, "This is her fourth son and eighth child, making my tenth." An entry made a week later implies that the infant's name emerged from a family council: "My mother came down tonight," the father recorded a week later, "and I blessed the baby, giving him the name chosen by his mother and the children, that of Douglas Allan."

Joseph and Ethel were never able to bring the girl-boy ratio into complete balance, although they came close. In the end, it stood at six to five when the last child, a boy, was born prematurely on March 4, 1927. Eight days later, the mother and her baby were brought home from the hospital. "This afternoon," Elder Smith wrote on March 12, "I had Ethel brought home from the hospital in an ambulance and I brought the baby, Josephine helping me, in a closed automobile. In the evening I blessed and named the baby boy, giving him the name Milton Edmund."

1992 Deseret Book Co.
