Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Thirteen

A New Home and Old Routines

The home to which Elder Smith brought his new son was the family's new home located on the east bench of Salt Lake City at 998 Douglas Street. The decision to build this gracious two-story brick home was made only a few months after the birth of Douglas. Several circumstances drove the decision. First, the Smiths were crowded in the old home. They needed more room to comfortably accommodate the parents and their ten children. Second, the Salt Lake City business district had begun to encroach upon the residential neighborhoods to the west, robbing them of the quiet serenity that had once made them appealing. A third factor that doubtless influenced the decision was a desire to get away from the heavy pall of smoke that often blanketed the downtown area during the winter months, which was aggravated by the output from thousands of coal-burning stoves and by atmospheric inversions that sometimes locked in the polluted air mass for weeks at a time. The Douglas street home site was on the valley's east bench, which was usually above this pollution.

As it was designed, the new home was to have a tennis court and a horseshoe pit to provide recreation for the entire family, and especially for Elder Smith's troupe of growing boys. After the work got under way with a groundbreaking in 1925, the whole family watched the progress of the construction with avid interest. A ride in the evening became a favorite family activity, usually ending with a stop at 998 Douglas to see what new features had been added since the last inspection.

The new house was ideally located for the convenience of a growing family. Within a radius of five blocks were the ward chapel and the primary, junior high, and high school buildings, while the University of Utah Campus was within easy walking distance. The street-car line was only half a block away, and the downtown and neighborhood shopping areas could be reached within minutes. Except for Josephine and Julina, who were in their twenties when the Smiths moved into it, the Douglas Street house became the "family home" for the children. It was here that Joseph and Ethel performed their most important work of parenting, implanting in the minds of their children ideas, images, and remembrances that would help form their character and guide them through life.

The perceptions most people have of a prophet are based upon his written or spoken words, his demeanor in the pulpit, or things written about him. A few who are closely associated with him get a better view of the man, learning about his work habits on the job, his likes and dislikes, his reactions to stressful situations, his personal philosophy, and his general attitudes toward people and life in general. And a still smaller number see him in the intimate surroundings of the home where he lives from day to day, eating, playing, visiting, studying, working, or relaxing with his family. Occasionally a curtain is parted temporarily to enable us to get a glimpse of a prophet in that setting, where he is viewed strictly as a man—as a husband, or as a father. We have already seen the appraisal of Joseph Fielding Smith written by his wife, Ethel, which provides a revealing insight into his character and some of his behind-the-scenes activities. We are also indebted to Amelia Smith, the youngest daughter, who later married Elder Bruce R. McConkie, and to Douglas Smith, the next-to-youngest son, who kindly provided the author with written answers to a lengthy set of questions that throw further light on the human qualities and characteristics of Elder Smith from the perspective of his children. Amelia was about ten when the family moved into the Douglas Street home and Douglas was a toddler of two. How, then, was life with father? Amelia remembers that he "was kind yet firm," and that "he never resorted to physical punishment for any misbehavior on our part, but would put his hands on our shoulders and say in a very hurt tone, 'I wish my kiddies would be good.' That was the most effective punishment he could give us and was far worse than any spanking could have been, simply the thought that we had hurt him."

Douglas reported that discipline by his father ordinarily consisted of "a gentle lecture," although "on rare occasions he would give what was more of a pat than a kick with the side of his foot to the seat of your pants." Even such a mild punishment was usually followed by "a hug and an expression of love." When he was younger, Douglas's "main discipline was sitting on a chair until things quieted down," a penalty imposed for "running around the house and being too rough." This son, brimming with boyish energy, seems to have had a penchant for tripping over the carpets and running into things, leaving a train of havoc behind. Mindful of this failing, when the father went through the family "to kiss everyone good-bye as he headed for work in the morning," the kiss given to Douglas was usually accompanied by the admonition to "remember your failing."

As to the practice of kissing in the Smith family, Douglas said: "President Joseph F. Smith apparently kissed his children and my father followed his example. As a matter of fact, Dad kissed his brothers and sisters; and Uncle Willard Smith would kiss everyone. A trip to the bank would bring a kiss which was a little embarrassing when you were in the lobby. Dad's children always greeted him with a kiss, even in public. This went on right up to his dying day."

Elder Smith was very much involved with his children and joined with them in their activities around the home. "He played games with us," wrote Amelia, and "he provided musical instruments . . . books, magazines and other opportunities for us to become cultured." In explaining that her father took a personal interest in her education, she noted, "More than once I had to retrieve my school books from him to do my studying."

As one might expect, Elder Smith was anxious to share his convictions with his children. "Probably the most important thing he did," wrote Amelia, "was to never miss an opportunity to bear his testimony to his family when we were together, to let us know what a great debt of gratitude we all owe to the Savior for what he did for us, and how much he loved him."

Douglas remembers how his father joined in games and competitions with the children. "I recall taking chairs and tipping them over," he wrote, "and covering them with blankets to make caves and tunnels out of the front room and he entered into the fun of crawling through them." As the children matured, the nature of the games Elder Smith enjoyed with them underwent a radical change. "We played checkers together," wrote Douglas, "and more frequently chess." In reflecting on the fact that in his maturity he often bested his father in chess, Douglas observed, "I have since thought it may have been just a little graciousness on the part of my father, which kept me interested."

The preparation of the tennis court and the horseshoe pit at the Douglas Street home clearly implies Elder Smith's avid interest in sports and his desire to involve his children in them. "In particular, he enjoyed playing baseball with the boys, or family," wrote Amelia, "and for many years played handball at the Deseret Gymn. He also enjoyed watching a basketball or football game, especially if his son was playing." Indicating the frame of mind with which her father approached competitive sports, Amelia noted: "I would not say that he was aggressive as an athlete. He enjoyed winning, but it was the sport and not the winning that was important to him."

Given his mild and loving nature, it may come as a surprise to some to learn that Elder Smith encouraged his sons to engage in boxing. "Our family had boxing gloves," wrote Douglas, "that from time to time were put to use by the boys. On occasion, Dad would put them on and act like he was boxing with us; but I remember I would not hit him out of respect, and he would not hit me out of love, so our fights were not like Paul suggested, but we did fight like one 'that beateth the air.' "

This atmosphere at home naturally influenced the boys toward competitive sports at school. Douglas, in mentioning this, tells in his own words the incident referred to in the preface when he was injured in a football game. "In an effort to make a tackle of a running back, I caught his heel under my chin and was knocked out. I lay on the sidelines until the game was over, and then in the locker room I was again instructed to lie down on some blankets. Dad came down to be with me and as happens in locker rooms, the language got to be a little rough. My father stood up on a bench and called everyone to attention and delivered a sermon on swearing that was very effective, but embarrassing to me, so I feigned that I had passed out again."

Life at 998 Douglas Street when all the children were home was never tame, especially when friends came calling. The Smith children were gregarious and outgoing, and their many friends felt very much at home when they visited the Smiths. Ordinarily there was a game of some kind going on there amid music practices, studying for tests, or sprucing up under Ethel's efficient, low-key direction.

A typical day in this household got under way early. Speaking of her father, Amelia noted that "he was an early riser, always up by 5 a.m. She remembered, during the days of coal furnaces, "hearing him cleaning out the furnace and getting the fire started to warm up the house for when we got up." And in the summer, she reported, "we would hear the sprinkling system running, and then usually by 7 a.m. we were assembled for family prayer and then breakfast." As Douglas reported it, breakfast in the Smith home was an adventure: "Our home on Douglas Street had a long kitchen with a long table," he wrote, "that would seat the whole family. Two long benches were on either side of the table with one of them being against the wall. . . . The younger kids had to sit on the bench against the wall, which meant crawling under the table to get to our place." Joseph Fielding always sat at the head of the table. "No one sat at the foot of the table," Douglas explained, "for it ran to the refrigerator." The meals were always commenced with prayer, which was usually offered by the father, although others prayed from time to time as invited. Doug had mixed feelings about his father's prayers when he was a growing boy, anxious to get on with the business of a meal. "When Dad prayed," he reported, "it was often long, it seemed to me, and the prayer would generally ask the Lord to keep the Saints 'true and faithful.' He would pray for the Lord to hasten His coming and I did not particularly join him in those feelings for I figured the Lord's coming was going to bring some unhappy events."

Like its predecessor, the Douglas Street home had a library whose walls were lined with shelves from floor to ceiling, crammed with books or magazines. It was here that Elder Smith worked early in the morning or late at night, researching, writing, and editing the numerous books, pamphlets, and articles he published over the years. To the extent it was feasible to do so, Elder Smith involved his children in these writing projects. "Some of us were given the opportunity to proofread some of his writings," wrote Amelia. And Douglas noted that sometimes his father provided a strong incentive for the children to delve into his writings by paying ten cents "for every error they could find by checking, either before or after him." Illustrating the meticulous care with which Elder Smith labored over his manuscripts, Douglas wrote, "He never let anything go without personally checking it himself."

Joseph Fielding was also precise with the spoken word and encouraged the children to follow his example. "He had two corrections he would make in our speech," wrote Douglas, "but he fought a losing cause. One, when people said 'each and every,' he would want to know which is the each and which is the every. He considered it a redundant phrase and would have preferred 'each and all.' . . . Two, he claimed that a person was truthful and the Book of Mormon or the Church was true." Because of the frequency with which these grammatical errors were and are repeated, Douglas lamented that his father was unable to "sell" the correct usage, either to certain members of his own family, or to the Church at large.

Only a few months after the Smiths moved into their new Douglas Street home, Ethel gave birth to her ninth and last child. It was by far her most difficult birth. Everything proceeded normally until Wednesday, March 2, 1927, when Elder Smith recorded in his diary: "In the evening while at the table eating, Ethel was taken with a hemorrhage." Joseph immediately got her to bed and sent for the family doctor, D. G. Edmunds, and a nurse, Lillian Jennings. They were able to stanch the bleeding so that by Thursday the doctor believed that the problem was under control and that Ethel would be able to carry the baby to term. But on Friday, Joseph reported, "It was evident that she would have to go to the hospital as her condition was worse." She was taken there in an ambulance early Friday morning, and Dr. Edmunds induced labor. "Everything went on successfully," Joseph noted, "and at 5:20 Friday March 4, she was delivered of a son, prematurely, weighing about 5 1/2 pounds. With skillful medical attention, both she and the baby were saved, the case being very critical for both of them." Eight days later, Ethel was returned home in an ambulance while Joseph, assisted by Josephine, took the baby home in the automobile. "In the evening," Elder Smith wrote, "I blessed and named the baby boy, giving him the name of Milton Edmund." This helpless infant, whose middle name honored the doctor whose skill had preserved his life, grew into the athletic young man whose name would be remembered in the annals of University of Utah football, except there the Milton was shortened to "Mit."

So with the birth of this baby, the childbearing cycle of Joseph Fielding and Ethel's marriage ended; and two months later, another cycle began as this diary entry explains: "I united in marriage at the Salt Lake Temple, Elder Henry Max Reinhardt and my daughter Josephine. I believe this young man is a good, clean Latter-day Saint, and hope they will be happy forever." Within ten years, this new family cycle would see six more of the Smith children married in the temple to "good clean Latter-day Saints." It would end in March 1950 with the marriage of Milton. And the third Smith family cycle began in 1932: "Josephine gave birth to a daughter, 7 pounds 9 2/3 ounces," Elder Smith recorded on August 15 of that year. "This is my first grandchild. We are all very happy as it began to appear that she would have no children."

When the Smiths moved into their new home, it was within the boundaries of the Yale Ward of the Liberty Stake. Their chapel, a new brick structure, dignified by white two-story-high colonial pillars at its entrance, was only a block and a half east of Douglas Street. The building, although in use at the time, had not been dedicated because the ward members had not yet contributed their share of the cost of constructing and furnishing it. Soon after the Smiths moved in, the local bishopric levied a "building assessment" on the members of the ward to raise the money needed to pay their share of the cost. Elder Smith made a generous donation for this purpose; and when the fund-raising effort bogged down, he also donated the Reo to the bishop for resale. "There were feelings of nostalgia as the old automobile was driven away for the last time," reported Elder Smith's son, Joseph.

It was a time of celebration in the neighborhood when, at last, the chapel was paid for and ready to be dedicated. President Heber J. Grant accepted the invitation to dedicate the building. On the stand with the Prophet at the service, held March 18, 1928, were elders George Albert Smith and Joseph Fielding Smith of the Twelve, both of whom resided in the ward. The audience of five hundred and fifty filled every seat in the chapel, the cultural hall, and the connecting foyer of the new building.

In a sense, the dedication of the Yale Ward chapel marked a milestone in the style of Church buildings. Ward chapels were unknown in the Mormon settlements in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois, and also in Utah and surrounding areas for several years after the exodus. When chapels were first built in the West, and for several decades thereafter, their entrances usually consisted of small vestibules, or cloak rooms, adjacent to the chapel. The change made by the Yale Ward chapel, and soon copied elsewhere, introduced a large foyer at the entrance that not only provided adequate space for people to remove coats and hats or winter wear but also served as a suitable place for small receptions or other social gatherings.

As Elder Smith continued with his apostolic ministry during this period, he noted other major changes in the structure and procedures of the Church. It had now grown to over 650,000 members, an increase of more than 60 percent since the time of his call in 1910, and the number of stakes had increased from 62 to 101 during the same period. Yet, the number of General Authorities had remained constant, thus greatly increasing the administrative burdens on Joseph and his brethren. Beginning in January 1928, meeting schedules were rearranged when priesthood quorums discontinued midweek meetings, holding instead gospel instruction classes during the Sunday School hours. This experimental change also included Sunday classes for all age groups, thereby reserving Tuesday evening as an activity night for young men and women. At the same time, the young men introduced another innovation, the Vanguard program for fifteen- and sixteen-year-old boys. Later when the Boy Scouts developed the Explorer program, patterned largely after the Vanguards, the Church adopted Explorer Scouting.

These and other changes were evidences of a vibrant church that altered its procedures and programs as necessary to serve the needs of a rapidly growing membership. But the basic doctrines and objectives of the Church remained unchanged, as did the role and the methods of Elder Smith and his brethren. They continued their customary round of stake conferences and other meetings at an accelerated pace. During the first few weeks of 1929, Joseph attended conferences in the Woodruff, Coalville, and Magna stakes in addition to special Sunday School meetings at Brigham City where the new class procedures were explained. He also participated in the annual Leadership Week at BYU, where he spoke at the general assembly as well as in a workshop where he discussed "Marriage according to the LDS View." While in Provo on this occasion, Elder Smith had a nice visit with Julina and Emily, both of whom were attending BYU. Their absence from home and Josephine's marriage had removed some of the pressures on the family home on Douglas Street, where Joseph Jr. and Lewis were kept very busy shoveling snow this winter season. There were frequent, heavy snow storms throughout January, accompanied by freezing temperatures. "Coldest night of the winter," Joseph recorded on January 23, "one degree below, officially in S. L. Colder everywhere else." Four days later, he noted that in returning from Brigham City, "snow drifts delayed the train about 2 hours." In Salt Lake City, frigid temperatures made life unpleasant, especially for those, like the Smiths, who lived on the east bench of Salt Lake City. At the time, there were only a few houses east of Douglas Street, so that the cold winds blowing out of the canyon to the east swept down there without impediment. "The past night has been the most disagreeable for us since moving to 998 Douglas," Elder Smith wrote on February 7. "The wind from the mountains was very strong. We could not warm the house above 55 degrees except in the basement, where we had to go to keep warm." The foul weather and drafts in the house gave Joseph a bad cold. "My eyes and nose are running," he reported on Saturday the 9th. Notwithstanding this, he had to leave early the next morning to drive to Garland in northern Utah with Milton H. Welling to attend the Bear River stake conference. "I was miserable all day and glad to get home," he wrote. Elder Smith spent most of the two following days in bed recuperating. He felt well enough on Wednesday, February 13, to do something that belied his illness and typified the interest he always took in his children. "Today I baptized my son, George Reynolds Smith, in the Tabernacle font," he recorded on that day. "Also confirmed him. He is 8 years old today." With the exception of Amelia, Lewis, and Douglas, all of Joseph Fielding's children were baptized and confirmed on their birthdays, which made it easy for them to remember this significant date. Had not unavoidable conflicts made it impossible, these other three children would doubtless have been baptized on their birthdays also. Such a practice reveals the orderly caste of Elder Smith's mind and his preoccupation with historical events.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
