Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Fourteen

Shepherding amid Challenges and Crises

Joseph Fielding continued to work regularly in the His- Jtorical Department as he had for many years in the Jpast and as he would continue to do for more than Jfour decades in the future. The detailed knowledge of Church history he had gleaned from this service and his thorough grasp of Church doctrine had prompted his appointment as a member of the reading committee of the Twelve, whose duty it was to scrutinize manuscripts prepared for publication by General Authorities of the Church to determine if they contained doctrinal or historical inaccuracies or questionable analyses. His diary contains several entries about a manuscript the reading committee was then reviewing, of which this one is typical: "We met with the committee reading B. H. Roberts M.S. at 8:15," he recorded on January 15, 1929. "We met with some difficulties in theories advanced by the author." The manuscript referred to was titled The Truth, the Way, the Life. And the "difficulties" related to the author's speculations about the possible existence of earthly beings resembling men whose lives on earth had predated Adam. Because of the absence of scriptural authority to support such a theory, the reading committee withheld approval of the manuscript unless Elder Roberts would edit it to remove the offending speculations. As he was unwilling to do this, the manuscript was never published.

When word of this incident leaked out, it generated lively and widespread discussion and debate, as there were some in the Church, a few occupying high position, who concurred in Elder Roberts's analysis. Apparently wanting his views to be understood by the public, Elder Smith gave a speech at a genealogy conference on April 5, 1930, in which he said in part: "Even in the church there are a scattered few who are now advocating and contending that this earth was peopled with a race—perhaps many races—long before the days of Adam. These men desire, of course, to square the teachings in the Bible with the teachings of modern science and philosophy in regard to the age of the earth and life on it. If you hear anyone talking this way, you may answer them by saying that the doctrine of 'pre-adamites' is not a doctrine of the church, and is not advanced nor countenanced by the church. There is no warrant in the scriptures, not an authentic word, to sustain it." Elder Smith went on to reject the scientific inferences to be drawn from fossil evidences that life on earth predated the advent of Adam.

Stung by this speech, which he apparently interpreted as an attack upon him personally, Elder Roberts spoke out publicly in defense of his views. Moreover, he directed a letter to President Heber J. Grant in which he vigorously criticized the tone and substance of Elder Smith's speech and asked whether it represented the official views of the Church or merely his personal opinion. "In the latter event," wrote Elder Roberts, "I feel that that fact should have been expressed in the discourse." Because of the turmoil created by two General Authorities speaking out publicly in opposition to each other on such a sensitive issue, they were invited to present their views at a special meeting of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve. The outcome of this hearing is indicated by the following journal entry of President Heber J. Grant on January 25, 1931: "After reading the articles by Brothers Roberts and Smith, I feel that sermons such as Brother Joseph preached and criticism such as Brother Roberts makes of the sermon are the finest kind of things to be left alone entirely. I think no good can be accomplished by dealing in mysteries, and that is what I feel in my heart of hearts these brethren are both doing." (Heber J. Grant Collection, Church Archives.)

These comments likely were prompted in part by an experience President Grant had had twenty years before. At the time, there was a controversy on the campus of the Brigham Young University over the issue of organic evolution. President Grant and four other members of the Twelve were assigned by President Joseph F. Smith to study the matter. The upshot was that three members of the BYU faculty were dismissed because of their insistence on teaching and advocating the theory. In the aftermath of this incident, President Joseph F. Smith wrote an article that was published in the Juvenile Instructor and that read in part: "In reaching the conclusion that evolution would be best left out of discussions in our church schools, we are deciding a question of propriety and are not undertaking to say how much of evolution is true, or how much is false. . . . The church itself has no philosophy about the modus operandi employed by the Lord in His creation of the world, and much of the talk therefore about the philosophy of Mormonism is altogether misleading. God has revealed to us a simple and effectual way of serving Him, and we should regret very much to see the simplicity of these revelations involved in all sorts of philosophical speculations." (Juvenile Instructor, April 1911, p. 209.)

As a result of the hearing before the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, Elder Smith and Elder Roberts discontinued the open advocacy of their conflicting views upon this controversial subject. It is apparent from the decision of the Council and the statement of President Heber J. Grant that the Brethren considered that there were no authoritative scriptures that resolved the issue, that the conclusions either of them reached represented only their own thinking and analysis, and that until there was clear, unequivocal revelation to resolve the issue, it remained in the realm of speculation, or what President Grant chose to call the "mysteries."

But while Elder Smith and Elder Roberts discontinued the open advocacy of their contrary views, they continued to harbor them privately, and the freedom to do so was inherent in the decision of the Brethren and in the plan of the Gospel they all accepted. That this was true as to Elder Roberts is apparent from the fact that he refused to edit his manuscript, preferring to leave it unpublished rather than to change it. And that it was true as to Elder Smith is clear from the fact that more than twenty years later, long after the death of Elder Roberts and President Grant, he wrote and had published a book entitled Man, His Origin and Destiny, in which he repeated the basic arguments, with supporting analysis, that he had used years before during the controversy with B. H. Roberts.

A few months after Man, His Origin and Destiny was published, Elder Smith was invited to review his book at a conference of institute and seminary teachers held on the campus of the Brigham Young University. Before the conference, the book was made required reading for all the participants so they would be better prepared to understand Elder Smith's presentation. He spoke twice during the conference and afterward participated in questions-and-answer sessions. Because of Elder Smith's position in the Church at the time and the emphasis given to his book before the conference began, questions were raised whether his views represented the Church's official position on organic evolution and the age of the earth. Many attending the conference were, of course, acquainted with the contrary views of B. H. Roberts, deceased, and naturally wondered whether his views had been formally or impliedly rejected by the Church.

Later in the conference, President J. Reuben Clark, counselor in the First Presidency, was invited to address the assigned subject, "When are the Writings or Sermons of Church Leaders Entitled to the Claim of Scripture?" In his talk, President Clark began from the fundamental premise that only the president of the Church "has the right to receive revelation for the church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the church." (Church News, July 31, 1954.) President Clark recognized that the words of a leader other than the president of the Church could be accorded scriptural status if, as stated in the Doctrine and Covenants, "they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost." (D&C 68:4.) Explaining how the Church would know when this had occurred, he said, "The church will know by the testimony of the Holy Ghost in the body of the members . . . and in due time that knowledge will be made manifest." (Ibid.) He added, "When any man, except the President of the Church, undertakes to proclaim one unsettled doctrine, as among two or more doctrines in dispute, as the settled doctrine of the church, we may know that he is not 'moved upon by the Holy Ghost' unless he is acting under the direction and by the authority of the president." (Ibid.)

President David O. McKay, who was president of the Church at the time, never endorsed Elder Smith's views on this controversial subject. And after he became the head of the Church, President Smith never specifically affirmed them. Since those who have succeeded President Smith have not spoken out on the issue, it remains where President Grant and the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve left it in 1931 and as President Joseph F. Smith stated it in 1911.

Elder Smith never allowed differences of opinion of this kind to alter the kindly feelings he had toward those who disagreed with him. So, while he disagreed with Elder Roberts on these and other matters, he retained a high regard for him. And this was true of all the Brethren. "The general authorities were spoken of with respect," wrote his daughter, Amelia. "I never heard my father speak critically of any of the Brethren, and always sustained or spoke of them with great respect."

A few months after the questions involving B. H. Roberts's manuscript arose, a financial crisis struck Salt Lake City. "The Deseret Savings Bank was forced to close its doors today," Elder Smith wrote on February 15, 1932, "and the Deseret National was taken over by the First Securities National. This caused a great panic and a run on Zions Savings Bank by depositors who became panicky. The bank met all demands successfully, remaining open until 6 p.m. and inviting the foolish people to get their money." The run on the bank continued the following morning "but subsided by noon." Perhaps to explain his characterization of these people as "foolish," Elder Smith noted later, "Several who drew their money lost it to thieves."

The shock waves from this panic persisted for months, causing concern throughout the community and the country. It was one of the manifestations of the great depression that had descended upon the world. This economic crisis affected Joseph Fielding in several ways. It jeopardized his own financial stability because his meager savings were on deposit in the bank. Its failure would destroy a fragile facade of financial security that he had built up over the years. It also increased the pressure he was under, exerted by his role as a director of the bank. "This morning, with Arthur Winter, Asahel Woodruff, and the state examiner," Elder Smith recorded on Monday, May 9, 1932, "I was called to commence the examination of Zions Savings Bank." Throughout the entire week until the following Saturday at noon, Joseph was at the bank from early until late, poring over the records with his associates and the bank examiner. It was a most stressful and uncertain time. No one knew what the outcome would be. Steeped in the history of the Church, Joseph Fielding knew well of the financial debacle in Kirtland, Ohio, a century before that had swamped the early brethren who were involved in a banking enterprise and that had precipitated a massive apostasy. That, in turn, had brought about the exodus of the high leaders of the Church from Kirtland, including his grandfather Hyrum Smith and his great-uncle Joseph Smith. Knowing, therefore, how financial chaos can quickly dissolve ties of love and loyalty, Elder Smith was undoubtedly uneasy about this volatile situation. At the ecclesiastical level, Joseph shared with his brethren concern for the Saints who were pinched by the economic crisis. "Matters of importance concerning the distress of the people were considered," he wrote on June 9, 1932, "and ways of meeting our problems were considered." This entry foreshadowed the first struggling steps taken by Elder Smith and his brethren to help alleviate the heavy economic burdens the great depression had imposed on the people. These steps would ultimately lead to the creation of the Church welfare plan (originally called the security plan) in 1936.

Meanwhile, the shepherding duties of the Twelve remained unchanged. Stake conference and mission tour assignments continued to come with regularity, regardless of the economic problems created by the depression. So, the day after the temple meeting where the Brethren had discussed "the distress of the people," Joseph was on the road again. "At 10 p.m." he wrote on June 10, 1932, "Ethel and I left on the D&RG [Railway] for Wichita, Kansas, where I am to begin a tour of the Central States Mission which will occupy the time until the end of June." Now that her youngest child, Milton, was six years old, Ethel felt comfortable in leaving for such a long trip because the older girls, including Naomi, who was twenty-two at the time, were still at home to supervise him and his older brothers.

Ethel did not go along merely for the ride. As a member of the Relief Society General Board, she would hold training sessions for district and branch Relief Society sisters living in the areas where the mission president had scheduled meetings.

On arriving at Wichita, Kansas, the Smiths were met by mission president Samuel O. Bennion and his wife, their hosts and guides throughout the tour. President Bennion, who was two years older than Elder Smith, would be called as a member of the First Council of Seventy the following year to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Joseph W. McMurrin, who passed away in October 1932.

The routine followed at Wichita, where the Smiths arrived at 9:15 a.m. Sunday June 12, set the standard for the entire tour. "Meetings were held in our own church building at 10:00 a.m., 2 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.," Joseph wrote under that date. "Also, after the 2 p.m. meeting [a meeting was held] with the missionaries. Ethel and Sister Bennion also held a meeting with the Relief Society sisters. It was rather late when we retired." The combination of member and missionary meetings was typical of mission tours conducted during this period. Since there were no stakes within the mission, President Bennion had direct authority as to all local units, branches, and districts, as well as the responsibility to direct the work of the full-time missionaries.

Although they retired late Sunday night, the touring party was up early Monday morning to be on their way in the mission automobile. Driving for them was Elder Player, one of the full-time missionaries. Arriving at Tulsa, Oklahoma, about noon, after a journey of 200 miles in "very warm weather," the party checked in at the Bliss Hotel, freshened up, ate a light lunch, and went immediately to a meeting scheduled for 2:00 p.m. As there was no chapel in Tulsa at the time, the meeting was held in an assembly room at the City Hall. Gathered there were members of the church who lived within a wide radius of Tulsa, some of them traveling as far as two hundred miles on a weekday to see and hear an apostle. The congregation also included some nonmembers, brought there by the missionaries or member friends. "In the evening we held another public meeting and also one with the missionaries," reported Elder Smith, "the sisters meeting with the Relief Society."

Tuesday's journey took the travelers from Tulsa, Oklahoma, to Little Rock, Arkansas, with intermediate stops in Muskogee, Oklahoma, for lunch and Fort Smith, Arkansas, for an afternoon meeting with the Saints. "Our journey was pleasant," noted Joseph, "a rain storm preceding us all the way from Fort Smith—a long day's journey."

An early start Wednesday morning from Little Rock enabled the travelers to arrive at El Dorado, Arkansas, shortly before 1:00 p.m. "After lunch," noted Elder Smith, "we held a meeting with the members of the church in the meeting house." In the evening, the visitors were treated to a fish fry. "Great pans of fish were cooked and the people held a feast," he wrote. Thus fortified, they "commenced another meeting."

On Thursday, the party traveled from El Dorado to Memphis, Tennessee, via Greenville, Mississippi; and on Friday from Memphis to St. Louis, Missouri. During this last leg of their journey, the touring party traveled three hundred miles in four different states, passing through a long string of picturesque towns in America's heartland. Such was their schedule this day, complicated by a late start when a shackle bolt had to be replaced in their car at Memphis, that the travelers were unable to hold meetings along the way. However, they did take time to stop briefly in Fulton, Kentucky, "to see a family of Saints named Williams." And, after ferrying the Ohio River, they visited the lonely cemetery at Mound City, Illinois, where "Union soldiers are buried."

Using modern missionary terminology, Saturday was the travelers' "P" day. "We spent the day in St. Louis," wrote Joseph. "We visited the large park where the World's Fair was held in 1904, and the historical building, also the Catholic Cathedral." Making no effort to conceal his bias, the diarist commented as to the cathedral: "A most magnificent structure, devoted to error and superstition." Their day of relaxation ended at "the elaborate Fox theatre." The show playing there, perhaps a double feature with newsreel and a cartoon, customary theater fare for that day, made no apparent impression on Elder Smith, whose diary was totally silent about the program.

We get the impression that Elder Smith was not quite comfortable with Saturday's relaxed routine and that he came to life, as it were, on Sunday. "This morning at 10:00 a.m. we held a general meeting," he reported. "At 2:30 we held a meeting with the missionaries until 5 p.m. Ethel and Sister Bennion also met with the sisters and instructed them in Relief Society work. At 7:30 we held a public meeting." Interspersed with these meetings were private interviews, priesthood blessings, and the interminable handshaking with those present, some of whom, perhaps, had never before seen let alone shake the hand of an apostle, an event never to be forgotten by the individual and to be remembered forever in family lore. The travelers left St. Louis early Monday morning, June 20, crossing the Mississippi into Illinois. They were reminded that this fabled river had been the pathway for thousands of Mormon converts as they migrated from their homes in Great Britain and Continental Europe via New Orleans, upriver to Nauvoo. A light rain the night before and an overcast sky had cooled the air, making their trip to Springfield especially pleasant. As they approached the Illinois capital, a rock thrown up from the unpaved highway punctured their radiator. During the three hours it took to repair the leak, the Smiths and Bennions visited Lincoln's home and other places of historic interest in the city. Leaving Springfield in midafternoon, they drove on to Carthage, where they arrived shortly before 5:00. "We went to the old jail," wrote Joseph, "where I have a feeling of depression." The gloomy place aroused terrible thoughts of the brutal murder of his grandfather and granduncle that had occurred there eighty-eight years before. "Surely the curse of God is on the place to this day," he confided to his diary.

The travelers had to pick their way carefully out of Carthage. "A cyclone had passed over the town a day or two before," explained Joseph, "and trees were lying everywhere in the streets." The damage was localized in a small area so that once out of town, they made the short trip to nearby Nauvoo without difficulty.

Because of the delay in Springfield, the travelers were unable to spend as much time in historic Nauvoo as they would have liked to do. It was possible, however, to visit the temple site and some of the old homes, including the Mansion House, the Prophet's home, which were unkempt and falling into decay. Elder Smith was incensed on visiting the burial plot of Joseph and Hyrum to find that someone had attempted to remove the bodies. "A malicious act of desecration," he wrote. Joseph's impression of the city was succinctly summarized in this concluding sentence of his diary entry for the day: "The curse of the Almighty is still on Nauvoo and shall remain until Zion is redeemed." Because of the sentiment this statement implies, Elder Smith could never generate much enthusiasm for the later restoration efforts made in Nauvoo.

Since Nauvoo had no suitable accommodations for overnight visitors, Joseph and his party drove on to Keokuk, where they spent the night of the 20th. The following day they drove to Jefferson City, Missouri's capital. En route they stopped to inspect the dam in the Mississippi River below Keokuk. "Joseph Smith, the Prophet, suggested that a dam be placed [at that point] months before his death," Elder Smith noted. They also stopped briefly in Hannibal, Missouri, the home of Mark Twain, whose novels of Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn memorialized life on the river. They arrived in Jefferson City early enough to go to the capitol building, where they had hoped to be granted an interview with the governor. Unfortunately, he was not in his office. However, they did meet there a man named Juell Mayes, "a friend of Geo. Albert and our people." But, the edge of the friendly greeting extended by Mr. Mayes was taken off when Joseph Fielding saw portraits of former governors Daniel Dunklin, L. W. Boggs, and T. Reynolds, who, he wrote, "aided the enemies of our people in the 30's." Until the time of his death, President Smith was rankled by the maltreatment the Latter-day Saints had received at the hands of Missouri's officialdom. And these feelings were translated into a persistent negative attitude toward the state and its subsequent leaders that the passage of time could not erase.

Bending northwesterly from Jefferson City the next day, the travelers drove to Joplin, Missouri, near the borders of Kansas and Oklahoma. On the way, they saw the major dam on the Osage River, "where the water has been backed up many miles, creating several pleasure resorts." Noting that the area traversed during the day was known as the Ozarks, Elder Smith observed that "the people here call the country mountainous." One detects here an implied put-down of the size of the Ozark Mountains. This is understandable, coming from one who was born and reared in the shadows of the towering peaks of the Wasatch.

Meetings were held in and around Joplin Thursday afternoon and evening. The next morning, the travelers drove to Independence, where they arrived at 10:00 a.m. Because of the numerous meetings scheduled over the weekend and the need to recuperate from several days of arduous travel, the party held no meetings Friday afternoon or evening.

Instead of staying at the mission home with the Bennions, Joseph Fielding and Ethel drove to nearby Kansas City, where they stayed with their friends Alfred and Bertha Holmes. Here the travelers freshened up and read the cache of mail that awaited them. Elder Smith was not too impressed. "Received letters from the children," he wrote, "but they did not say much." At least they did not tell of any injuries or illnesses in the family, and that of itself was good news, given the penchant of his young sons to tear around the house.

During the early afternoon, Joseph did something that was typical of his visits in the homes of Latter-day Saints. "I spent a good portion of the time answering questions for Alfred and Bertha Holmes," he wrote. Elder Smith's reputation for gospel scholarship was so well known that members, given the chance, would ply him with doctrinal questions. He patiently responded, often at length, as he did with these trusted friends. Afterward, Elder Smith accepted Alfred's challenge for a game of handball at the Kansas City Athletic Club. Here the apostle worked off the tensions of travel while enjoying the spirit of friendly competition. Later, the Bennions drove to the Holmes's house, where the three couples spent a pleasant evening of dining and conversation.

Thus refreshed, they were ready for the weekend. "I met with the missionaries," Joseph noted on Saturday, June 25, "to hear their reports; and I answered questions." During part of the day, Ethel and Sister Bennion were excused from the missionary meeting to instruct the Relief Society sisters. On Sunday, three general meetings were held. "I occupied the greater portion of the time," Joseph reported, "and we heard short talks from the missionaries. Ethel spoke at the evening meeting. Good attendance."

On Monday the Smiths and Bennions toured some of the historic sites north of Independence. The first was Richmond, Missouri, where they visited the graves of David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery and the site of the jail where Joseph and Hyrum were imprisoned for a while. It was here that the Prophet Joseph Smith, incensed by their vulgarity, rebuked the soldiers who guarded the prisoners. The ramshackle building in Richmond that had served as a prison at the time no longer stood, so the visitors had to imagine what it had looked like. At nearby Liberty, however, the old jail where the Smith brothers were next imprisoned was still standing, leaving nothing to the imagination. The squalid little building, which measured only 22 1/2 by 22 feet on the outside, had walls of double construction. A four-foot space between the outer walls and the inner oak walls was filled with loose rock. Inside were two levels, each about fourteen feet square. The only ventilation came from two small windows with iron bars. The original beds consisted of hewn logs covered with straw. It was reported that the food served to the prisoners was so filthy that they could not eat it until they were driven to it by hunger. It was also reported that at mealtime, the Prophet Joseph Smith insisted that Hyrum sit at the head of the table, symbolizing his status as the elder brother. To see this dreary place, which he called a "dungeon," where his grandfather had been imprisoned, was an emotional experience for Joseph Fielding Smith, especially since the visit occurred on June 27, the 88th anniversary of the martyrdom of his grandfather and his greatuncle in the Carthage jail.

Other historic sites visited during the day were Gallatin; Adam-ondi-Ahman; Haun's Mill, where several Saints were massacred; and Far West, where Joseph Fielding's father was born in 1838. There was no evidence of the small house where the birth occurred; it had stood across the street from the temple site. Nor was there evidence of any construction on the temple site other than the huge cornerstones. Joseph Fielding could not have failed to remember that it was on the southeastern cornerstone that his cousin George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff were ordained to the apostleship and set apart as members of the Twelve prior to their missions to Great Britain.

Except for the Liberty Jail, no buildings standing in Missouri could be identified with the Latter-day Saints, even though the Church had had a presence there longer than in either Ohio or Illinois. The widespread pillaging, looting, and burning of Mormon buildings in Missouri, connected with Governor Lilburn Boggs's order to exterminate the Saints, had literally scoured the countryside of any evidence that they had been there. It was as if the state had wanted to erase all vestiges of Mormon influence. In return, Joseph Fielding Smith had ill feelings toward the state and blamed it for the indignities and woes heaped upon the Church and his family. He was reluctant to applaud the state for any positive accomplishments and was always ready to condemn it for its shortcomings. Joseph and Ethel were entertained by the Ellsworth family in Kansas City the evening of June 27 and spent the following day with the Bennions. "Ethel did some shopping," wrote Elder Smith. "We all visited the Longview Farm in the afternoon where some of the world's finest horses and cows are found. This farm is owned by a woman and is most wonderful in all particulars." Elder Smith also accompanied President Bennion to the hospital three times during the day and evening to visit one of the missionaries who had been operated on for appendicitis. The frequency of the visits implied concern about the elder's condition as did Joseph Fielding's final entry about him: "He was feeling as well as possible in the afternoon."

That night, the Smiths left for home on the Missouri Pacific, transferring to the D&RG Western at Denver. After two nights and a day en route, they arrived in Salt Lake City at 8:30 Thursday morning, June 30.

One might think that after twenty days away from home, Joseph would have taken the day off to unwind before resuming his headquarters duties. Instead, he took a taxi home from the depot, had a bath, changed his clothes, and went immediately to the temple, where the apostles were in session. In recording the events of the day, Joseph Fielding made one of the rare critical entries to be found in his diaries. "Several matters were discussed," he wrote, "including the writing of lessons on the D&C and ----- who has sought the honor, was granted the privilege." Elder Smith was offended by people who sought to aggrandize themselves. It had been his settled practice never to laud his own achievements or to push himself forward. He was content to let his actions speak for themselves, and if they merited commendation, that must come from others, not from his own mouth. Because of his innate modesty and his refusal to actively seek personal recognition or preferment, such a quality in others was irritating to him and occasionally prompted a response of the kind contained in this diary entry. And once in a while the conceited or arrogant conduct of another would bring a verbal response showing his displeasure. Such an incident, related to the author by a person who was present at the time, occurred one day on the elevator of the Church Administration Building. Among those present was the son of a prominent member of the Church who, by his demeanor and words, betrayed an exaggerated sense of self-importance. After the young man left the elevator, Elder Smith said quietly but with apparent feeling, "He makes my tired ache." This phrase eloquently expressed the apostle's disdain for those who are conceited or puffed up.

Another object of Elder Smith's disdain at this time was those members of the Church who, despite the strong admonitions of President Heber J. Grant and other Church leaders to the contrary, persisted in supporting the efforts to repeal the eighteenth amendment, which instituted the prohibition of alcoholic beverages. This issue was conceived in Utah as an effort by Church leaders to perpetuate a legal restriction based upon a religious principle. What concerned the Brethren was the negative social effects that would follow repeal. And so Joseph Fielding had joined President Grant and other Church leaders in speaking out on this issue. On Sunday, August 14, 1932, Elder Smith was invited to speak at the sacrament meeting in the 25th ward. The proposed repeal of the eighteenth amendment was the main topic of his discourse. "I advised the people to sustain the 18th amendment," he wrote of his talk, "which is now being attacked by politicians and many ignorant people." It was a source of sorrow to Elder Smith and his brethren when Utah later became the state whose vote was the last one necessary to adopt the amendment, which repealed prohibition.

As has already been noted, it was in 1932 that Joseph Fielding's career as a grandfather began. He was privileged to bless Josephine's baby, his first grandchild, whom he named Maxine Reinhardt. Thereafter as other grandchildren were added to the family, he blessed some of them, or stood in the circle as they were blessed by their own fathers. But, regardless of who was voice in bestowing the name and a blessing, each grandchild was looked upon with special affection as "belonging" to him. The reservoir of love Joseph Fielding Smith had for his family was inexhaustible. Each member, whether wife, child, or grandchild, felt of that love and sensed a special kinship to him. "He was always affectionate with his family, kissing boy and girl alike," wrote a grandson, Hoyt W. Brewster. "I recall being kissed in the lobby of the chapel one Sunday when I was just entering my teenage years—a time when many young men are embarrassed to kiss or be kissed. One of my friends, having observed this exchange of affection, later came up to me and said 'How was the big kiss, Hoyt?' I simply said, 'It was great. He's my grandfather.' I thought it a privilege to be kissed by my grandfather and my father." (Statement in possession of the author.)

This grandson has never forgotten another kissing incident involving President Smith that occurred under more unusual circumstances. Hoyt was serving as a missionary in the Netherlands in 1958 when the London Temple was dedicated. Having been invited to attend this service, along with all the other Dutch missionaries, he was filing into the assembly room with his companion when President Smith saw him. "Without a moment's hesitation," wrote Hoyt, "he jumped up from his chair and extended his arms, motioning me towards him. In that instance I did not see Joseph Fielding Smith, President of the Council of the Twelve Apostles . . . but a grandfather who saw one of his grandchildren for whom he had great love. I didn't hesitate to break ranks and rush to the stand where he embraced me and kissed me in front of that entire solemn assembly. That to me was one of the most sacred and memorable moments of my life." (Ibid.)

Through the eyes of this grandson, we get other revealing glimpses of President Smith: "He was a happy, fun loving grandfather," he wrote. "Until his physical limitations would no longer allow it, he regularly joined in the baseball games that were played at the annual family picnic in July. I recall his once hitting a line drive down the third base line right into the lens of my Uncle Ren's camera who was filming the event." Hoyt also dispels the unfounded rumor that his grandfather was a vegetarian. "While he may have cut down on the eating of meat in later life, the claim that he was a vegetarian is not accurate for he ate meat in our home." As to his preferences in food, Hoyt writes, "He really enjoyed a bowl of bread and milk as a light supper." And a key personality trait he observed in his grandfather was a genuine sense of humility, a reticence to push himself forward, to boast, or in other ways to draw attention to himself.

This grandson finds it significant that the same humility and reticence existed in his mother Naomi. "She was so shy about their relationship that when we attended the solemn assembly where he was sustained as the Prophet, she identified herself as a sister-in-law of Elder Bruce R. McConkie when questioned by the usher about being a family member." This daughter, like the other children of Joseph Fielding Smith, seemed to feel perfectly secure in the mere knowledge of their special family relationship, and the publication of that fact was not necessary to give her a feeling of self-worth or importance. The manner in which this unusual sense of family integrity, cohesion, and self-confidence was created has already been mentioned. Additional insight into this process is provided by the grandson, Hoyt W. Brewster Jr.: "When grand-daddy set me apart as a missionary, he reminded me that my forefathers had given much to the work and much was expected of me. I have always understood that to mean that I was expected to live worthily and to be an example to others so that none could fault the church or my family because of some misdeed on my part. I do not claim perfection, but my life is significantly better because I have acted on the desire to keep my family free from shame." (Ibid.)

To fully understand the character and motivations of Joseph Fielding Smith, one must grasp the overriding influence of his family upon him. His name alone was a constant reminder of his identity and of the duties owed to those who had preceded him. One of these was to implant in his children and their descendants the principles and ideals of the Smith clan. The constant watch-care he maintained over his family is evident from his diaries, which abound with references to its various members. The frequency and variety of these references are illustrated by a few of the entries made during the first few weeks of 1932. On January 3, for instance, he noted that he and Ethel "visited at the home of Bro. and Sister Farr, where Joseph Jr. is paying attention to one of the Farr daughters." Apparently Elder Smith wanted to gauge the qualities of the Farr family. The fact that Joseph Jr. was sealed to the Farr's beautiful daughter, Zella, the following year implies that Elder Smith was satisfied. A few days after visiting the Farr family, Joseph Fielding called on his cousin Patriarch Hyrum G. Smith, who was in "poor health." He visited the Patriarch often until his death on February 4, 1932, and then worked with David A. and George Albert Smith to make the funeral arrangements. He was one of the speakers at the memorial services.

During the period of the patriarch's last illness, Joseph was excused from attending a conference in the Summit Stake in order to speak at the funeral of Ruby Brewster. "Her son Hoyt W.," he explained, "is in the Netherlands Mission. He is engaged to my daughter Naomi." Two years later, Elder Smith performed the temple marriage for this couple. Ten days after speaking at the funeral of Hoyt Brewster's mother, Joseph Fielding wrote, "My sister Jeannette, who has been ill for several days, passed away today shortly before noon." He explained that his sister's later years had not been "the most happy" because of illness and because "her husband Blanchard Ashton lost his life a few years [before] attempting to rescue his sister from drowning." After the funeral, he dedicated his sister's grave. Finally, on February 8, Joseph Fielding wrote: "Ethel returned from the (Patriarch's) funeral and went to bed ill from an attack of influenza. She has been in bed all day. . . . Douglas also ill." A few days later he was able to report: "Ethel feeling better. Douglas also."

These are typical of thousands of Elder Smith's diary entries about members or potential members of his family that amply demonstrate the paramount position they occupied in his thoughts and that reflect the ebb and flow of life among a large and active Latter-day Saint family. Except for Josephine and Emily, who were married; Naomi, who was working and who in September would marry; and Milton, who was too young, all the Smith children were now attending school. Julina and Lois were at Brigham Young University, where Lois was an undergraduate and Julina was working on a master's degree. "Went to Provo in the afternoon," Joseph noted on March 18, "and took the two babies, Douglas and Milton, and Ethel; we brought Julina and Lois home." That night, the apostle "went with Lois to see the basketball games," which were part of the annual high-school tournament. Only two nights before, Elder Smith had attended other tournament games with his fourteen-year-old son, Lewis. Douglas, who would have been insulted had he known he was then classified as a baby, was baptized in the Tabernacle font by his father on May 5, his eighth birthday. Only two days before this event, Joseph Fielding had reported with ill-concealed pride, "Julina successfully passed all requirements at the BYU for a masters degree. She has written a thesis on inter-relations of the Latter-day Saints and the American Indians." Julina received her degree the following month at the commencement exercises in Provo, which her parents attended with their friend Susa Y. Gates.

Meanwhile, Elder Smith never missed an opportunity to spend time with his growing sons. On the Sunday prior to Julina's graduation, he took his son Joseph with him to Logan to attend the conference of the Cache Stake. Eighteen-year-old Joseph Jr. was at the wheel of the family car. The eighty-mile drive to this northern Utah city enabled the pair to engage in unhurried conversation. Young Joseph, who sought to emulate his father, was an avid student of the gospel and never missed the opportunity to ply his father with doctrinal questions. Indeed, he later wrote a book, Religious Truths Defined, which was based in large part on the answers to questions he had put to his father. We may safely assume, therefore, that much of their conversation focused on doctrinal and spiritual themes as they traveled to Logan and back on this Sunday.

Elder Smith was patient and practical in responding to the questions of his children about the doctrines of the Church. And, if time permitted, he answered in great detail. So, a few months after this trip to Logan, young Joseph, who was then a missionary in England, received a letter from his father that answered questions about the role of Jesus Christ as the Creator. Among the many things contained in the father's lengthy answer was this wise advice: "It is sufficient for us, until we are prepared by faith to believe and understand greater things, to confine our study to the salvation of men and the dealings of the Lord with us here and now. Until we can comprehend the simple things of the gospel and put them into practice, we better not try to get off on some other world. If we do we may get lost in transit." Since his son's question was prompted by an inquiry made by someone he was teaching, Elder Smith added this: "If any investigator or member of the church desires to know these things, tell them that they better learn the simple truths and how to live them first. It is foolish to attempt to teach children of the primary grade higher mathematics. We must first master each rung of the ladder, we cannot reach the top in one jump from the bottom. Let your attitude be for the present the same as the Psalmist: 'Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is too high, I cannot attain to it.' (Ps. 139:6)."

A few months after the trip to Logan, Elder Smith took eleven-year-old Reynolds with him to the Tintic stake conference. They drove there early Sunday morning and returned that evening following the second general session in the afternoon. Because of Reyn's youth at the time and his avid interest in sports of all kinds, whether as a participant or a spectator, we can safely assume that the father's conversation with this son did not dwell exclusively on doctrinal themes. It is also safe to assume that the father derived as much enjoyment from his conversation with this eleven-year-old sports enthusiast as he did the conversation with Reyn's more mature brother. And that enjoyment would not have been feigned, for, in fact, the father was as much a sports fan as any of his sons. "In the afternoon attended a 'football' game between the U. of U. and BYU," he wrote two weeks after the Tintic conference. Then, tongue-in-cheek, he added: "They call the game 'football' altho only one man on each side kicks the ball. The others run with it or throw it."

When they became old enough, Elder Smith also enjoyed competing with his sons in handball and horseshoes, as well as other sports. And hiking was an enjoyable sporting activity in which all could join regardless of age or sex. "Today with all the children who were with me," Elder Smith wrote on July 27, 1932, "I climbed to 'Sunset Peak' and other peaks, and to several of the lakes. It was quite a long journey before we returned." The occasion was a four-day holiday the family spent at Brighton in Big Cottonwood Canyon east of Salt Lake City at the cabin of their friend George A. Holt. On the last day, the doting father "took the boys, including the two little fellows, on a 'kyke' up the canyon." The "little fellows," of course, were eight-year-old Douglas and five-year-old Milton. On another occasion, Elder Smith took all of his sons on a long hike up Mill Creek Canyon, where they had to force their way through thick underbrush to reach their destination. As much as he liked to hike, the father vowed he would never again take a hike of that kind. And as far as is known, he never did.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
