Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Fifteen

Another Shadow Falls

As 1932 drew to a close, the Smith family was Asecure, healthy and happy, looking forward Awith optimism to the future. While the depres- Asion had created great want and had alarmingly increased unemployment across the nation, Elder and Sister Smith, who had been reared during a period of economic stress, were accustomed to living frugally. They therefore made the adjustments necessary to conserve their modest resources. which they used wisely in caring for their own family while reaching out to others less fortunate. Meanwhile, they counted their blessings, the most important of which were their children. Josephine, Emily, and Naomi were now happily married to husbands who were faithful and active in the Church and with whom they were wholly compatible. Julina had excelled academically and had received her master's degree. Lois and Amelia were busy discovering boys while pursuing their educational goals. And Joseph Jr. was preparing to leave for England on his mission. Lewis, now a teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood; Reyn, who was looking forward to becoming a deacon soon; and Douglas, a newly baptized member, were developing in a way that filled their parents with Latter-day Saintly pride. Meanwhile, Milton, the baby and pet of the family, lived in that insular, remote world of young childhood where he probably sensed that everybody thought he was pretty special and that he had the unusual power to bring joy to the whole family merely by doing the most ordinary things like expressing thanks for the privilege of going on "kykes" with his father and brothers.

Of all the family, perhaps Ethel was the one most optimistic about the prospects for the future. She was now only forty-three years old, just approaching the prime of her life. For twenty-one years, she had served as a member of the General Board of the Relief Society, the most prestigious and influential group of women in the Church. Not only that, she had stood out as one of the most able and articulate members of this board. "Sister Smith was one of the most brilliant women I ever knew," said Amy Brown Lyman, president of the Relief Society General Board. "I considered her the finest writer and speaker I had on my board." (Stewart and Smith, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, p. 243.) As during the tour of the Central States Mission earlier in 1932 when Ethel accompanied her husband on his Church assignments, she would ordinarily hold training meetings with local Relief Society sisters and would often share the pulpit with her husband at the general ses-sions. Occasionally Ethel attended stake conferences with members of other general boards, independent of her husband, as she did on Friday, August 26, 1932. "This evening," wrote Elder Smith on that date, "Ethel left with representatives of the MIA for Zions Park Stake." She was gone all weekend and did not return until the following Monday morning. "Met Ethel at 11:40 a.m.," Joseph Fielding noted on August 29, "and took her home."

For the first time in her married life, Ethel was able to get away from home several days at a time because there were older children at home who could take care of the younger ones. This gave the mother a sense of freedom and independence she had not known before. And with the younger children growing rapidly, there was the expectation that within a few short years, all the children would be out of the home, leaving Ethel free to travel more extensively with Joseph, to continue her work on the Relief Society board, to pursue her interests in history and writing, and to savor the grandmother's role. Moreover, she continued to enjoy the reflected recognition emanating from her husband, whose extensive writings and steady rise in the hierarchy of the Church shed a special light of distinction upon him and the entire family.

In these favorable circumstances, life was rich and rewarding for Ethel Smith. And prospects for the future were abundant and promising. Yet, within a few months, this rosy picture started to fade. The change began with vague feelings of apprehension that Ethel was unable to explain or mitigate. These down moods were cyclical, coming and going at irregular intervals and varying in their strength and duration. In time they came with greater frequency and intensity, causing deep feelings of depression and fear that so disturbed Ethel that she was unable to perform her daily tasks. Then sometimes, when these dark shadows lifted temporarily, she would be driven to sudden spurts of hyperactivity as if to compensate for any time lost during her periods of disability.

Doctors of today, looking back on Ethel's symptoms, would see in them indications of a chemical imbalance that can now be treated effectively with drugs. At the time, however, her only relief came from the struggling prayers offered regularly in her behalf, the priesthood blessings given by her husband and others, and some professional help. "After the meeting," Joseph wrote on January 30, 1934, "Bro. McKay (David O.) gave Ethel a blessing at her request. She has been ill for several weeks." These blessings always brought peace and comfort. But they were only temporary in their effect and in time wore away, exposing her again to the terrors of her illness.

Every avenue of potential aid for Ethel's relief was explored. "Ethel, who has not been well for some time, is staying with Dr. Pearl U. Nelson for a few days," Joseph wrote shortly after Elder McKay's blessing. Dr. Nelson, a naturalist and chiropractor, was Elder Smith's sister-in-law, the wife of Joseph Nelson, who was first married to Joseph Fielding's deceased sister, Leonora.

Like other professional treatments Ethel received, Dr. Nelson's ministrations brought no lasting relief. "Ethel not well," her concerned husband wrote later. "She has been for several months greatly concerned over supposed physical ailments, and worried."

Frequent rides in the family car always brought some relief, and occasionally Ethel accompanied Joseph on his conference assignments to nearby stakes, which offered a welcome diversion. "I attended the North Davis stake conference," Elder Smith wrote on February 11, 1934. "Ethel went with me at her request. . . . I fear the day was too strenuous for her."

After the April general conference, the family decided that a trip to California might help. "I left with Ethel for Los Angeles for a few days on the coast," Elder Smith wrote on April 16, "the object being to give Ethel a change, as she has been ill for several months due to nervousness and shock (worry). We were on the coast from the 17th of April when we arrived until the 29th." During this time, they toured with the mission president, holding meetings in Whittier, Santa Ana, San Bernardino, San Fernando, Santa Barbara, and Baldwin Park. Then, on the weekend of April 28 and 29, they attended conference in the Hollywood Stake. But, the change of scene and routine failed to bring relief to his beloved wife. "I regret to say," he wrote, "that her condition is little improved and she will have to have special care for her ailment."

A few days after returning from California, Elder Smith made arrangements for this "special care" for Ethel, providing her with the best diagnostic treatment available at the time. Unfortunately, the state of medical knowledge in this field was still in its infancy so that no permanent improvement was made in her condition. In these circumstances, the entire family rallied around to support the beloved mother and each other. Out of this came a greater sense of love and unity and a greater appreciation for the simple joys of family life. Within the limits of Ethel's illness, the flow of events in the Smith household continued unabated. There were school, sports, and social activities for the children, and for Joseph Fielding there was the constant round of his apostolic duties. With help, Ethel was able, intermittently, to carry on her domestic responsibilities. And the Smiths continued to enjoy the periodic outings that had been so much a part of the family's routine.

A notable vacation was planned for the summer of 1935, two years after Ethel first began to suffer. Elder Smith was able to block out twelve days from his church duties during the last part of July for a trip to California. With six of their children (Julina, Amelia, Lewis, Reynolds, Douglas, and Milton), Joseph and Ethel left Salt Lake City early Monday morning, July 15. Because of the large number who went along, it was necessary to take two cars. The driving chores were divided among Elder Smith, the two girls, and newly licensed Lewis, who was most willing to shoulder more than his share of the driving load.

The first day's travel took the vacationers through scenic Bryce and Zion's canyons and colorful St. George to Mesquite, Nevada, where they arrived at 11:00 p.m., hot, tired, and dusty. "The weather was very warm," Joseph reported, "and in our crowded condition, we did not sleep much." So they were up and on their way by 4:00 a.m. the next morning in order to beat the desert sun. Fifteen hours later, they arrived at Long Beach, California, where they were "fortunate in securing two tent cabins," which they rented for a week. "Hardly had we located ourselves," wrote the father, "before the boys were in bathing suits and on the beach." Thus began one of the most relaxing and enjoyable vacations the Smith family had ever spent together. They lived by the sun and mostly in the sun. All the children were big enough that they did not require constant surveillance. They were allowed to swim at will, to inspect the nearby pier, or to sunbathe on the beach as the whim of the moment dictated. This left the parents free to do as they wished, whether to take a dip, visit in an unhurried way, or merely sit and gaze at the ocean, lulled by the rhythmic pounding of the surf. Such an unstructured routine, free of pressures and deadlines, was especially soothing and calming to Ethel. It was also an idyllic interlude for the entire family.

Joseph and Ethel were able to tear the children away from the beach long enough to visit the planetarium and the museum. And on Sunday the family attended Sunday School in the morning and sacrament meeting in the evening at Long Beach. It requires little imagination to guess who the main speaker was at the evening service. It was a busman's holiday for Joseph, who, even during his vacation, found himself in the pulpit.

Monday evening, the 22nd, the Smiths were guests in the home of Dr. J. Douglas Barnes, where they spent "a very delightful evening." The next morning, they drove south to San Diego, where, after finding "comfortable lodgings at an auto park," they drove on to Tijuana "just to satisfy the children in crossing the U. S. line."

The family celebrated Pioneer Day by spending the entire day at the San Diego Fair, which was then in progress. "The Tabernacle Choir was there," reported Elder Smith, "and gave concerts in the Ford Bowl near Henry Ford's exhibit. We attended the concert that afternoon and also visited the L. D. S. building." At day's end, they "were tired."

On Thursday morning, the Smiths packed and started for home. During the day they paused briefly in San Bernardino and at the San Luis Rey Mission, stopping for the night at Las Vegas, Nevada, "by request of the children." And the next day they made the last leg of their return trip to Salt Lake City, "glad to be back again."

To be home meant the resumption of the daily routines that made life alternately enjoyable and tedious. Joseph was pleased to find that his daughter, Josephine, and her husband, who had stayed at the Douglas Street home during the family's absence, had kept the lawns and flower beds well watered. One of Joseph's main means of relaxation was to tend his flowers and plants. Less enjoyable was the "donkey" work around the house, which he performed willingly but with far less enthusiasm. "Cleaned auto and did other odd jobs," he reported the day after returning from California. As for Ethel, she too was glad to be home amid her treasured things, surrounded by a loving family and thoughtful, caring neighbors. But the respite in California, while temporarily relieving her of the trauma of her illness, had not cured it. So, she lived from day to day, struggling against the emotional pressures exerted upon her while trying valiantly to fulfill her wifely and motherly duties. It was not easy, either for her or for her husband and children. Yet it was a burden they could not lay down. So, they accepted it stoically as a natural legacy of the human condition in which all humanity must share.

Notwithstanding this, it was sometimes difficult for the Smiths to be entirely philosophical and objective about their plight. It must have seemed at times that the fates had served up an overdose of misfortune for them. Such a time occurred during the first few months of 1936. In early January, Mary Reynolds died; she was a polygamous wife of Ethel's father, George C. Reynolds. Five days after the funeral of Ethel's Auntie Mary, Joseph Fielding's mother passed away. Her death was preceded by several weeks of intense pain caused by a fall that fractured several of her ribs. A few months later, the whole Smith family was devastated by the death of Lois's seven-month-old daughter, Dorothy. The passing of this sweet child was undoubtedly of special poignancy to Ethel as the little girl had been born on October 23, 1935, Ethel's forty-sixth birthday. While death of itself seems not to have held any special terrors for the family, yet the circumstances surrounding the death and the resulting loneliness and yearning for the departed one brought great sadness and mourning.

Overshadowing all these stressful events, of course, was Ethel's illness, which seemed to defy diagnosis. The oscillating swing of her moods was unpredictable. The effect was not unlike a roller-coaster ride. There were periods of relative calm when everything was in gear and life moved on at a deliberate, measured pace. Then suddenly, at the summit of this slow upward trend, would come a precipitous, sometimes frightening descent into the depths of despair. "This is a sad day for me and my children because of the condition of my wife," Joseph Fielding wrote on February 19, 1936. It was difficult for them to grasp how such a radical change could have occurred in the condition of their beloved wife and mother in such a short time. And, given the failure of divine or professional help to provide permanent relief, they were baffled and balked, not knowing what more to do.

Yet, the family coped with their problems, continuing an orderly course in their lives. For Elder Smith, there were the constant demands made by his calling. Through all the upset and uncertainty at home, he continued to handle his share of stake conference and mission tour assignments. In early September 1936, he left Salt Lake City by train to tour the Eastern States Mission. He was met at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, by the mission president, Don B. Colton, on Sunday morning, September 5. With the mission secretary, Wayne F. Richards, they went directly to the chapel, where the first meeting of the two-week tour was held. Leaving Pittsburgh the next morning by automobile, the touring party made a side trip to Kirtland, Ohio, as Elder Smith wanted to visit the temple. "There we were lectured," he wrote, "and the LDS roundly abused." During the tour, Joseph was aroused by certain erroneous statements made by the guide, which he disputed and corrected. This "won the friendship of a Mr. Green," wrote Elder Smith "who handed me a dollar bill 'for the cause.' " After leaving Kirtland, the party drove on to Erie, Pennsylvania, where they held an evening meeting. The next morning, the apostle met with the full-time missionaries laboring in that area. This set a pattern he would follow during the next two weeks, alternately holding meetings with members and missionaries. From Erie, the touring party traveled to Jamestown; and the next day, en route to Scranton, they saw some of the most famous sites connected with the early history of the Church—Harmony, the home of Isaac Hale, the father of Emma Hale Smith, the Prophet Joseph Smith's wife; and the Susquehanna River, on whose banks John the Baptist and later Peter, James, and John appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and in whose waters Joseph and Oliver were baptized. Next came Altoona, Pennsylvania, followed by Fairview and Hagerstown, where arrangements were made for Elder Smith to speak over the radio.

On the way to Washington, D.C., after leaving Hagerstown, the travelers paused briefly at Gettysburg, where they inspected the famous Civil War battlefield, tracing in their mind's eye how the soldiers of the blue and the gray had fought savagely over the rolling countryside, drenching the field with their blood. Endowed as he was with a sense of history, we may be assured that Elder Smith reflected too, as he gazed on the scene, about how the clipped eloquence of Abraham Lincoln had later fixed forever in the American mind the significance of that critical battle.

At Washington, Elder Smith and President Colton were the guests of Edgar B. Brossard and his gracious wife, who, Joseph noted, were very kind to them. The Brossards accompanied the visitors to Baltimore, Maryland, on Sunday morning, September 13. There a meeting was held, and then they went to the "beautiful" meeting house in the nation's capital for an evening sacrament service. The next morning, the Brossards also took the visitors on a tour of the city before they left for Philadelphia. A tight schedule did not permit any sight-seeing of Philadelphia's historic sites, there barely being time for a missionary-member meeting before the travelers left for New York, where they arrived at 1:30 a.m. Tuesday morning.

New York City was the headquarters of the Eastern States Mission. Joseph Fielding spent the morning of Tuesday, September 15, inspecting the mission office at 155 Riverside Drive and visiting with the members of the office staff. And in the afternoon, he and President Colton were driven northward, up the Hudson River, by Elder Richards to Newburgh, where they held a meeting, On the way, they passed through West Point, the site of the United States Military Academy. Here also were seen the restored remains of large fortifications built to enable Colonial America to control traffic up the Hudson. During the revolutionary period, that control was aided by a heavy iron chain, stretched from the west bank to Constitution Island, that prevented British ships from ascending the river. No doubt Joseph Fielding's historic sense was excited by recalling that General Benedict Arnold's treason arose from his abortive attempt to betray this key military post to the enemy.

From New York City, Elder Smith was driven to New Haven, Connecticut, where more meetings were held and where the apostle was shown around part of the sprawling campus of Yale University. That afternoon, the party drove to Boston, Massachusetts, where an evening meeting was held. Afterward, the apostle was taken to nearby Lexington, where he was a guest in the home of a brother and sister Knecht. "Sister K," Joseph explained, "is the daughter of S. Norman Lee of Brigham City."

It sometimes happens that a backward glance will invest a certain day or incident with an importance not understood at the time. Friday, September 18, was such a day in the life of Joseph Fielding Smith. Early that morning, his party left Lexington destined for Fort Henry, New York. Their route of travel took them through Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, the birthplace of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Here they paused to view the impressive granite monument that honors the Prophet and to visit Elder Angus J. Cannon and his wife, who were in charge of the visitors' center there. Traveling on, they arrived at Fort Henry in time to hold a meeting at 8:00 p.m. In recapping the events of the day in his diary, Elder Smith wrote in conclusion: "Met Elder Bruce R. McConkie, a most excellent Elder." Over the years of his apostolic ministry, Joseph Fielding Smith met literally thousands of missionaries. Many of their names found their way into his personal record by way of acknowledgment and thanks for services rendered to him. In only one instance, however, did the diarist both mention an elder's name and extol his virtues. The single instance involved this "most excellent Elder," Bruce R. McConkie, who would later become Joseph Fielding's son-in-law, the husband of his youngest daughter, Amelia. Moreover, this young elder would later emulate his father-in-law's example of strict reliance on the scriptures in speaking and writing, in his prolific literary output, and in his stern, unbending pulpit presence. As fate would have it, Bruce McConkie would fill the vacancy in the Twelve resulting from Joseph Fielding Smith's death; it would be in Elder McConkie's home that the Prophet would spend his last days; and he would die there.

Bruce McConkie and Amelia Smith had been acquainted before he entered the mission field. And that acquaintance was rekindled soon after his release. "In the evening," wrote Elder Smith on February 7, 1937, only five months after he met Bruce McConkie in Fort Henry, "with Julina, Amelia and Bruce, attended the joint meeting of the Yale, Yalecrest and 33rd Wards in the Bonneville Stake (split) conference." And within thirteen months after Joseph Fielding Smith and Bruce R. McConkie met at Fort Henry, "the most excellent elder" and the apostle's baby daughter were sealed as man and wife in the temple.

But before that happy event would take place, another mournful experience awaited Elder Smith and his family. After months of illness, Joseph's beloved Ethel passed away. "Intended to be present and take part at the funeral of my mother's sister, Melissa J. L. Davis," he wrote on August 26, 1937, "but was called suddenly to the bedside of my wife, who was suddenly stricken. She has been ailing for many months, and in spite of all aid passed away at 3:15 today. A better woman could not be found, or truer wife and mother."

Economical with words, especially when writing, Joseph usually masked his feelings, as he did in this brief entry. We can only guess, therefore, about the full impact of Ethel's death upon him. During the twenty-nine years of their marriage, she had given birth to and nurtured nine of his children, had reared Louie's two, had made a haven and a heaven of their home, and had been his most ardent admirer and supporter. She was always there to encourage, to counsel, and to assist him, to accompany him to social and church gatherings, and to share with him in the joys and trials of rearing their family. She was his lover, his friend, his partner and counselor wrapped into one. Therefore, it was undoubtedly a trying and traumatic thing to have that relationship severed, even though temporarily. "The funeral services for my beloved wife, Ethel, were held today," he recorded on Monday, August 30, 1937. "The Deseret News contained an excellent report. The speakers were Bishop T. Fred Hardy, Nettie D. Bradford, Samuel O. Bennion and President David O. McKay. Music by John Longden, Harry Clark and Jessie Evans. Organ, Sister Darrell Ensign."

1992 Deseret Book Co.
