Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Sixteen

Another Dawn

Ethel's death came in the midst of a rush of im- Eportant activities for the Smith family. Amelia was Eplanning her nuptials. Lewis was getting ready to Eenter the mission field. And the three younger boys were preparing to return to school. Sixteen-year-old Reyn was beginning to earn his athletic spurs at East High School, while thirteen-year-old Doug was in junior high and ten-year-old Milton was in elementary school. Since Amelia was preoccupied with her own affairs, Joseph supervised the preparations for his missionary and his student sons. "Went with Lewis," he wrote four days after Ethel's funeral, "to make purchases preparatory to his mission, also to obtain a passport." Several days later, the father accompanied Amelia and Lewis through the temple when they obtained their endowments. Present also were Julina and Amelia's fiancÃ©e, Bruce R. McConkie.

Meanwhile, Joseph's church responsibilities continued unabated. At the office he was preoccupied in preparing a manuscript that would contain some of the key writings and sayings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. This entailed a thorough canvass of the early historical records and the extraction and arrangement by date and subject matter of choice excerpts from these. While Elder Smith had able research assistance for this project, he bore the ultimate responsibility for checking the accuracy of the quotations and for proofreading the completed manuscript. This was detailed and sometimes tedious work that demanded Joseph Fielding's most concentrated efforts. However, because of the admiration and respect he had for the Prophet, it was obviously a labor of love from which he seemed to derive great personal satisfaction. His satisfaction became complete the following year when the manuscript was published under the title Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The apostle's activities outside his office continued as usual with stake conference visits, board meetings, funerals, weddings, and, of course, family responsibilities. It was the latter which, at the moment, gave Elder Smith the greatest concern. He still had the three young sons at home who were already in or who were fast approaching a critical stage of their development. While his married daughters rallied around to help, they had their own family responsibilities that made it difficult for them to give their young brothers the kind of attention and supervision they urgently required. These were the circumstances that prompted Elder Smith to begin seriously thinking about remarriage two months after Ethel's death. As he did so, his thoughts focused on Jessie Evans, Salt Lake County Recorder and well-known contralto soloist with the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir. Curiously enough, Joseph hardly knew Jessie Evans. She had sung at Ethel's funeral, but this was done to fulfill Ethel's specific request, for she had known Jessie and admired her singing. The request for her to sing at the funeral was made through Joseph Fielding's brother-in-law, William C. Patrick, who was well acquainted with Miss Evans and who had been invited to help arrange for the funeral. Following the services, Elder Smith wrote a note of appreciation to the singer in which he not only thanked her for participating but also expressed admiration for her talent, going so far as to say that he enjoyed her singing as much as any he had heard. This letter brought an appreciative response from Jessie. And later, because Joseph had worked for a while in the recorder's office when he was a young man, there were telephone calls and some correspondence back and forth about Jessie's work. With a letter dated October 9, 1937, Elder Smith forwarded material from the Church Archives that he felt would be helpful to Miss Evans in establishing the real date of the creation of Salt Lake County. He added that if in the future he could be of assistance, he would consider it a pleasure, not a duty, to respond. Because of the personal allusions in this letter, Joseph suggested that it not be filed in the recorder's office.

Between October 9 and October 23, Elder Smith made a decision to radically alter the nature of his relationship with Jessie Evans. "Wrote an important letter," he noted on the 23rd, "but held it for several days." In this letter he told Jessie that he would like to develop a relationship with her on a personal level. He obviously had matrimony in mind. But it was a delicate step for him to take, given his position in the Church and the relatively short time that had elapsed since Ethel's death. Clearly, however, his family situation caused him to act with greater speed than he otherwise would have done. He held this "important letter" for four days, mulling over the pros and cons of entering into a courtship. Finally, on October 27, he decided to take the plunge. "Went to County Recorder's office," he wrote on that date, "and signed specially prepared document of historical nature, etc. Had interview with recorder, very important, and left her the letter I wrote on the 23rd." Thus began one of the most sedate, proper, albeit interesting courtships on record. It extended more than two months before Joseph popped the question. The manner in which he conducted it is a model of judgment and prudence, interspersed with a restrained ardor.

The weekend after he delivered the letter, Elder Smith was in Oakland, California, for a stake conference. Reflecting a practice that had then become fixed, he was joined by a representative of the "Security Committee," the forerunner of today's Welfare Committee. During the conference, Joseph accompanied stake president Eugene Hilton to inspect possible sites for "Security Quarters." There seemed to be a sense of urgency about moving the Security Plan forward, and much of the instruction given over the weekend focused on the theory and the practical application of the plan.

Between meetings on Saturday, President Hilton and his counselors drove the apostle to San Francisco across the newly completed Bay Bridge. Excited by the experience, Joseph pronounced the bridge "one of the wonders of the world."

Back in Salt Lake City, Elder Smith resumed his unorthodox courtship. "5:10 met Miss Jessie Evans," he wrote on November 2, "and had important interview with her." By now, after only two brief "interviews," both of which were held in public places, the couple had apparently reached an understanding. So, three days later, Joseph "spent the evening out with J. E. and met her mother." The following Sunday, Elder Smith attended services in the Tabernacle, where Jessie sang a solo; and that night, after a meeting in the Burton Ward where Joseph was the speaker, the couple had another "interview." On Armistice Day, after the weekly rehearsal of the Tabernacle Choir, Elder Smith "brought Jessie Evans to the house and had her meet Amelia and Bruce." And Sunday evening, November 21, after returning from a conference in the Wasatch Stake, Joseph called on Jessie again when he "left her a ring which she was willing to accept."

During the remainder of the year, there were frequent visits back and forth in the Smith and Evans homes, where different members of the families gathered to become better acquainted. Typical of these was one held two days after Christmas. Joseph wrote of the occasion, "Josephine, Julina, Amelia, Bruce and I spent the evening at the home of Jessie Evans who entertained us with songs. A very pleasant and enjoyable evening." And on the 28th, he added, "Jessie E. and her mother spent the evening at the home with music, etc., children happy." Having achieved his purpose in winning the consent of Jessie Evans to be his wife, while obtaining the approval of both families, he noted with obvious satisfaction on the following day: "Spent the evening with Jessie Evans, this day being her birthday, and because she has consented to become my wife, for which fact the children are happy as well as I. The Lord bless her."

The person who consented to become Joseph Fielding Smith's third wife was an attractive, vivacious woman of thirty-five who, through her talent and charm, had carved out a successful career in both music and politics. Endowed with a rich contralto voice, she had, through years of training, become a professional singer of note. However, she gave up a promising operatic career because of the responsibility to care for her widowed mother and the lack of opportunity for professional employment in Salt Lake City where the family lived. The reputation she had gained as a singer had given Jessie Evans widespread recognition in Utah, and this, coupled with her jovial, outgoing personality, made her a natural for politics. So, she had been elected to the office of Salt Lake County Recorder without difficulty. And her musical talent had earned her the role as a soloist with the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, whose performances were broadcast weekly over a national radio network. As a result, at the time of her marriage, she was better known among the general public than was Joseph Fielding. Due to the circumstances of her age, talent, and reputation, Jessie Evans's prospects for marriage had almost dwindled to the point of extinction. She was simply overqualified as a potential wife. Most suitors would have been intimidated to approach her with matrimony in mind. Only someone with the stature and reputation of a Joseph Fielding Smith would have had any reasonable prospect of winning her as a bride.

Elder Smith considered himself fortunate to have found someone with the qualities of Jessie Evans to become his wife and the mother to his children. He later told his son Douglas, "Your Aunt Jessie always belonged to me. I know that the Lord intended it. And the Lord sent her to me when I needed a wife and needed help and somebody in the family to help us and take care of us, and the Lord had raised her up and sent her to me. And oh, how grateful I am, for she has been just as true and faithful as anybody could possibly be, and we all love her."

Elder Smith and Jessie continued their courtship until April 12, when they were sealed in the Salt Lake Temple by President Heber J. Grant. Previously, Joseph had received an assignment to conduct a stake conference in Honolulu and to tour the Hawaiian and Japanese missions in the Hawaiian Islands. Accompanied by members of their families, they went directly from the temple to the depot, where they boarded a train for San Francisco. Remaining there two days, they then boarded the luxury liner Lurline on Friday morning the 15th for the short voyage to Los Angeles, where the ship was to pick up the rest of its passengers destined for Hawaii. Since the Smiths had several hours before the ship's departure from Los Angeles, they visited with Jessie's adopted sister, Lily, and her husband, Heber Simpson, at nearby Santa Monica before reboarding the Lurline.

The five-day voyage to the islands was picture perfect, with "a very smooth sea all the way." The long, languid days afforded the newlyweds the opportunity to reflect on the marvel of their marriage and to contemplate their future as man and wife. Despite a difference of twenty-six years in their ages and differences in temperament, background, and training, Joseph Fielding and Jessie Evans Smith were remarkably compatible. She was an irrepressible extrovert, full of fun and good humor, who enjoyed the limelight of public attention. Joseph, on the other hand, was a quiet, retiring introvert, dignified and detached, who always seemed somewhat uncomfortable in a public setting and who never sought to call attention to himself. The thing that bridged the wide gulf between these two disparate personalities was the genuine love and respect they had for each other. During their courtship, Joseph had written of Jessie that she had "the most lovely voice—to me—that I ever listened to, whose music and song have charmed thousands, but more especially me. Always willing and ready to bless others, never refusing to sing at funerals and entertainments, if it is possible to accommodate all who make requests. I love her for her goodness, virtue and loveliness; her consideration and care for her mother, and because she loves me. May the Lord bless her always, I humbly pray." Jessie reciprocated these feelings in full measure. She frequently expressed her love for Joseph and was heard to say, "He is the kindest man I have ever known. I have never heard him speak an unkind word."

The lazy days aboard ship, in addition to providing uninterrupted hours for visiting and reading, were punctuated with turns around the deck for exercise, interludes at the rail to admire the fish that surfaced occasionally, or the gliding albatross that followed their ship most of the way, and with entertainments that were staged each afternoon for the enjoyment of the passengers. The director of activities aboard ship, having learned of Jessie's musical talents, approached her hesitantly to ask whether she would be willing to favor the passengers with a song. Her pleased and proud husband reported the result: "Jessie added to the entertainment on the vessel by singing at the afternoon concerts Tuesday and Wednesday, receiving encores and singing by request of many who were aboard." And when Joseph's identity as a high leader of the Mormon Church leaked out and it was learned that he and this charming, effervescent songstress were on their honeymoon, they acquired immediate celebrity status.

That reputation was hardly diminished by the scene that unfolded as the Lurline docked at Pearl Harbor. Waiting on the pier to greet the Smiths was a large group of Saints, led by Oahu stake president Ralph Woolley and presidents Bailey of the Hawaiian Mission and Robertson of the Japanese Mission, who joined with enthusiasm to sing the traditional Polynesian songs of welcome. And when the Salt Lake visitors disembarked, they were almost smothered with fresh and fragrant leis; "fifty in all," wrote Joseph. So overwhelming was this demonstration of love and respect that Elder Smith cast aside his customary reticence and wrote with unabashed pride, "We were met by the largest, best and most worthy group of any who got off the ship."

The travelers were taken directly to the stake president's home, where Sister Woolley, whom the brethren called "the queen of hostesses," had prepared an elaborate dinner for them. The entertainment that followed capped a memorable day for the newlyweds. "We were royally entertained by two groups of Hawaiian women," explained Joseph, "who came with their ukuleles, guitars and a bass viol and sang for us." The first group of singers was comprised of eight women. Later in the evening, four other women, with two male accompanists, came to perform. "Their singing of Hawaiian songs was a delightful thing," he wrote. Predictably, Jessie joined in the singing and, to the satisfaction of all, especially her husband, learned one of the Hawaiian songs. "They were delighted with her singing," noted Joseph, "and have made arrangements for her to sing with them at the conference on Sunday."

The following day, Friday, was spent quietly and lazily at the Woolley residence, where the Smiths divided their time between writing letters, visiting with their gracious hosts, and inspecting the lavish and beautiful grounds surrounding the home.

On Saturday, President Robertson of the Japanese mission took Joseph for a ride to see the sights of the city, ending up at the "Punch Bowl," which afforded them a spectacular view of Honolulu.

Time off with no church assignments was an oddity for Joseph Fielding Smith. Usually during the annual summer break, he changed his normal routine, but ordinarily he would sandwich in speaking assignments or interviews that robbed the interlude of any semblance of a vacation. Now, however, during this April of 1938, he had spent ten full days entirely free from official duties while enjoying the companionship of his new bride. But, we get the sense that the end of this period of leisure was not unwelcome to him. "At 7:00 p.m." he wrote on Saturday April 23, "the priesthood session of the Oahu stake conference was held and reports were made which were equal to that I have seen and heard in any other stake of Zion." And the following day he seemed elated by the crowded schedule of meetings arranged by President Woolley. The first general session was held at 10:00 a.m., followed by a "musical meeting" at 1:30 p.m. where Jessie and her new friends sang for the entertainment of the conference. The afternoon general session "was all in Hawaiian" except for Elder Smith's remarks. Immediately following this meeting, the apostle attended a special session for the Samoans, only to return at 7:00 p.m. for a gathering of the youth. "The MIA meeting was equal to any session in any stake," he wrote appreciatively. "The young people did splendid work. Jessie sang two numbers and thrilled the congregation."

Jessie's participation in these meetings set a pattern for the rest of their married life. Whenever Joseph Fielding presided, he wanted her to perform if for no other reason than that he never tired of hearing her sing. Beyond that, however, her well-trained contralto voice, singing sacred hymns, added a special touch of spirituality to the meetings, inspiring the listeners and elevating his own capabilities in delivering the spoken word. Later, through the persistent and playful urging of his wife, Joseph would occasionally join Jessie in a duet, blending his own fine baritone voice with hers. On these occasions, they would usually sit together on the piano bench while Jessie played the accompaniment, moderating her usual, full-throated voice so as not to drown out the singing of her husband. In time, Elder Smith began to refer to these performances as "do its" rather than duets, implying that he joined in them with reluctance only to humor Jessie. The fact is that he really enjoyed them as he enjoyed other aspects of his relationship with this puckish, irrepressible woman who had become his wife. Her zest for life, her almost perpetual gaiety, her love of music, and her comedic tendencies added a certain carefree quality to Joseph Fielding Smith's life that he had not had before. And in his own modest, restrained way, he joined in, or at least approved of Jessie's frequent high jinks. So, he never complained about the cast-iron plaque that hung on Jessie's kitchen wall proclaiming, "Opinions expressed by the husband in this household are not necessarily those of the management." Nor did he question or reprimand her for insisting that she had a special dispensation from the Utah Highway Patrol to speed in their little white car. And there is no indication he objected to her carrying on conversations with passersby from the second-floor balcony of their Eagle Gate apartment on State Street. During one such conversation of which the author is aware, she playfully threw down an orange to a friend who was walking by and with whom she had been carrying on a conversation.

This apartment was in view of the office her husband occupied while he was the president of the Church. Jessie had a spy glass that one day she trained on the window of President Smith's office. Seeing there a bust of his grandmother, Mary Fielding Smith, she called on the phone to demand, "Who is that woman in your office?" Confirming the playful banter that sometimes passed between them, he said to her when she came once to help in his office during an emergency, "Remember, Mama Dear, over here you are not the speaker of the house." And again in the same vein, once when they drove away from a chapel where he had spoken, he rolled down the window and said with mock anxiety, "Look out! Woman driver." Such was the charming relationship between Joseph Fielding and Jessie Evans Smith, a relationship solidified during their honeymoon in Hawaii.

As already noted, however, this honeymoon was arranged around ecclesiastical responsibilities that were the principal reason for Elder Smith's presence in the islands. So, on the Tuesday following the Oahu stake conference, the apostle held meetings in Honolulu with the missionaries from both the Japanese and the Hawaiian missions. Later in the week, he inspected and attended a session in the temple at Laie. He spoke twice at Laie, at a service that preceded the temple session and at a chapel near the temple. Jessie sang on both occasions. Returning to Honolulu, the following Saturday the visitors enjoyed an elaborate luau that featured pig, poi, fish, and sweet potatoes. Joseph was fascinated to learn how the food for the luau was cooked with hot rocks in the ground.

Elder Smith spoke and Jessie sang at morning services the day after the luau; and in the afternoon, they flew to Maui, where, in the evening, a public meeting was held. There the Smiths teamed up again to speak and to sing. At their request, Joseph and Jessie were awakened early Tuesday morning, May 3. By 4:00 a.m. they were on their way toward the summit of Haleakala, reputed to be the largest extinct volcano in the world. Winding upward, their automobile was driven through the clouds that hovered around the mountain like a halo. Emerging from the cloud cover, they arrived at the summit just in time to witness the extraordinary sight of the sun seemingly rising out of the Pacific Ocean to the east. "It was a beautiful sight above the clouds," wrote Joseph. "We could see the mountains of Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa on the island of Hawaii." Turning around, they could also look into the black depths of the great crater from whose mouth had flowed the molten lava that had given birth to the island.

The Smiths flew from Maui to North Kohala in the afternoon. There they were met by the customary greeting party, were laden with fragrant leis, and were driven to a chapel at Waimea. "I spoke and Jessie sang," wrote Joseph. The following day, they were driven to Kona. "Our reception at Kona was very warm and friendly," he noted, "a gathering awaiting us when we arrived with music and song." The meeting held that night followed the usual routine with Jessie singing and Elder Smith speaking from the scriptures. Leaving Kona, the visitors were driven to Hilo, passing through vast lava beds produced by the volcano Kilauea they passed on the way. The meeting held that night at Hilo was a disappointment. "The attendance here was not as large and responsive as in other places," he noted. If that was the low point of the tour, the high point came two days later on the island of Molokai. On Saturday, May 7, the apostle and President W. W. Bailey were driven by an elder to the leper colony over a narrow, treacherous road that descends over two thousand feet down the Pali. There Elder Smith held a meeting with the members of the Church who were mourning out their lives in that dreary, isolated place. "The poor people were praying that I would come and visit them for no other brother has visited them of the authorities for many, many years," he wrote. As Elder Smith assessed the impact of this experience, seeing people whose only hopes seemed to lay in the atonement of the Savior and in the promised rewards hereafter, he wrote, "My visit here was one of the most important things in my visit to the islands." Back at the main city on Molokai, Joseph and President Bailey attended a luau whose elaborate menu and accompanying music and joviality seemed to accentuate the cheerless condition of the lepers he had just left.

After the luau, Elder Smith attended "a very excellent MIA meeting," and then, to gain insight into the strength and maturity of the local native leadership, he participated as an observer in a district council meeting. The following day, a Sunday, was filled with the usual worship services.

Back in Honolulu, Joseph yielded to Jessie's playful pressure and took her shopping to buy gifts for those at home. And that night, they were the guests of Brother and Sister Henry Oki, who treated them to a sumptuous meal of Chinese food. In typical oriental fashion, the meal was served slowly, almost ritualistically, in many courses, allowing ample time for leisurely conversation.

After several days of travel, interspersed with numerous meetings and interviews, the visitors decided to take off for two days. The first day, Tuesday, May 10, was spent quietly at the comfortable home of President and Sister Ralph Woolley, where the Smiths rested, wrote letters, and roamed around their hosts' beautiful gardens. The next day, the visitors intended to experience the pleasures of deep-sea fishing, but the trip proved to be a colossal bust. The Smiths left the Woolleys early in the morning and were driven across the Pali to the beach, where they joined a jubilant party that boarded Mr. Elkington's yacht. The jubilation was short lived. In the open sea, the yacht was battered by waves so heavy that probably not a single line was cast. The decision to turn back seems to have been unanimous, although it is questionable whether some members of the party had the desire, or even the ability to vote. Back on shore, they compensated for the lost fishing opportunity by taking "a sea bath instead."

The next morning, the Smiths were flown to Kauai, "The Golden Island." Here they were driven to see the "Grand Canyon of Waimea," which bears some resemblance to the Grand Canyon of the Colorado on the mainland. After visiting other places of interest on the island, the Smiths participated in a missionary meeting that was followed by a general meeting where Joseph spoke and Jessie sang.

This was to be the last formal meeting for the honeymooners during their twenty-three day stay in the Hawaiian Islands. They flew back to Honolulu the morning of Friday, May 13, and spent the day packing for their return voyage to the mainland. That night they dined at the home of President and Sister Robertson, where the Baileys were also present. During the course of the evening, the Robertsons and their guests were treated to the unusual sight of a total eclipse of the moon.

It would have been hard to distinguish the scene at the Pearl Harbor pier Saturday morning, May 14, from the one there on April 21 when Elder and Sister Smith arrived. The pier was thronged with scores of singing, joyous Saints who loaded the departing dignitaries with colorful, fragrant leis. Now, however, the warm alohas, spoken or sung by all, meant "Good-bye, come again" instead of "Hello, welcome to Hawaii." "Everywhere we went we were royally treated by the Hawaiians," wrote the apostle after their ship, the S.S. Matsonia, had cleared the harbor. "We received 283 leis and attended five or six luaus. We have held numerous meetings, met many hundreds of members and I hope were able to do some good. Jessie's singing won the hearts of the people and we have made many friends."

There was unaccustomed excitement on the S.S. Matsonia shortly after it left Pearl Harbor with the Smiths aboard. A member of the crew, who apparently was intoxicated, fell or jumped overboard. Once the alarm was sounded, the ship began to circle in an attempt to locate and rescue the man. Although it did so for an hour while both crew and passengers anxiously scanned the sea for any sign of the lost crewman, the search was in vain. This unfortunate incident seemed to cast a pall over the entire return voyage.

Waiting to greet the Smiths at the Wilmington pier in California was President W. Aird MacDonald, whom Elder Smith had cabled while the Matsonia was at sea. After spending two days in the Los Angeles area, the travelers left by train Friday evening, May 20, and arrived in Salt Lake City the following day. They were greeted at the Salt Lake depot by Jessie's mother and two brothers and by Julina, Amelia, Bruce, Reyn, and Douglas. "We all went home where the girls had prepared dinner, with the help of Sister Evans," Joseph wrote.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
