Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Seventeen

Readjustments

At home, some readjustments were necessary to Amerge two families into one. While Jessie had Anever been married and therefore had no chil- Adren, she had been supporting her mother, Jeanette Buchanan Evans, who lived with her. It was decided, therefore, that "Mother Evans" would move with her daughter to 998 Douglas to take up residence with the Smiths. There she would remain until her death in 1957. It was a happy arrangement. Since it was intended that Jessie would accompany Joseph Fielding whenever possible on his church assignments and since Jessie had many outside commitments because of her singing, it was fortunate that Mother Evans was available to provide continuity and stability in the home for the three sons during times when the father and Aunt Jessie were both away.

The news at home was good and bad. The good news was that the three boys were in good health and the house was intact, having suffered no observable damage. The bad news was that Julina had recently undergone a tonsillectomy and Emily's husband, L. Garrett Myers, had had major surgery for the removal of a goitre. Moreover, the day after Joseph and Jessie returned, Julina was hospitalized for the removal of her appendix; Cousin Silas Smith performed the surgery. Three days later, Garrett was released from the hospital and four days after that Julina followed suit.

Thus Aunt Jessie was speedily introduced to life in a large, active, and growing family. And that indoctrination accelerated when on June 8 she accompanied her husband to the Salt Lake Temple to watch him perform Julina's sealing to Eldon Charles Hart, then accompanied him and the newlyweds to Provo, where they watched the new groom graduate from Brigham Young University. The next day, it was to East High School to see son Reynolds graduate. And three days after that, word was received from Chicago that daughter Lois had given birth to a son. In the midst of all this, Jessie thought it was a good idea to host a dinner for the neighbors on Douglas Street as a means of getting acquainted. And, of course, there were the customary festivities to honor Julina and Eldon.

Meanwhile, Jessie soon gained insight into her duties as the wife of a busy General Authority. The weekend following the return from Hawaii, she accompanied Elder Smith to Ogden for the conference of the Mount Ogden Stake. The following weekend found them in Springville for the Kolob stake conference. And the weekend after that, they attended meetings of June conference together. Before the Sunday general session, Jessie sang with the choir during its weekly national broadcast. Notwithstanding their hectic schedule, this was undoubtedly a time of excitement and exhilaration for both Joseph Fielding and Jessie Evans Smith as they began their married life together.

Soon after returning from Hawaii, Elder Smith commenced working in earnest on the biography of his father, a project he had had in mind for many years. He had intermittently done some work on it, gathering materials and poring over his father's numerous diaries and other personal papers. Now, however, he focused on it almost to the exclusion of all other noncurricular activities. He worked steadily on the manuscript during the summer break in 1938. And afterward, when he had a few spare hours, usually early in the morning or late at night, he continued with the project. It was a labor of love that ended six days before Christmas, 1938. "Received the first copies of the biography of my father from the News Press," he wrote on December 19. "The Deseret News gave me a very fine announcement Saturday."

The months during which Elder Smith was preoccupied writing this biography typified the oscillating nature of his life as it alternated between events of joy and sorrow. The joy came chiefly from the elements of order and excitement that were introduced into the Smith household with Joseph's marriage to Jessie. While Jessie had many commitments outside the home, she arranged them so that she could devote sufficient time to the care and training of the three boys who were still living there. And on the occasions when she was unable to be present for special events or needs, her mother was available to fill in. Also, Jessie's effervescent personality and musical ability added a certain tone of carefree gaiety to the family. She soon became involved in attending sporting and other events with Joseph and his sons, and in helping the boys with their personal affairs. "Jessie and I went shopping with Reynolds," Joseph noted on September 16, "in order to fit the boys out for school." Then expressing a point of view with which most parents can relate, the father added, "Rather expensive." Earlier the parents had accompanied Reyn to a softball tournament.

Jessie was an enthusiastic traveler and added a genuine zest to family trips. So during July, Joseph and Jessie and the three boys enjoyed an outing at Yellowstone Park, where they visited Old Faithful and other attractions. And on the way home, they camped overnight at Bear Lake, taking a swim in its frigid waters. The weekend following their return from Yellowstone, the extended Smith family joined to honor Joseph's brother David and his wife, who had been called to preside over a mission in Canada. Earlier in the year, at the April general conference, David A. had been released as a member of the Presiding Bishopric, where he had served for thirty-one years. The extended Smith family joined together for another happy occasion later in the year to celebrate the marriage of Hyrum Mack Smith. Joseph Fielding, who performed the ceremony in the Salt Lake Temple on December 21, noted in his diary on that day: "Hyrum will leave for the British mission in January. He was born after his father's death, and his mother passed when he was about 2 weeks old."

Aside from these major social events involving the extended Smith family and the smaller ones involving only Joseph and Jessie and the boys, we find during this initial period following the marriage that Elder Smith was becoming more involved in entertainment events, doubtless reflecting Jessie's influence. Some he seemed to enjoy, as when on October 6 he accompanied Jessie and Lois to the oratorio Elijah. "It was an excellent performance," Joseph wrote approvingly. No doubt his enjoyment was enhanced by the fact that Jessie took a leading part. Later, Joseph went with Jessie, Lois, and Amelia "to hear the great Italian tenor Gigli in the Tabernacle." On this occasion, he offered no comments about the performance. However, he was quite outspoken about some of the movies Jessie inveigled him into attending. "Did not enjoy it," he wrote of the movie Marie Antionette which he and Jessie saw in early September. And of the movie Kentucky, which they saw during the Christmas holidays, he noted analytically, "It was good and clean, but I think I could have improved on it."

The day after the Smiths saw this movie, President Heber J. Grant and his wife, Augusta, called at their home to visit. While there, the Prophet prevailed on Joseph and Jessie to sing a duet. In reporting the incident, Elder Smith was self-deprecating, as usual, about his singing ability, but he was obviously pleased about the response of their guests. And when, the next day, he received a congratulatory letter from President Grant, Joseph Fielding was so touched that he copied it in his diary, something he had never done before. Because he obviously attached special significance to the letter, it deserves to be quoted verbatim here: "My Dear Joseph," it began. "I was delighted last night to listen to you and your good wife sing. I am thankful to think that you are going to take a little bit of time to sing and to visit with your loved ones, instead of working, working, working. I am sure that the singing will prolong your life. I don't want to flatter you, Joseph, but I want you to know that I consider you the best posted man on the scriptures of the General Authorities of the church that we have. I want you to prolong your life. I want you to make a business of trying to take care of yourself. Now I am not overworking so long as I can get my quota of good sleep. I am not the least bit alarmed if I go on singing and travelling around, releasing myself from the steady grind of work. I want you to do the same to the best of your ability. Your father worked altogether too hard. If he had taken a little more exercise, moving around, travelling away from home, and getting away from the cares and troubles of other people, it would have been better for him. He took a greater interest in the welfare of other people than almost any man who ever lived. He was my ideal of all the brethren from my childhood up to the day of his death. I am very grateful indeed for the fine letters I have from him, my dear cousin. May the blessings of the Lord be and abide with you perpetually, and may you be enabled to work less and accomplish more, is the prayer of my heart. I am, your affectionate relative, Heber J. Grant." After quoting the letter verbatim, Elder Smith added, "I certainly appreciate the letter very much."

Near this time, Elder Smith was warned by his doctor friend that his life would be endangered were he to continue to play handball. Given Joseph's faithful nature and the Prophet's direct admonition to prolong his life and to "make a business" of trying to take care of himself, it is reasonable to assume that President Heber J. Grant's letter was an important factor in Elder Smith's seemingly precipitate decision to give up the game he had enjoyed so much for so long. Nor is it far-fetched to infer that an assignment President Grant gave him a few months after writing the letter was in part an effort to encourage Joseph to pace himself more and to moderate his tendency toward overwork.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
