Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Eighteen

The Hectic Honeymoon

The assignment came as a distinct surprise. Shortly after the 1939 April conference, President Heber J. Grant advised Elder Smith that he would be going to Europe, where he was to tour the missions. He was also told that Jessie was to accompany him. The apostle was given wide latitude in arranging his itinerary, which would take him and Jessie to England and throughout Europe. Since it was intended that the assignment would occupy several months, there would be ample time between meetings with missionaries and members to visit places of historic interest or of special beauty and charm. It was this last aspect of the assignment that gave it the romance of a second honeymoon. It was undoubtedly intended as such by President Grant, who seems to have taken this means to provide Joseph with an enjoyable break in his strenuous routine while giving him enough official duties to salve a conscience seemingly obsessed with the need to be constantly at work.

Elder Smith was especially surprised to receive the assignment to tour the missions in Britain and Europe because it had been only a year since his marriage to Jessie and since, on assignment, he had toured the missions in Hawaii with her. To receive this assignment only a year later, affording the opportunity for a second honeymoon while performing his apostolic duties was wholly unexpected, although greatly appreciated.

Aside from the prospect of visiting ancient Britain and Europe with his new bride and mingling with the missionaries and members there, two other circumstances endowed this assignment with special significance. The first was the nostalgic prospect of returning to the mission field of his youth, which he had not visited since his release forty years before. So much had transpired in those four decades: The death of Louie; his marriage to Ethel and her subsequent death; the birth of his eleven children; his call to the Twelve followed by almost three decades of apostolic service; his establishment as a noted historian and as the premier scripture scholar in the Church; his marriage to Jessie; and all the challenging, joyous, or traumatic happenings connected with these significant events. All these seem to have aroused in Elder Smith feelings of reflective enjoyment as he and Jessie prepared for their departure. The other thing that made the coming tour special for Elder Smith was the fact that his son Lewis was then serving as a missionary in the Swiss-German mission. The prospect of seeing this much-loved son in the mission field and, perhaps, of sharing a pulpit with him was pleasing.

Joseph advised Lewis of his assignment in a somewhat jocular letter written on April 11, 1939. "If Mr. Hitler and Mr. Mus— whatever his name is, and he is a muss—will just keep cool for a few more weeks and not cause another war, I will be with you in June." A week later, the father wrote a second letter to his son advising that he and "Aunt Jessie" would leave Salt Lake City on April 21. "We will go from here to New York . . . [and] will sail on the 29th." Commenting on the planned visit to England, he added, "It is now 40 years, or will be on the 12th of May, since I left home for my mission to England. There have been many changes, no doubt, in that land since that time, and also in all of Europe."

Not the least of the changes during this interval was that in the status of Joseph Fielding Smith. Forty years before, almost the only distinctive thing about him was his distinguished name. Until that time he had done nothing to set him apart from the missionaries who accompanied him into the field or from those who awaited him there. And during his stay in England, he accomplished nothing of significance that hinted of future distinction.

While the influence of his powerful father had weighed heavily in his employment at the Historical Department and in his call to the Twelve, it was his own industry and superior qualities of mind and character that had enabled him to carve out a place of eminence among the leaders of the Church. The mark of distinction Joseph Fielding had richly earned during these forty years was particularly evident throughout the seven months he and Jessie were abroad. Everywhere they went, Elder Smith was treated with honor and respect. This began with their departure from the Salt Lake depot on Friday, April 21, 1939. Present to bid them good-bye were many members of the family, friends, neighbors, and associates from Church headquarters. Similar crowds would welcome them or bid them farewell at cities all along the route of their tour.

On the way to New York City, from where they were to embark for England, the travelers made a side trip to Palmyra. Here, at the cradle of the Church, Joseph was privileged to again visit places of historic importance to the Latter-day Saints and to explain their significance to Jessie. Of particular interest were the old Smith home where Joseph's grandfather Hyrum had lived as a boy; the sacred grove where his great-uncle, the Prophet Joseph Smith, had received the vision of the Father and the Son; and the Hill Cumorah, where the Prophet had obtained the golden plates from which the Book of Mormon had been translated. This visit could not have failed to arouse deep reflections about the miraculous origins of the Church and to underscore the significance of the tour that lay ahead.

The voyage from New York to England was quite unlike the previous year's journey to Hawaii. The turbulence of the Atlantic robbed this trip of the relaxed enjoyment that had marked the days en route to Honolulu. And, unlike that trip, there was now an undercurrent of tension and foreboding. This foreboding had been hinted at in Elder Smith's letter to Lewis in which he had made lighthearted remarks about Hitler and Mussolini. The fact is that as their ship carried the Smiths toward England, there was widespread speculation about the possibility of another war erupting in Europe. A month before, Hitler's troops had entered Prague, thereby annexing Czechoslovakia to the Third Reich and dashing the false hopes raised by the Munich Conference the previous September. A month before the Smiths' ship eased out of the harbor for En-gland, Neville Chamberlain, Britain's prime minister, had announced that if Poland's independence were threatened, His Majesty's Government would be obligated to lend Poland all support in its power. And a week after that, Mussolini invaded Albania. It was under the pressure and uncertainty of these events, stirred by the wild speculations they produced, that Elder Smith and Jessie arrived in England to begin their tour.

Here they were met by Hugh B. Brown, the president of the British Mission who, with his missionaries, helped them gather their baggage and then took them to the mission home at 9 Gordon Mansion in London. This would be the Smiths' headquarters during their stay in Great Britain.

Elder Smith was well acquainted with Hugh B. Brown, who had been the president of the Lethbridge Canada stake in the 1920s and who was later the president of the Granite Stake in Salt Lake City. Moreover, the future held in store an even closer relationship between this pair. In 1953 President Brown would be called as an assistant to the Twelve; and in 1958 his call to the Twelve would place him in the quorum over which Joseph Fielding Smith then presided. Still later, they would jointly serve as counselors to President David O. McKay.

Before beginning their tour of the British Mission, which would take them into many cities in England and Scotland, Joseph and Jessie were shown around historic London by President Brown and his charming wife, Zina Card Brown. For Joseph, the occasion aroused nostalgic memories of his visits to London four decades before. The same nostalgic remembrances occurred when the touring party visited Nottingham and Derby. While many things had changed, the parks and old buildings still remained, arousing memories of his struggling efforts to succeed as a missionary and his periodic bouts with homesickness.

A highlight of the tour was a mission-wide MIA convention held at Sheffield. In attendance were members and investigators from England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. The convention featured sports, dances, and talent shows, in addition to a Sunday evening worship service where Elder Smith and President Brown shared the speaking time. Also, an instruction and testimony meeting for the missionaries was held in conjunction with this convention.

After completing the tour of the British Mission, Elder Smith and Jessie crossed the channel, holding meetings in Holland, Belgium, and France.

By early June, they were at Lucerne, Switzerland, where Elder Smith presided at a conference of all the mission presidents serving in Europe and Great Britain. In addition to President Hugh B. Brown of the British Mission, there were in attendance Thomas E. McKay of the Swiss and East German Mission, Mark B. Garff of the Danish Mission, Franklin J. Murdock of the Netherlands Mission, Joseph E. Evans of the French Mission, M. Douglas Wood of the Swedish and West German Mission, John A. Israelson of the Norwegian Mission, and Wallace F. Toronto of the Czechoslovakia Mission. Here each president gave a stewardship report of the past work in his mission and a projection about his goals and activities during the coming months.

A somber theme interwoven with all these reports was the spectre of another general war in Europe that would embroil all of the countries in which these mission presidents were laboring. An ominous development had occurred on May 20 when V. M. Molotov, the new foreign commissar in the Soviet Union, announced, following a meeting with the German ambassador, that mutually profitable economic agreements might be reached between the two countries, provided that a suitable "political basis" could be established. Because of the uncertainties this and other crucial events had created, one of the chief items on the agenda of the conference was contingency planning for a possible war.

Leaving Switzerland, Elder Smith and Jessie traveled into Italy. Here they would spend several weeks. There were no organized branches in Italy at the time, nor was missionary work being done there. Freed from holding church meetings, the Smiths became typical tourists, enjoying the rich store of cultural treasures in this ancient land.

They arrived in Milano on June 22, spending several days browsing in the city's museums and galleries, visiting its quaint shops, admiring its classical architecture, and sampling its tasty cuisine. After visiting the ancient cathedral where Leonardo da Vinci's original painting of the Last Supper is found, Joseph pronounced it "wonderful." Later they visited a gallery that displayed an extensive collection of da Vinci's works, both artistic and inventive. After visiting Milano's famed cathedral, Elder Smith wrote that it "looks like lace from the outside."

At Vatican City a few days later, Joseph was particularly impressed by the Church of the Capuchin Friars. "Seven rooms are decorated with the bones of dead Friars," he wrote with astonishment. "You see thousands of them." The next day in Rome, the tourists visited the usual points of interest, including the Coliseum and the tomb of Caesar Augustus. Also, they visited and were impressed by the Mussolini Forum, an academy devoted to the training of Italy's future leaders. Here youths ages fifteen to twenty-one were schooled in history, science, and other academic disciplines with emphasis on the martial arts. "The grounds and buildings are magnificent," Joseph wrote approvingly, remaining silent about the man after whom the academy was named.

Traveling on to Naples, the honeymooners took a launch to the Island of Capri, famed for its mild climate, beautiful scenery, and its Blue Grotto, a large cavern whose walls bristle with stalactites that reflect a brilliant blue light when touched by the sun's rays. Here amid groves of citrus and olive trees and grape orchards were found the remnants of magnificent villas built by the Roman emperors, Augustus and Tiberius. Joseph and Jessie's night on Capri must have seemed almost magical as the couple watched the moon rise over Monte Salaro, the tallest mountain on the island, which rises to a height of almost two thousand feet. The moon's reflected light glimmering on the sea and the sweet aroma of orange blossoms created a romantic mood the Smiths likely never forgot.

That mood was shattered a few days later in Florence. The Smiths had spent July 3 browsing in the city's quaint shops; visiting its magnificent cathedrals, chiefly the Santa Maria del Fiore with its exterior facing of red, white, and green marble; and admiring the prolific collection of Renaissance art in its museums and galleries. Here were classic specimens of the works of Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Giotto, and other noted Renaissance artists. As the Smiths relaxed on the veranda of their hotel room that evening, with the wide and meandering Arno River in clear view, they seem to have been imbued with an unusual sense of peace and contentment. But that changed early the next morning, America's Independence Day, when the Smiths were awakened by the rhythmic sound of jack boots pounding the cobbled streets below as some of Mussolini's brown shirts strutted by. It gave the visitors a "terrible feeling" as they were brought back to the harsh realization that the peace and contentment they had experienced in pleasant Italy could be changed overnight with the onset of war.

Joseph and Jessie completed their Italian tour with a visit to fabled Venice, called by some the Queen of the Adriatic. Here the visitors from Utah, accustomed to the arid deserts of the western United States, were astonished to find a magnificent city built on pilings buried beneath a lagoon of the Adriatic Sea.

From Venice, the Smiths traveled northward through Austria to Czechoslovakia, where they were joined by mission president Wallace F. Toronto and his wife. A pall of uncertainty and discontent hung over this beleaguered country, which, at the time of the apostle's visit, had been under Hitler's domination for four months. Holding meetings with members and missionaries in various cities, the visitors attempted to lift the spirits of the Saints and to prepare them for the uncertainties that lay ahead. Talk of another war was everywhere, so that the contingency planning considered in Lucerne had special relevance for the local leaders. It was understood that if war broke out, the foreign missionaries would be withdrawn, leaving the governance of local Church units in the hands of local leaders. This, of course, was a fearful prospect for the Czech Saints, which made Elder Smith's visit even more meaningful.

Joseph and Jessie ended their visit to Czechoslovakia on July 24 with a series of meetings in Prague. The presence of Hitler's storm troopers on the streets bore ominous witness of the country's subjugation to dictatorial rule, which doubtless overrode any feelings of elation the visitors may have had in remembering that it was also Utah's pioneer day.

Leaving Prague, the Smiths traveled to Berlin, the heart of Nazi power. Because they were Americans, whom Hitler considered to be future enemies, their movements were kept under close surveillance by the Gestapo, although they were free to travel about the city at will. Indeed, the travelers received wider publicity here than in any other city during their European tour because Jessie was invited, for a fee, to sing over Germany's largest radio station. This, of course, publicized Elder Smith, who was identified as the singer's husband. Notwithstanding this, Joseph and Jessie had uneasy feelings during their stay in Berlin.

However, the tensions there could not compare with what the travelers found in Danzig on July 27. Danzig was then the subject of intense international speculation and concern. The media focus on it arose from demands Hitler had made that it be given to Germany, together with a strip of land across the Polish corridor. The series of previous "demands" made on European neighbors by the Nazi leader, followed by German occupation, had instilled a sense of foreboding in the citizens of Danzig that their city was next. And that foreboding was intensified because Britain and France had drawn a line on Poland, which threatened that this ancient Baltic city might become an actual battleground.

Despite this, Danzig had not allowed the uncertainties it faced to interfere with the normal flow of its civic and cultural life. So, government officials hosted Elder Smith and Jessie at a special luncheon upon their arrival. And that night, the visitors were honored at an open-air presentation of Richard Wagner's opera Siegfried. As much as she might have wanted to do so, Jessie restrained herself from joining in the chorus.

Returning to Berlin, the travelers attended services in the LDS chapel on Sunday, July 30. As Elder Smith entered the building, the members spontaneously began to sing "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." Later in the day, this surprising and, to Joseph, somewhat embarrassing incident was repeated at services held at nearby Chemnitz. While Elder Smith had been regularly sustained as a prophet at general conferences during the previous twenty-nine years, he knew well that he was not the prophet. Ordinarily this song refers to the president, who is empowered to guide the Church "in these latter days." To have it sung under these circumstances seems to have been a source of embarrassment to this sensitive, reticent man. But, there was nothing Elder Smith could have done gracefully to correct the misconception, so he let it pass without comment. At each of these Sunday meetings, the usual procedure was followed, with Elder Smith giving the concluding address and with Jessie speaking briefly and singing.

The mood in Berlin was tense, as it was in other German cities, as the visitors toured in West Germany with President M. Douglas Wood and in East Germany with President Thomas E. McKay. Nazi troops were everywhere. The nation was clearly gearing up for war. And the delicacy of Elder Smith's position imposed limitations on what he could say in public. So his sermons focused only on the principles of the gospel and were devoid of any reference to political or military matters. He shared with Lewis the restraints under which he had to act while in Germany. "From here," he wrote from Copenhagen on August 16, "we will go to other parts of Denmark, and then we have to go back into the West German Mission to finish our labors. As far as Germany is concerned, we would just as soon go to Holland and France. If we had the same freedom in Germany, it would be better. However, we got along well when we were there, but we had to be more guarded in our remarks and were watched by secret agents. These things do not add to your peace of mind."

Prior to writing this letter, Elder Smith and Jessie had spent two weeks touring the missions in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. In these countries, the visitors did not detect the tension they had felt in Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Germany. "It is very quiet and peaceful here," Elder Smith wrote to Lewis from Denmark on August 18. Everywhere he and Jessie went in that country and in Scandinavia, the same placid conditions prevailed. This was surprising in a way, given the proximity of these countries to Germany and considering the belligerent attitudes Hitler had shown toward other European neighbors. So, it was an enjoyable and peaceful interlude as the Smiths traveled alternately with Mission Presidents Mark B. Garff, M. Douglas Wood, and John A. Israelson and their wives, meeting with missionaries and the Saints in various parts of Scandinavia. The royal treatment the travelers received is hinted at in the already mentioned letter of August 16 that Elder Smith wrote to Lewis: "In Germany we got much synthetic food, but in Sweden we had a good supply of the very best. Good butter and cream were furnished us in Sweden in abundance and also good bread. Then again they give you a square meal before they serve you the meal you order. You have the privilege of going to the table and helping yourselves as often as you like, and it is all good too. In Norway they give you good things to eat, but they are not so elaborate with it."

Within a week after writing this letter, Elder and Sister Smith were back in Germany. Writing to Lewis from Hanover on August 24, he noted: "We are hoping now that nothing will arise to interfere with the program as it has been arranged for us." This was written without knowledge of the feverish negotiations that had gone on behind the scenes between Germany and Russia as a prelude to Hitler's invasion of Poland. The foreign ministers had been in regular contact during the period to clarify certain "territorial questions in Eastern Europe." By August 20, the terms had been agreed upon, and, three days later, the day before Elder Smith wrote his letter to Lewis, Molotov and Ribbentrop signed a nonaggression pact in Moscow.

From that point on, the descent into the maelstrom of war was swift and sure. The Brethren in Salt Lake City had been carefully monitoring the course of negotiations between Germany and the Soviet Union. And when it became clear that the nonaggression pact would be signed, they acted promptly. Later in the day on August 24, after he had written the letter to Lewis, Elder Smith received a cablegram from the First Presidency instructing that all missionaries in Germany be transferred to neutral countries. At the same time, similar cablegrams were sent directly from Salt Lake City to M. Douglas Wood and Thomas E. McKay, presidents of the West German and East German missions. These instructions required the cancellation of all meetings Elder Smith had scheduled to be held in Germany. However, he decided to go forward with the one scheduled in Hanover the night of August 24. "It was quite exciting," Jessie wrote of that meeting. "We . . . had a very splendid service, but everyone was still wondering about conditions." The next morning, Elder Smith received word from President Thomas E. McKay that pursuant to the direction from Salt Lake City, all of the missionaries in the East German mission were being sent to Denmark. Later in the day, the Smiths traveled by train to Frankfurt, the headquarters of the West German mission. President and Sister Wood had preceded them there, having gone by plane. According to Jessie, "things were surely popping" when they arrived at the mission office in Frankfurt with "phone calls, telegrams and cablegrams, and everyone busy packing."

One of the cablegrams was from the First Presidency, directing Elder Smith to go to Holland or Denmark, where he was to coordinate the work of shepherding and reassigning the missionaries being withdrawn from Germany. This instruction required a change in his plans as Joseph had previously made arrangements to go to Basel, Switzerland. Despite the urgent demands for transportation out of Germany, the Smiths were able at the last minute to book passage on a train that left Frankfurt for Holland shortly after midnight on Saturday, August 26, 1939. Four hours later, their train arrived at Cologne, where they were scheduled to make only a brief stop. Instead, they were kept waiting an hour and a half. "That wasn't a very pleasant feeling," wrote Jessie of this unscheduled delay. "We could see many people running and making a lot of noise." Between Cologne and the Dutch border, the Smiths saw other things that made them uneasy. "We could see through the train windows soldiers out in the fields putting up guns," reported Jessie, "and soldiers lined up along the way. It was a terrible feeling." At the border, the German authorities first questioned the right of the Smiths to enter Holland. However, when Elder Smith produced tickets he had previously obtained for a liner from Holland to the United States, he and Jessie were allowed to pass. "We were the last to cross the border," wrote Jessie, "because one hour after, we received a phone call that they wouldn't let any of the elders [who had been serving in West Germany] across, so we were surely in a fix." A chief problem faced by the elders in satisfying the immigration officials at the border was the lack of sufficient money. This deficiency was cured, however, when Elder Smith directed both President Wood of the West German Mission and President Murdock of the Netherlands Mission to send representatives to the border with money. It was later decided to send these West German missionaries to Denmark, where the East German missionaries had already been sent. On this account, Elder Smith decided that he too should go on to Denmark, where he could better coordinate the work of reassigning the missionaries who had been working in Germany. So, he and Jessie flew from Holland to Copenhagen. Here they were met by mission president Mark B. Garff, who took them to the mission home, where they would remain for two months. President Garff also turned over the mission office to Elder Smith for use in his work.

By Monday morning, August 28, Elder Smith was at his desk in the mission office in Copenhagen. Following the departure of the missionaries from Frankfurt, Salt Lake had ordered the evacuation of the missionaries from Czechoslovakia, instructing them also to go to Denmark. In a letter to Lewis, the apostle described the scene at his headquarters in Copenhagen, where frantic efforts were being made to accommodate the missionaries who were arriving there from the south: "Since arriving here, we have been kept extremely busy," he wrote, "trying to reach the different missions and with communications from and to the First Presidency. From the reports we received, conditions are getting more grave and communications more difficult. . . . We are both well but kept constantly near the telephone and typewriter. We still have one worry, in addition to the many others, as President Toronto and his missionaries have not arrived [from Czechoslovakia]. We hope they will be here tonight."

Meanwhile, the political situation was deteriorating rapidly. The day before the Smiths departed from Frankfurt, France had warned Hitler it would stand by Poland; and on the same day, Neville Chamberlain announced the signing of an Anglo-Polish Alliance. These actions served as a temporary brake on the dictator's plans to invade Poland. He pleaded for "understanding" in his attempts to negotiate a settlement of German claims in Danzig and the connecting corridor. Grasping at straws to prevent war, the British and French pressured Poland to negotiate. Yielding, Warsaw sent envoys to Berlin for discussions. There Hitler refused to negotiate unless Poland's ambassador had full power to cut a deal. When Warsaw insisted that the final approval of any plan must be made there, Hitler claimed the Poles were stalling and didn't want to negotiate.

And when on August 30 Warsaw ordered a general mobilization, Germany's media trumpeted that Poland was planning to attack. To lend credence to this false charge, the next day the Feuhrer rigged an attack on a German radio station near the border, claiming it was made by Poles, who were actually Germans dressed in Polish uniforms. It was on this pretext that Hitler sent his Panzer divisions into Poland at dawn, September 1. In an impassioned radio speech in which he attempted to justify the invasion, the dictator cynically claimed that he had had to meet force with force. Later he rejected allied demands to withdraw. Left with no alternative, Great Britain and France formally notified Hitler on September 3 that a state of war existed.

These shocking events radically altered Elder Smith's task. It was no longer a matter of shifting missionaries to different parts of Europe. Now the aim was to evacuate them entirely. This presented the apostle and the mission presidents with an enormous logistical problem that was aggravated by bureaucratic red tape and the paralyzing fear and anxiety the war had produced. Added to these complexities were the hurried and harried steps that had to be taken to transfer the direction of the European districts and branches to local leaders and to respond to the many anxious inquiries received from home as to the whereabouts and condition of the missionaries.

There were 697 who had to be evacuated, including 611 elders, 63 young women missionaries, and 23 others comprising mission presidents and their families. They returned to the United States on twenty-three different ships, most of them freighters. Writing to Lewis on September 8 from Copenhagen, Elder Smith said that a hundred missionaries had left that day on two freighters, sixty on the Scanyork and forty on the Mormachawk. "They were furnished cots in the hold instead of freight in the space they occupy," he explained. "They were all happy and seemed to be very comfortable." While the remaining missionaries were waiting for passage home, they were kept as busy as possible under the circumstances. "Each morning we have had the missionaries together in meeting, and I have given them one hour to one hour and a half in which they have asked questions. . . . I hope, at least, that we are able to clear up some of the funny notions some of them had."

Elder Smith and Jessie had originally booked passage home on the Manhattan, which sailed from Southampton on September 8. However, when Joseph saw that his duties could not be completed by then, he turned their tickets over to a missionary couple who had been serving in West Germany. Within a month, however, nothing remained for him to do, and he was ready to go home. "I am willing to remain here indefinitely," he wrote to Lewis on October 7, "but cannot see anything more that I can do. I am no help to you in Switzerland, and cannot assist you or the missionaries in France or Holland to get away." Since there were no open berths on ships leaving Denmark, the Smiths traveled to Holland, where, after a two-week delay, they were able to book passage on the freighter Zaandam. The apostle did not enjoy the delay. "We have found the past two weeks very trying," he wrote to Lewis on October 18, "because there has not been anything to be done. I have held my hands or spent [my time] walking the streets or reading while Aunt Jessie has knitted."

The return voyage on the Zaandam introduced the Smiths to spartan life aboard a freighter. It was hardly the kind of luxurious fare they had enjoyed on their previous voyages together. Yet, there was a special congeniality among the passengers, an unusual sense of camaraderie, coming from a shared perception that they had just escaped from a great scourge that had descended upon Europe. That sense of escape was moderated by the knowledge that German U-boats prowled the Atlantic so that they could not feel absolutely safe until they reached the shores of America. Once there, Joseph and Jessie traveled across the United States by train, arriving home on November 12, 1939, almost seven months after they had left on their so-called second honeymoon.

It would take some time for them to sort out the meaning of the things they had seen and heard. For Elder Smith, two perceptions stood out above all others. The first was his conviction that the war stemmed from a general rejection of Christ's message delivered by the Latter-day Saint missionaries. "They have not appreciated the message which we sent to them," he wrote in a letter to Lewis. "They did not want us and are glad to see us go. . . . We have been crying repentance among the nations for all these years as the Lord commanded us to do, but steadily and persistently the nations have been growing more corrupt and more ungodly year by year." The second was his sorrow for the faithful, god-fearing people among these nations who would innocently suffer from the war. "My heart was sick," wrote Elder Smith, "every time we held a meeting and shook hands with the people at its close. They all greeted us warmly, and their [friendship] meant more to me than they perhaps realized. Some of them shed tears and said they were looking for grave trouble, and we would never meet again in this life. I feel sorry for them now, and pray each day that the Lord will protect them through this dreadful time."

1992 Deseret Book Co.
