Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Nineteen

The War Reaches Home

The Smiths' Christmas in 1939 was, at the same time, joyous and sad. Jessie, with her artistic and dramatic flair, her irrepressible good humor, and her music brought gaiety and excitement into the Douglas Street home. Two of the children still lived there, fifteen-year-old Douglas and twelve-year-old Milton, while Reynolds, a freshman at Brigham Young University, came up from Provo for the holidays. Yet, beneath the surface of joy as the family gathered to sing and to laugh, to exchange gifts and to reflect on the deeper meaning of their celebration, ran a deep current of foreboding. The war in Europe had escalated dramatically. Following the German invasion of Poland, the Soviets had attacked from the east, and in short order all of Poland had been subjugated and carved up between the two aggressors. Meanwhile, Soviet troops had invaded Finland, where bitter fighting was then taking place. And there was much talk about a German invasion of the Scandinavian countries. All the while, of course, Great Britain and France were feverishly gearing up for the major armed conflict everyone knew was coming. Aside from their general concern for the Europeans they had so recently visited, the Smiths had a personal apprehension about the war in Europe because Lewis was still there. He was serving as an assistant to Thomas E. McKay, president of the Swiss and East German Mission. It would be two more months before he would return. So, the holiday celebrations of the Smiths were necessarily alloyed with gnawing concern about the future.

Meanwhile, life in Salt Lake City went on unabated. Following Joseph's return from Europe, he had resumed his normal routine of stake conferences, mission tours, and work in the Historian's Office. He was also busy making editorial changes for another printing of The Way to Perfection, a little volume that had been well received by the public. His other writings at the time consisted mostly of answering the questions that were put to him in ever-increasing numbers. By now, his reputation as the leading scripture scholar of the Church had been well established so that most doctrinal questions gravitated to him for handling. He usually banged out the answers on his old typewriter, using the hunt-and-peck method. Over the years, he had become adept in using the typewriter, zipping along at a speed almost equal to that of the secretaries in the office.

During this period, Joseph's writings and sermons took on a more somber tone as he reflected on the causes and implications of the war. "I have been crying repentance among the stakes of Zion for thirty years," he told a Tabernacle audience, "calling upon the people to turn to the Lord, keep His commandments, observe the Sabbath Day, pay their honest tithing, do everything the Lord has commanded them to do, to live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God." (Conference Report, October 1940, p. 117.) Elder Smith saw the European war as the direct result of disobedience to the laws of the gospel. He also believed that the same fate awaited America unless its people repented. Said he, "I am going to repeat what I have said before, for which I have been severely criticized from certain quarters, that even in this country, we have no grounds by which we may escape, no sure foundation upon which we can stand, and by which we may escape from the calamities and destruction and the plagues and pestilences, and even the devouring fire by sword and by war, unless we repent and keep the commandments of the Lord, for it is written here in these revelations." (Ibid.)

Some of the criticism directed at Elder Smith for his outspoken calls to repentance came from within the hierarchy of the Church. One of the Brethren went to him on January 19, 1940, to read a letter containing "severe criticism" of Elder Smith because he persisted in telling the people to repent and that if they failed to do so, the "judgments of the Lord [would] overtake them." This brother endorsed the criticism and urged Elder Smith to speak only that which was "good and commendatory." Joseph's answer was predictable, "I informed him I would [continue] to cry repentance in all the stakes of Zion for our people need to repent." A few days later, Joseph Fielding wrote a long letter to this brother, which he hoped would "do him some good." It was troubling that he not only refused to preach repentance but also criticized Joseph for doing so. Elder Joseph Fielding saw it as his duty to raise a warning voice when the people began to drift away from the path marked by the scriptures. And he had no intention to abandon that duty, regardless of what anyone said. That speaking out made him unpopular in some circles seems not to have had any deterring effect upon him; his purpose was not to become popular or famous in the eyes of the people. Instead, he saw his role as that of a watchman on the tower whose duty it was to sound the warning call to those below who could not see the approaching danger.

The stream of bad news that flowed from Europe was a constant reminder of the calamity that had befallen the nations there. Joseph continued to receive reports from Europe and from those who had been evacuated. But these reports were sporadic and incomplete and furnished only a vague picture of the conditions of the Church and its members. In order to obtain a clearer and more focused understanding, the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve assigned the mission presidents who were in the field when war broke out to maintain regular contact with the local leaders in these countries. At the same time, Elder Smith was assigned to direct and coordinate these efforts. "These brethren," he wrote on February 6, 1940, "will counsel and advise the local presiding officers; receive reports from them, and then consult with me."

In this capacity, Elder Smith made a trip East later in February. His ultimate purpose was to meet the last of the missionaries to be evacuated from Europe. Meanwhile, he would preside at two stake conferences along the way. He left the Salt Lake City Union Pacific depot Thursday evening, February 22, Washington's birthday. Jessie, who would stay home this time, drove him there. The next day, as his train streaked across Wyoming and Nebraska, Joseph was caught up in a reverie. "Spent the day on the train, reflecting on the journeyings of the pioneers over these plains, and how my father, when a boy, drove his ox team all the way from the Missouri to the Salt Lake Valley. And now we cross in comfort in two days on the train and can in a few hours by airplane. It is wonderful."

The first stake conference was held in cold and windy Chicago, where Elder Smith arrived on the 24th to find the heaviest snowfall the city had had all winter. There to greet him were Julina and Eldon, who then lived in nearby Urbana, and Chicago stake president William A. Matheson. Over the weekend, the apostle presided at the usual meetings of a stake conference, in between which he "had a good visit with Julina and Eldon," who, with Elder Smith, were guests in the Matheson home.

The following weekend found Joseph in New York City, where the second stake conference was held. Here he found a situation he had not encountered before during thirty years of service in the Twelve—local leaders who were more or less indifferent toward him and his instructions. The reasons for this attitude are unclear. Perhaps their advanced education, their wealth, and a condescending attitude toward Elder Smith's call to repentance lay at the root. He was troubled by their attitude and commented on it at some length. "I left the stake," he wrote on March 3, 1940, "feeling some restriction existing or barrier, between me and the stake officers, who are PhD's and scientific mechanical professors, who lack some of the human qualities found in those of less scholastic and scientific training. At the close of the meeting, not one of the presidency of the stake as much as noticed that I was present and although I spent some time talking with members of the congregation, I was not approached and wished a pleasant farewell and journey, but without any farewell greeting was permitted to leave the building in company with my niece, Donnette McAllister."

The cold reception Elder Smith received at the stake conference was matched by a heavy winter storm that struck the New York area the next day. It was reported to be one of the worst and most destructive storms to hit New York in many years. "The falling rain froze on whatever it touched," Joseph wrote. "The ice then formed made the trees look like the limbs and branches were made of rock candy." The ship carrying the last of the returning European missionaries, the S.S. Washington, was delayed in arriving because of the ferocity of the storm. So Elder Smith and members of the staff of the mission headquarters at 155 Riverside Drive had to make two trips to the pier of the United States Lines over the treacherously slick Manhattan streets.

They arrived at the pier for the second time about 9:30 a.m., just in time to see the big ship ease into the dock. Among the passengers were President Thomas E. McKay, his wife and daughter, and four elders, including Elder Smith's son Lewis. The father's joy at seeing this son again was heightened by relief that Lewis was at last out of the war zone and safely home on American soil. "We were all happy . . . and glad to have the group home," wrote Elder Smith, "the last of the missionaries out of Europe. The foreign nations requested the missionaries to leave; and our own country requested all Americans to leave Europe; and now we are all home." The relief this entry implies would be shattered in less than two years when the United States would be drawn into the conflict. And not long after that, the tragedy of war would directly strike the Smith family when this beloved son, Lewis, would be killed in military service.

Later in the afternoon, Elder Smith and mission president Frank Evans made still another trip to the docks. This time, they met a ship arriving from Brazil with a missionary, Elder Quasley, who had been sent home because of illness. "The father and mother were also there to meet him," wrote Joseph, "so we felt relieved."

While Elder Smith was busy winding up his affairs in New York City, Lewis spent the time profitably, doing missionary work with the elders who labored in the mission office. Two days later, father and son traveled by train to Washington, D.C. Establishing their headquarters in the Hamilton Hotel, the Smiths spent two days in the capital, visiting places of historic interest. Their guides were Sterling Wheelwright and his wife and Elder Smith's nephews Edward and Elmer Smith, sons of his brother, David A. The talented Sterling Wheelwright gave organ recitals at the Washington, D.C., chapel and the two nephews were furthering their education. These hosts alternated in showing the visitors around. They inspected the Washington and Lincoln memorials, the White House, Arlington National Cemetery, and the capitol building, among other places. At the Capitol, they sat for a while in the gallery of the Senate to watch the proceedings. Elder Smith was not impressed. Vice-president John Nance Garner left the chambers immediately after the roll call, as did Utah senator Elbert Thomas. Utah's other senator, William King, was not present. The visitors remained for an hour, listening to Senator George W. Norris of Nebraska. Elder Smith pulled no punches in his appraisal of the speaker. "He is one senator who has a good opinion of himself," he wrote, "but is over estimated by his state and many people who can be fooled much of the time." From the Senate, the visitors went to the supreme court. Here the diarist was more impressed by the building ("one of the finest in Washington") than by its occupants. He bluntly expressed the appraisal of the court that was then held by most persons of conservative views. "The court now contains a majority of men," Joseph Fielding reported, "who are under some control by the U. S. President and who are reversing decisions previously made. Some of these men were noted for radical views on government."

Reared in a community where initiative, independence, and rugged enterprise were among the most admired qualities, and by parents who, without government subsidy, had helped tame a wilderness, Elder Smith never endorsed the social legislation enacted during the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt. He thought that subsidies, or what he derisively called "hand-outs," destroyed individual initiative and created a dangerous and deadening dependency on government. While he recognized that the poor among us who are sick, aged, or incompetent required special help, he looked to the family, the Church, and local governments to fill these needs. At the same time, he abhorred those who glutted themselves on the public wealth through large and unconscionable subsidies to businesses. These views reflect the basic conservative political philosophy Joseph Fielding Smith embraced throughout his life. His philosophy coincided with that of his brethren in the Church hierarchy and helped to shape the Church welfare program.

Leaving the nation's capital, Elder Smith and Lewis traveled by train to Chicago, where they arrived the morning of March 8. Transferring to a bus, they went on to Champaign, Illinois, where Julina and her husband lived. "We arrived there about noon," noted Elder Smith, "and spent the day visiting the University of Illinois, and especially the library. It was a happy visit as Julina had not seen Lewis for two and a half years." The travelers returned to Chicago the following day, where they were to catch the train to Salt Lake City. As they left the elevated municipal train at Chicago's northwestern station, Elder Smith was jostled by a woman and two men in a narrow passageway. "When I felt in my pocket," he wrote, "I found that I had been relieved of one purse which contained five dollars." Fortunately, most of the money Elder Smith had with him was in another pocket; and the lost wallet did not contain valuable personal documents.

The travelers boarded their train for home late Saturday night, March 9. The following day was a special one for both father and son. It was Lewis's twenty-second birthday and provided their first opportunity for a long, easy visit since the son arrived in New York six days before. And, as it turned out, it was the last time they would have such an opportunity, for within two years Lewis would be in the army and their crowded schedules during the interval would not allow them the luxury of such a long time alone together. So, as their train sped westward during the entire day, they were able to visit quietly and companionably about many things of mutual interest. Elder Smith had good reason to be proud of this son who had distinguished himself in the mission field, serving at the end of it as the assistant to the mission president. And the son admired and sought to emulate his distinguished father. Aside from the filial relationship between them, they were bound by their shared convictions about the Church and its mission.

At home there was a repetition of what had occurred at Champaign, as Lewis became reacquainted with the other members of his family whom he had not seen for two and a half years. "We had a celebration," wrote the father, "and gave thanks that he was home from troubled Europe."

During the following year, the scope and the intensity of the war in troubled Europe increased explosively. Like a spectator at a horror movie played on a gigantic screen, Elder Smith traced the progress of the war in his diary. In April 1940, the month after he and Lewis returned home, he reported Germany's lightning-quick invasion of Denmark and Norway. On May 9, he reported the German invasion of Holland and Belgium, made, as he put it, "without any warning and on the flimsy and lying excuses similar to those which were made at the sudden and wicked invasion of Denmark and Norway." The next day Joseph had much to say about Germany's fanatical leader and about the biblical implications of the war. "The career of the German Madman," he wrote of Hitler, "will continue as far as the Lord permits and then he will come to his end. The prophets have warned the world of these destructions, but the world, and many, very many, members of the church have not heeded the warning." When in June Italy joined Germany in the war, Elder Smith also had harsh comments to make about its leader. "Yesterday, Benito Mussolini, the dictator of Italy, forced the Italian nation into the war against France and England. This act is that of a sniveling coward who, like the jackal, strikes from behind at a wounded and helpless foe." Then scorning the objectives of Hitler and Mussolini, he added, "It appears that Satan's plan, dictation and compulsion, is prevailing; but it cannot triumph in the end."

While this prediction ultimately proved correct, the events that followed soon after created serious doubt. Within days after Italy's entry into the war, the French government declared Paris an open city, moving its headquarters first to Tours, then to Bordeaux. On the heels of that, a new French government, under World War I hero Marshal Philippe Petain, asked for an armistice; and by June 25, France lay prostrate, defeated in only forty-two days.

As Great Britain stood alone following its shattering defeat at Dunkirk in June, and as Germany's air attacks on England were accelerated, a growing perception in America was that the United States would ultimately be drawn into the war. That perception became clearer when in January 1941, American and British officers met in Washington, D.C., where it was agreed that the two nations would maintain joint planning staffs. Two months later, the Lend-Lease Act was passed, authorizing the United States to provide war materials for nations under attack by the Axis powers. Reacting to this, Elder Smith noted in his diary on March 27, "The war abroad is increasing in intensity and the attitude of our own government is ominous."

Meanwhile, life in the Smith family went on despite the gloomy prospect that the United States would be drawn into the war. Elder Smith had continued to fulfill his apostolic responsibilities by attending stake conferences and touring missions. Following the October general conference in 1940, he and Jessie toured the Central States Mission in company with mission president John F. Bowman and his wife. All along the way in meetings with members and missionaries, Elder Smith bore down strongly on the theme that the war in Europe was the result of disobedience to God's laws and that unless the people of the United States repented, they would suffer a similar fate. A diary entry made on October 24, following a meeting in Oklahoma City, reveals the intensity of Elder Smith's preaching on this subject and the reaction of some people towards it. "While I was speaking and mentioned the fact that the world needs repentance, and as I referred to the filthy practice of drunkenness and tobacco, two men got up and left in disgust or contempt; but nevertheless, we preached repentance and bore witness of the restored gospel and warned the people, as we have done consistently, of the calamities, bloodshed etc., if they do not repent." In token of Elder Smith's unswerving belief in the rightness and timeliness of his views, he added, "We had a very good meeting."

Amid the troubling news of the war in Europe and Elder Smith's fiery denunciation of evil and threats of dire consequences to follow, family life among the Smiths went on as usual. In May of 1940, Reynolds was ordained an elder, and his bishop approached him about filling a mission. In less than a month, Reyn's papers were processed, and on June 11 he received a call to serve in Argentina. "He seems very pleased," his father wrote of the call. The son entered the mission home July 1, and by mid-July he had been set apart by his father and sent on his way.

During the period of Reynolds's preparation to go on his mission, Jessie underwent an appendectomy and later became gravely ill when peritonitis set in. Joseph learned of the emergency surgery while he was attending a stake conference in Safford, Arizona, where Spencer W. Kimball presided. Canceling plans to go on to the Mexican colonies for a series of meetings, the apostle returned home immediately. He was driven to Phoenix, Arizona, by President Kimball and there took a bus to Salt Lake City. "After riding all night and most of all day Monday, [I arrived] in Salt Lake City at 4 p.m. As soon as I could, I went to the LDS Hospital where I found Jessie in considerable distress but cheerful. . . . She was very glad to see me, as I was to see her, and I left her feeling encouraged." Because of her perilous condition caused by the infection after the appendectomy, it was necessary for nurses to attend Jessie for many weeks at home following her release from the hospital. She recovered gradually and, after months of convalescence, regained her full health.

Meanwhile, at a purely personal level, Elder Smith continued to enjoy the role of father and grandfather. The traditional celebration of Elder Smith's birthday was delayed this year because of complications in getting Reynolds into the mission field. But this neglect was rectified the following week when the family gathered at Liberty Park to commemorate Joseph's sixty-fourth birthday. "During the week from the 21st to the 27th [of July], I was at the office and at home. Played ball with my boys two or three times which amused them." Had the sons been consulted, there is little doubt that their reaction would have been one of admiration, not amusement, that their sixty-four-year-old father was vigorous enough physically and young enough at heart to enjoy a game of ball with them.

The following week, Elder Smith took Douglas and Milton with him to the Alpine Summer School, where he spoke to the students and teachers. While they were there, Professor Carl F. Eyring permitted them to look at the heavens through a telescope. Even though it was daytime, they were able to see some of the stars and planets because of the high altitude and the clearness of the atmosphere. And Venus could even be seen with the naked eye. The next day back in Salt Lake City, Joseph was pleased to be able to share his new-found knowledge: "Venus was visible to the eye here in Salt Lake City," he wrote on July 31, "and I pointed it out to my children." And the proud patriarch reached another milestone on August 15, when he baptized his oldest grandchild, Maxine Reinhardt, Josephine's daughter.

During this period, when the General Authorities were in recess, Elder Smith was able to do something that he seldom did during all the years of his apostolic service—he prepared and gave a Sunday School lesson to an adult class in the Garden Park Ward. The following week, he was off on his never-ending round of stake conference visits when he traveled to Malad, Idaho, with Roscoe W. Eardley of the Welfare Committee. And the following week, Elder Smith was in Oakley, Idaho, with another welfare worker, Harold B. Lee, who within a few months would be called to the Twelve and who later still would serve as Joseph Fielding Smith's first counselor in the First Presidency. "Bro. Lee and I did all we could to encourage and help the stake to better their condition in Priesthood activities," reported Elder Smith of a welfare meeting they held. The apostle's instruction at the general session "emphasized the need of repentance, loyalty and obedience."

These themes were interwoven in practically all of the sermons Elder Smith delivered during the period leading up to the entrance of the United States into World War II. He sensed a deterioration in loyalty and obedience, even among the Latter-day Saints, and therefore called upon them to repent and to prepare for the terrible days he saw ahead for them. Although the United States was not then at war, he saw it draw ever closer as in July 1941, when American troops replaced British troops in Iceland; and later that summer when the United States began to construct naval and air bases, presumably for the use of the British. These and other circumstances had created a general perception that the direct involvement of the United States in the war was inevitable. The only uncertainty was when and under what circumstances it would occur. All became clear on December 7, 1941, when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. At the time, Elder Smith was presiding at the conference of the Uvada stake in Caliente, Nevada. "Sunday afternoon," he noted in his diary, "the report came over the radio that the Japanese had made a sudden dastardly, cowardly attack on Honolulu, without any warning, creating a considerable destruction and loss of life." When the next day the United States declared war on Japan and three days later Germany and Italy declared war on the United States, Elder Smith and the entire nation knew that the terrible event they had sensed would come, but had fervently hoped could be avoided, had become a reality.

Like all other parents, Joseph's first and immediate concern was for his sons who were of military age. At the time, three of them were in that category, Joseph, who was twenty-seven; Lewis, twenty-three; and Reynolds, who was almost twenty-one. And Douglas would reach draftable age the following May. Moreover, all of the apostle's sons-in-law were of an age that made them vulnerable to the draft. The prospect that these sons and sons-in-law might be sacrificed filled him with revulsion. While he was convinced that the challenges facing the American nation came from a general rejection of God's laws, he held the country's leaders to a higher and more specific standard of accountability. Thus, while he participated in the government's call for a day of national prayer on January 1, 1942, he was critical of what he perceived as a lack of humility among its leaders. Elder Smith's diary entry for that day tells the story best: "This morning at 10:30, I was in the Winder Ward where the people had assembled in a prayer meeting in keeping with a proclamation from the President of the United States because of the trouble and difficulties in the world. I addressed the meeting at some length. My own feelings are that it would have been better if the President had called on the people—including himself—to repent, as well as to pray. Prayer without humility and the spirit of repentance avails nothing. I take it that in most instances it will be like this in the prayers: 'O Lord, we need thy help, come to our aid, but we do not intend to keep thy commandments.' "

A personal tragedy in the Smith family during this period added to the somber feelings created by America's entry into the war. Elder Smith was awakened at 3:00 a.m. December 17 by a telephone call from his daughter, Lois, who tearfully explained that his little grandson and namesake, Joseph Fife, had just passed away in a San Francisco hospital. "It is a very severe blow," wrote the grandfather, "as this is the second child Lois and her husband have lost. Jessie and I will leave tonight for Stockton." Snarled rail traffic caused by the new war emergency prevented the Smiths from leaving until the next morning. This put them in Stockton at 3:00 a.m. on Friday the 19th. "We learned that funeral arrangements for our precious baby were for 1:30 p.m. Saturday," Joseph noted on that day. "Jessie and I spent the time all day Friday with Lois and Dr. Fife and helped to comfort them in their sore affliction. Beautiful services were held Saturday. Jessie sang and the speaking by the Bishop and others was comforting." The Smiths left at midnight following the services. Because of complications in their train schedule, they did not arrive home until almost twenty-four hours later.

As Elder Smith monitored the news daily, he became more convinced that the war was the direct result of personal and collective sin. And it seemed to nettle him that others did not understand this and that they failed to speak out about it in their public addresses. So when in early January he attended a meeting where Arthur Gaeth, a well-known Mormon news commentator, was the speaker, Joseph deplored the fact that in discussing the war and its causes, Mr. Gaeth "failed to give the principal reason—violation of the Lords commandments and wickedness." This lack in others was compensated for to an extent by Elder Smith's persistent focus on this theme. His recorded sermons during this period uniformly dwell on it. His diary is filled with entries about it. So we can safely assume that his unrecorded talks featured some discussion about it. And as had been true from the beginning of his apostolic ministry, Elder Smith had many opportunities to speak. Indeed, during this period such opportunities were multiplied because of special instructional meetings for priesthood leaders that the General Authorities had begun to conduct. In early January, Elder Smith, accompanied by Marion G. Romney, newly called assistant to the Twelve, went to northern Utah to conduct such meetings with priesthood leaders in the Cache and Logan stakes. "We were able to discuss matters of priesthood much better than in a stake conference," Joseph Fielding wrote of them, "and search the hearts of the people who had the responsibility." The following weekend, Elder Smith, accompanied by another new assistant to the Twelve, Thomas E. McKay, traveled to Idaho, where similar priesthood training meetings were held in the Rexburg and Yellowstone stakes.

The meetings Joseph Fielding held with Elders Romney and McKay actually had two main purposes. The first, of course, was to instruct the local leaders in their duties. The second, equally if not more important, was to train his companions in their duties as General Authorities. As already indicated, they had been recently called as assistants to the Twelve. At the same time, April 6, 1941, three other men had been called to the same position, Clifford E. Young, Alma Sonne, and Nicholas G. Smith. Initially, Joseph Fielding had had misgivings about their calls. His concern did not relate to these brethren's ability or qualifications, nor to the need for help at the general level. It related instead to the absence in the scriptures of any reference to the office of "assistant to the Twelve." He understood that scripturally the Seventy were intended to be those whom the Twelve would call on for assistance. Yet, because of restrictions then imposed on the Seventy, they were incapable of providing the measure of help the Twelve urgently needed. The Seventy then lacked the authority to ordain high priests, authority that was essential in reorganizing stakes. Nor could they ordain bishops or call and set apart high councilors. Laboring under these restrictions, members of the First Council of Seventy could not be sent alone to reorganize stakes, nor could they relieve members of the Twelve of much of the load in reorganizations when they went out as companions. This was a crucial problem as the Church continued to grow worldwide, thereby increasing the workload of the Twelve. The solution lay in the broad authority vested in the prophetic office to take the action necessary to carry on the work. Therefore, when President Heber J. Grant decided to call assistants to the Twelve who could function without the restrictions imposed on the Seventy, Elder Smith and the other apostles approved.

The men selected as assistants to the Twelve were experienced in Church matters but not at the general level. So, for a time, they were sent out with members of the Twelve to learn their new duties. Because Elder Smith was by now one of the senior members of the Twelve, he had a major responsibility in training these new brethren. He knew them all well. At the time of his call, Elder Romney was the president of the Bonneville Stake where Elder Smith resided. Joseph had known Thomas E. McKay for many years through their related Church assignments and through association with Elder McKay's brother, President David O. McKay. And he still had another official relationship with Thomas E. McKay because of the continuing responsibilities they shared to shepherd the Saints in Europe through correspondence. Elder Smith was also well acquainted with Alma Sonne and Clifford E. Young, both of whom had served as stake presidents. Both were also prominent bankers, Elder Sonne from Logan, Utah, and Elder Young from American Fork, Utah. Moreover, Elder Young, because of his status as a son-in-law of President Heber J. Grant, had long been a member of the unofficial and loosely structured "Church family" comprised of General Authorities and their kin. Finally, Joseph and Nicholas G. Smith were cousins—Nicholas, a former mission president and acting Church patriarch, being a brother of George Albert Smith of the Twelve and a descendant of "Uncle John," who was a brother of Joseph Smith Sr., the Prophet's father.

In turn, then, with other members of the Twelve, Joseph Fielding accompanied these assistants to the Twelve on visits to stake conferences and other Church meetings where the new men learned by observation what was expected of them in their callings. But more important, perhaps, they absorbed the learning and lore of the Church at the general level as they traveled with members of the Twelve. Over time, these assistants and others who would follow them were by this means thoroughly indoctrinated into the Church hierarchy. And within a few years, when he became president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Joseph Fielding Smith would not only have training duties with the assistants but would also have authority and responsibility to direct them in their work.

On the same day in April 1941 when the first five assistants to the Twelve were called, Elder Harold B. Lee was sustained as the junior member of the Twelve. This initiated a twenty-nine year association between Elder Smith and Elder Lee as members of the Twelve. Despite a difference of twenty-three years in their ages, the pair had a special affinity that far transcended their apostolic association. Joseph Fielding had visited the Pioneer Stake in Salt Lake City on assignment during the 1930s when Elder Lee served there as the stake president. With the other General Authorities, Elder Smith had watched this young leader struggle, with his associates, to alleviate the economic want among their members brought on by the Great Depression. The creative welfare initiatives developed by Harold B. Lee in the Pioneer Stake caught the eye of the First Presidency, resulting in his eventual call as the managing director of the Church welfare program. In this capacity, Elder Lee had accompanied Joseph Fielding and other members of the Twelve on stake conference assignments over several years as they teamed up to teach welfare principles to local priesthood leaders. A particularly memorable assignment they shared was in August 1937 when they traveled to Canada to attend conferences in the Cardston and Lethbridge stakes. Elder Lee and his wife, Fern, had gone to Canada by automobile with their friends Charles and Lenora Hyde, while Elder Smith had traveled there by train. After the conferences ended, it was discovered that Elder Smith could save a day by traveling home with the Lees and Hydes. So, he canceled his train reservations, and the five of them piled into the car for the trip home. Joseph was particularly anxious to get home early because Ethel's condition had worsened, preventing her from accompanying him. The two-day trip, with a stopover in West Yellowstone, afforded the travelers with a rare opportunity for long, uninterrupted visiting. In less than a week after the travelers arrived in Salt Lake City, Ethel passed away, thus setting off the chain of events already described. And more than twenty years later, Elder Lee's dear wife, Fern, would pass away, thereby creating another strong affinity between him and Elder Smith. Over the years of their apostolic ministry, many other shared events strengthened the bonds of understanding and mutual confidence between this pair. Thus, when Elder Smith selected counselors upon being ordained as the tenth president of the Church, he turned first to this trusted friend and associate, Harold B. Lee, who acted as the voice for the members of the Twelve in the ordination of President Smith. Thereafter during the period of his prophetic ministry, Joseph Fielding Smith's friend Harold B. Lee served ably at his side, faithfully carrying out the many tasks delegated to him. And when President Smith passed on, his successor would be Harold B. Lee, who was then the senior living apostle, notwithstanding that when Elder Lee was called to the Twelve in 1941 there were eight other living apostles between him and Joseph Fielding Smith who outranked him in apostolic seniority.

All this, of course, was in the distant future when on Monday, January 26, 1942, Joseph Fielding Smith and Harold B. Lee of the Twelve joined to conduct another of the special priesthood training meetings then being held throughout the Church. This one was in the Bonneville Stake of Salt Lake City, where Joseph Fielding resided. "It was a very successful meeting." he noted.

The first week of February 1942 found Elder Smith and Jessie in Los Angeles, California, where they had gone to attend the quarterly conference of the Inglewood Stake. Traveling on the Challenger, one of the new diesel streamliners, they were met at the depot by Jessie's nephew, Robert L. Simpson, who, nineteen years later, would be called as the first counselor in the Presiding Bishopric of the Church. Later, Bishop Simpson would be called as an assistant to the Twelve and, on October 1, 1976, when the First Quorum of Seventy was reconstituted, he was inducted into that quorum.

Although Elder Smith was the official visitor at the Inglewood Stake Conference on the weekend of February 7 and 8, 1942, he found on arriving at the stake center Sunday morning that President Heber J. Grant was also present. The Prophet had traveled to California to seek relief from the cold and dismal weather in Salt Lake City. And he had also come to the lower elevation of California for relief from a stroke he had suffered two years before. It is an unusual coincidence that President Grant experienced the first episode of the stroke that had debilitated him on Sunday, February 4, 1940, as he attended a session of the Inglewood Stake Conference. Four days before, the eighty-three-year-old Prophet had played a vigorous round of golf in San Diego with a foursome that included Joseph Anderson, his secretary and dear friend. "The best game for a long time I have played," President Grant had confided to his journal. It was also to be his last game of golf. Perhaps the fact he had shot well was explained in part by a session before the round when he had practiced "fifty cents worth of balls." Apparently the vigorous exercise in San Diego four days before was the main cause of what happened on Sunday February 4, 1940. At 9:30 a.m. that day, California Mission President W. Aird MacDonald drove President Grant and Joseph Anderson to the Inglewood Stake Center for the morning session of the conference. As the car pulled into the parking lot, the prophet became dizzy. When he stepped from the car, the vertigo caused him to lose his balance and stumble to the ground. Despite the urging of Joseph Anderson and President MacDonald that he return to the mission home, President Grant insisted on attending the morning session. Because his tongue was thick he did not speak, although after a nap during the noon hour, he felt better and spoke for about forty minutes at the afternoon session. The next morning as President Grant attempted to get out of bed, he suffered another attack of dizziness and fell. On being helped back into bed, he discovered that his left side was paralyzed. This and his slurred speech were the infallible signs he had suffered a stroke. During the two intervening years, the Prophet had struggled with his disability, attempting to regain the strength and stamina he had enjoyed so abundantly before. But the attempt had failed. He was still unable to get around without assistance. And his speech was quite slurred and indistinct. However, he continued to work at it, carrying around a hard rubber ball in his left hand and squeezing it to strengthen his muscles. He shared the pulpit with Elder Smith at the Inglewood Stake Conference on Sunday, February 8, 1942, speaking briefly and extemporaneously. It was the last talk President Grant ever gave in a stake setting. And two months later, he delivered his last public address when he spoke for a few minutes at the April general conference. He then withdrew into silence until his death three years later.

There was another unscheduled speaker at the Inglewood Stake Conference on this Sunday in February 1942. It was Hugh B. Brown, the former president of the British Mission, with whom Joseph Fielding had been working to encourage the British Saints through correspondence. But Elder Brown participated at this conference in another capacity. After his return from England, he had been appointed as the coordinator for LDS servicemen. At the time he was visiting military camps in southern California to encourage and strengthen the Latter-day Saints in military service. Learning of the conference, he had come to worship with the Saints and was called on to speak. While it was the last time Hugh B. Brown would share a pulpit with President Grant, it was not so as to Elder Smith. On many occasions in the future Joseph Fielding Smith and Hugh B. Brown would share speaking assignments following Elder Brown's call as a General Authority. What happened later to this pair provides an interesting commentary on the shifting roles of Mormon priesthood leaders. After Elder Brown's call as an assistant to the Twelve, and still later after his call as a member of the Twelve, his file leader was Joseph Fielding Smith, who was president of the Twelve. Then when Elder Brown was called as a member of the First Presidency, he became one of President Smith's file leaders, a condition that continued to exist even after Elder Smith was called as one of President McKay's counselors. Then when Elder Smith became the president of the Church and Elder Brown was returned to his position in the Twelve, the roles were reversed again.

The day after the Inglewood Stake Conference, Elder Smith and Jessie spent the day at the Simpson home, relaxing and visiting. In the afternoon they went to the beach. While the apostle had no great yen for swimming in the surf, he enjoyed watching the waves and walking on the sandy shore. And later when he became the Prophet, a favorite diversion was to spend a few secluded days at the Laguna Beach cottage owned by the Church. There with Jessie he enjoyed many quiet hours, gazing at the sea and watching the changing patterns of light as the sun glimmered through the early morning fog or blazed at mid-day, then, like a glowing red ball, dipped into the ocean at sunset. Now, however, as he and Jessie visited the beach with Jelaire Simpson, Robert's wife, Joseph was distracted by the events that brought the war ever closer to his own family. "By government edict," he wrote on that day, "the nation went on advanced time called 'war time'. The clocks were set ahead an hour." Then after questioning the need for such a change, whose effect, he felt, was 'to disrupt nature,' he added pensively, "The whole world is in turmoil and war, and many of our young men are being drafted into service."

What Elder Smith had stated as a general proposition in this entry became very personal and pointed a month later. "My son Lewis W. reported to the U. S. draft board and was inducted into the U. S. Army," Joseph recorded on March 4, 1942. "This condition brought sadness to us all. It is a shame that the clean and the righteous are forced into a conflict of world proportions, because of the wickedness of men." After repeating his conviction that the war not only resulted from disobedience to God's laws but also fulfilled ancient prophecies, the concerned father added this benediction: "May the Lord guide and protect the sons of the Latter-day Saints and all others who will live righteously." At this time, Elder Smith seems to have had no inkling that this noble son would be sacrificed. He seemed confident that the boy would be spared. At least, he fervently hoped and prayed it would be so, realizing that the righteous are not immune to the death and devastation caused by war.

Two days after Lewis was inducted into the army, Elder Smith and Jessie left for California, where stake conferences were held at Gridley and Sacramento. Sandwiched between the meetings of these two conferences was a nice visit with daughter Lois and her husband, Dr. William J. Fife, at Stockton. While there, the Fifes arranged two social gatherings where Jessie sang and Elder Smith responded to questions. In such an intimate setting, people came to know the apostle better, to observe the loving and relaxed relationship he enjoyed with his family, and to find that he had a wry and charming sense of humor. These qualities usually came as a surprise to many who had only seen Elder Smith from afar as he spoke from the pulpit, where his message, especially during these days of war and turmoil, was usually one of warning and a call to repentance.

Everywhere he went now, Elder Smith found the same conditions that existed at the meetings in Sacramento. "Many young men in uniform were present," he wrote of the general session held on Sunday, March 15. On arriving home the following evening, he found a postcard from his own serviceman. It was written from Shepard Field, Texas, where Lewis had arrived the previous Saturday night. Betraying a sense of uncertainty and helplessness, Joseph wrote complainingly, "The government will not tell parents when their sons are leaving or where they are going."

The new conditions imposed by the entry of the United States into the war were most evident at the April General Conference, 1942. Because of restrictions placed on travel, only stake presidencies and other designated priesthood leaders were invited to attend. "The church has restricted the excessive travel of the people," Joseph explained. "Moreover, the precaution was taken against any act by enemies or cranks which might occur." The meetings on Sunday were held in the upper room of the temple. Following the morning session, the brethren took a half-hour break and returned at 12:30 for a three-and-a-half-hour testimony meeting to which they had come fasting. "The sacrament was administered by the apostles," reported Elder Smith. "It was a very inspirational and glorious occasion. The spirit of the Lord was present and every heart was touched."

While the exigencies of the war imposed restrictions on the General Conference of the Church, they had no such impact on the stake conferences. These meetings continued unabated with the same frequency as when Joseph Fielding was called to the Twelve thirty-two years before. During that entire period, he had been on the road most of the time, visiting the stakes or touring missions. Now at age sixty-six, at a time when most men have either retired or are looking toward retirement, he was still in the harness, pulling his share of the load, a load that grew with each passing year as Church membership continued to increase rapidly. So, during the two months following the April General Conference, Elder Smith presided at the stake conferences in Denver, Colorado; the West Jordan, Panguitch, and Beaver stakes in Utah; the Teton Stake in Wyoming; the Pasadena Stake in California; and the Montpelier Stake in Idaho. Meanwhile, he spoke at sacrament meetings in the Bonneville and North Twentieth wards, installed a new bishopric in the Yalecrest Ward, and addressed the students at the Brigham Young University. Also, during the three or four days each week when he was at home, he was heavily involved in "board and committee meetings," in directing the usual work in the Historical Department and in handling a mountain of paperwork that changes caused by the war had imposed upon him. "It appears that nearly everyone desires to get government employment in some plant or office," he noted in his diary, "and all have to have certificates of birth. We have issued about 9,000 in this office. I have to sign all certificates in duplicate which keeps me busy. I have signed some 18,000 times, and they still come."

On the day Elder Smith made this entry, he encountered still another annoyance that had been spawned by the war—rationing. He and Jessie went to the federal building to register for their ration of sugar. Joseph was irritated by the glacial speed with which the clerks performed their duty, taking as long as a half hour for an applicant. "It struck me," he wrote with characteristic candor, "that the method was one more evidence of incompetent methods of which we have seen so many manifestations." Then revealing the wry sense of humor that surfaced at times and under circumstances that were wholly unpredictable, he added: "The ration of sugar is 1/2 lb. per person per week, with time and sugar out if you have sugar on hand."

The rationing of sugar was, of course, merely the camel's head under the tent. It was followed by a large and rapidly growing bulk of foodstuffs and commodities that were in short supply. The main priority was to provide military personnel with an abundance of everything. Nothing was too good for the GIs. The circumstance under which the country had been plunged into war had raised patriotism in the United States to torrid levels. And such was the hoopla and ballyhoo connected with it that entry into the armed services was made to appear glamorous and exciting. But a peek behind the curtain was sobering and shocking to a man like Lewis Smith, who had been reared in the sheltered environment of a prophet's home and who, only weeks before his induction, had been preaching the gospel of love and peace. Lewis had been unable to spell out what he was faced with in the terse postcards and letters he sent home periodically. However, he had that chance on June 10, 1942, three months after his induction, when he spent several hours visiting with his father and Aunt Jessie in Bellville, Illinois. At the time, Lewis was stationed at Camp Scott. On their way to tour the Canadian Mission, Elder and Sister Smith had stopped in St. Louis and, having a nine-hour layover before their train left for Chicago, had taken a bus to Belleville, to which Lewis had also traveled by bus from his base. It was an emotional reunion and a bittersweet experience for the father, sweet merely because he was in Lewis's presence and bitter because of the insight he gained into what his son faced in the service. "We found him looking well," wrote Joseph, "but not too well pleased with army life, where he sees so much evil and rottenness among the men in the service. . . . We spent about four hours with him and found it difficult to leave. We returned to St. Louis and he went back to Scott Field."

The Smiths left St. Louis at midnight, changed trains at both Chicago and Detroit, and, after an unscheduled two-hour delay, arrived at their first destination, Windsor, Canada. There they were met by Joseph's brother, David A. Smith, former member of the Presiding Bishopric, who was then presiding over the Canadian Mission. With David was his wife, Emily, and a son, Edward. Soon after their arrival in Windsor, Joseph and Jessie found themselves in the first of the missionary meetings they would attend during the mission tour. Teaming up the next day at a meeting in Chatham, Joseph and David "taught the straight gospel," something they did unsparingly during the next two weeks.

The schedule David A. had arranged was hectic. It included meetings with members and missionaries all along the way. After leaving Chatham, the touring party visited London, Kitchner, Hamilton, Toronto, St. Catherine, Montreal, and Ottawa. At both Hamilton and Montreal, Joseph Fielding dedicated LDS chapels, both of which were renovated and refurbished private homes.

A highlight of the tour for Joseph was a visit to the Russell Farm near Toronto. It was here that his grandmother, Mary Fielding Smith, was baptized in 1836 as a result of the preaching of Parley P. Pratt. Baptized at the same time were Mary's brother, Joseph Fielding, and her sister, Mercy Rachel Fielding. Another convert of Elder Pratt's preaching was John Taylor. Those events, obscure at the time, profoundly influenced the history of the Church. Mary later married Hyrum Smith and bore his son, Joseph F., the father of Joseph Fielding, both of whom would become presidents of the Church. Mercy later married Robert B. Thompson, who once served as one of the Prophet Joseph Smith's private secretaries. John Taylor became the third president of the Church and was with Joseph and Hyrum when they were murdered in the Carthage jail, himself being severely wounded. And Joseph Fielding, Mary and Mercy's brother, was with the first group of missionaries sent to England in 1837. This group, led by Heber C. Kimball, opened their proselyting efforts in England at Preston by preaching in the protestant church of James Fielding, Joseph Fielding's brother.

The extraordinary results of Parley P. Pratt's mission to Toronto was a powerful object lesson to the missionaries in the Canadian Mission as Elder Smith conducted this tour, illustrating the far-reaching results that can flow from a single proselyting effort.

Joseph and Jessie left Canada on July 2, arriving in St. Louis the following evening. There they met Lewis, who had obtained a weekend pass. With Lewis were four returned missionaries who were also stationed at Scott Field. One of these was Lewis's cousin, Joseph Peterson, the son of Elder Smith's sister. On Saturday, July 4, Joseph and Jessie celebrated Independence Day with the five young men at a special dinner in the Jefferson Hotel, where they were staying. "We had a pleasant visit," Elder Smith reported. "It was hard to leave our boy to return home."

Arriving in Salt Lake City on July 6, Joseph Fielding found the so-called General Authority recess in full swing. So, on the following weekend, he and Robert Judd of the Welfare Committee traveled to Richmond, Utah, for a conference of the Benson Stake! He took this glitch in his schedule in full stride. And the day after returning from this conference, his annual period of relaxation commenced in earnest: "Monday 13th [of July] to Saturday 18th, I spent the time quietly, part of the time at the office and part at home, working around the lot, etc. I purchased some furniture and a carpet to replace some that is worn out." During this week, Joseph and Jessie joined the members of the board of directors of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company at a dinner hosted by President Heber J. Grant at his summer cottage up Emigration Canyon, east of Salt Lake City.

This week began a month of relaxation for Elder Smith, during which he was able to get a reprieve from the steady grind of stake conferences and mission tours. And his headquarters work was reduced to a minimum, consisting only of attending a few essential meetings and responding to correspondence that required immediate attention. He did accept two invitations to speak at ward sacrament meetings during the period, but these did not require travel or extensive preparation. His loosely structured schedule during this period provides an interesting insight into how an apostle unwinds: On his birthday, Sunday, July 19, he accompanied Jessie to the weekly Tabernacle Choir broadcast; and in the afternoon his family assembled to wish him a happy birthday. Following his talk at the 24th Ward sacrament meeting a week later, Joseph "met with the members of my brother Hyrum's family and instructed them." The next day, he and Jessie drove up Millcreek Canyon to look at a cabin Taylor Merrill had advertised for sale. Within two weeks, the Smiths had purchased the cabin and, before the recess was over, they had refurnished it and were enjoying spending time there. The day after looking at the cabin for the first time, Joseph assisted Jessie with housework in the morning, and in the afternoon they went with their neighbors, Richard L. and Alice Evans, to see the movie "The Pride of the Yankees." The Smiths and Evans ended the day with dinner at a Chinese restaurant. Although they were separated in age by the wide gulf of thirty years, there was a remarkable compatibility between Joseph Fielding and his young colleague, Richard Evans. Of course, their shared status as General Authorities and residents of Douglas Street provided strong ligaments of bonding. But, there was much more that bound them together. Both enjoyed the written word and were careful and precise in the use of language. Both were published authors. Both were former missionaries to England. In temperament, both were quiet and thoughtful with a wry sense of humor. And, finally, their relationship was enhanced because of the long artistic relationship between Elder Evans and Jessie Evans Smith. From 1930, when Elder Evans became the narrator of the weekly Tabernacle Choir broadcasts, he and Jessie had been closely associated through Jessie's role as a choir soloist. And because Jessie's maiden name was Evans, there was a playful pretense between her and Richard that they were cousins. Moreover, the two couples were drawn even closer together socially because only four years separated Jessie and Richard in age. So the Smiths and the Evans genuinely enjoyed each other. As a result, they developed a good-natured camaraderie unlike any other Joseph Fielding Smith seems to have formed. This is best illustrated by letters that passed between Joseph Fielding and Richard in 1941 while plans were being made for a tour of the Tabernacle Choir to California. Wrote Joseph: "You are hereby authorized, appointed, chosen, designated, named, commanded, assigned, advised and otherwise notified, informed, advised and instructed . . . to see that the said Mrs. Jessie Evans Smith, is permitted to travel in safety, comfort, ease, without molestation and that she is to be returned again to her happy home and loving husband and family." Richard's good-natured response was in the same vein: "Your masterful document of August 15 has cost me a good deal of brow-wrinkling and excruciating concentration. I think without question it will go down in history with the Bill of Rights and the Magna Charta. The remarkable thing about it is, as my legal staff and I have studied it over, that it conveys to me no privilege that I did not already feel free to take and imposes on me no responsibilities that it was not already my pleasure and intention to assume. However, it is a good idea, as many men can testify, to have the consent of a husband before traveling two thousand miles with his wife." Against such a background, it is not difficult to imagine that the Chinese supper the Smiths and Evans shared on July 28 was marked by gaiety and good humor.

The supper the Smiths had the following night at the home of Elder and Sister Harold B. Lee was doubtless as enjoyable but in a different way. Assembled at the Lees' home were several General Authorities and their wives, along with key leaders from the Welfare Department and their wives. While this was a relaxed social event, it also served an institutional purpose by bringing together and solidifying those involved in a common enterprise. Many of the social events Joseph Fielding and his companions had attended over the years were of a similar institutional character, helping those involved to focus even more devotedly on the immediate and distant goals they all shared. Those having only a superficial knowledge of the forces that drive the Latter-day Saints will never grasp the depth and intensity of the motivations these objectives generate. These become the dominant force in their lives, taking precedence over all else. What is of overriding importance to them is the filial relationship all bear to Deity and the duty of obedience this entails, the indebtedness owed by all to the Savior, the key role of his restored church in leading the world back to God's presence, and the special responsibility given to the Latter-day Saints to direct the earthly affairs of the Church. The pervasive effect of that responsibility filters into every aspect of life, influencing if not controlling the way the Mormons work, play, and socialize. What is said here of Latter-day Saints generally applied with particular force to Joseph Fielding Smith, who was a special witness of Jesus Christ and his mission and doctrine in all the world.

The events of the day following the supper hosted by Elder and Sister Lee demonstrate this. After spending part of the day bottling fruit, Joseph and Jessie drove to Brighton to visit Mother Evans, who was on vacation there. "Then we came part way in the canyon," Joseph reported, "and met in a social with the Priesthood of the Cottonwood Stake." It requires little imagination to guess who capped the program, or what he talked about. It was understood by all when Elder Smith accepted the invitation to the social that he would be expected to speak for his supper. And everyone would have been disappointed had he not focused on some aspect of the work that bound them together.

During the final two weeks of the recess, Elder Smith and Jessie spent several days picking chokecherries and service berries and making them into jelly. Meanwhile, there were other opportunities to socialize in a pleasant setting and to relax. One Sunday after Joseph had spoken and Jessie had sung at the sacrament meeting in their own ward, they joined Presiding Bishop LeGrand Richards and his wife and other guests at the home of Wesley Smith, Joseph's brother, for conversation and refreshments. And a few days later, the Smiths were driven by Richard and Alice Evans to Salt Air on the Great Salt Lake, where they joined the members of the Tabernacle Choir and their partners for a banquet and outing. And for pure, uninterrupted relaxation, they spent several days and nights at their new cabin up Millcreek Canyon.

By mid August, Elder Smith was prepared to again take up his arduous duties. During the week prior to the October General Conference, he presided at six stake conferences, beginning with the conference in Richfield, Utah. In turn, there followed conferences at the Bear River, Franklin, Smithfield, Star Valley and Big Cottonwood stakes. At each of these, Elder Smith was accompanied by a representative of the Welfare Department who helped him teach priesthood leaders the principles and procedures governing the Church Welfare Program, which by now had become a vital part of the program of the Church.

Meanwhile, Joseph's headquarters assignments continued apace. Much of the load of the Historical Department was now on the shoulders of his assistants. However, the ultimate responsibility was still his, which required regular, consistent supervision and follow-through. There were, of course, the regular meetings with the members of his quorum and with the First Presidency where the final decisions were made for the governance of the Church. And there were regular meetings of various committees on which he served, including the Missionary Assignment Committee.

A critical issue facing the Brethren as the October General Conference approached was the desire of President Heber J. Grant to fill the office of Patriarch to the Church, which had stood vacant since the death of Hyrum Gibbs Smith in February 1932. In the meantime, both Nicholas G. Smith and George F. Richards had served successively as the acting Patriarch. Traditionally, the office of Patriarch to the Church had passed lineally to the eldest son descending from Joseph Smith Sr. But it was the intention of President Grant to call Joseph F. Smith, the nephew of Joseph Fielding Smith, to that office, even though he descended through the line of President Joseph F. Smith, who was not the oldest son of the martyr Hyrum Smith. Following the death of Hyrum Gibbs Smith in 1932, members of the Twelve had recommended that his eldest son, Eldred G. Smith, be called to the patriarchal office, but President Grant had declined to make the call. As the 1942 October General Conference approached, President Grant went to Joseph Fielding's office to discuss the matter privately with him. "He said he could not feel right about accepting the recommendation of the apostles," Joseph wrote of the interview, "that the office be given to Eldred Smith and for ten years he had only had a 'stupor of thought' in the consideration of this appointment. Now he felt clear regarding his duty and his mind was at rest that Joseph F., son of my brother Hyrum M., should receive this office. I said, so far as I am concerned, when the President of the Church says the Lord has manifested to him or inspired him to do anything, I would support him fully in that action. . . . If the president is inspired to change the order of descent the Lord has indicated, I will be with him with my support."

Few other instances in his life demonstrate more clearly than this one Joseph Fielding Smith's unqualified support of the one who occupies the prophetic office. Although when asked about it earlier, Joseph had expressed a contrary view, he yielded that view immediately upon learning that the Prophet was inspired to do otherwise. And in giving that support, Elder Smith powerfully endorsed the idea that the Church is directed by revelation and that the Lord inspires and directs the living oracles according to the needs of the moment.

Three days after President Grant's surprise visit to Joseph's office, the Prophet presented the name of Joseph F. Smith to the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve as the Patriarch to the Church. "The Brethren accepted the nomination unanimously," he reported. And at the first session of the conference on October 3, 1942, Joseph F. Smith was unanimously sustained as the Patriarch to the Church.

The attendance at this conference was by invitation only and was restricted to designated priesthood leaders—general officers of the Church, general superintendencies of Sunday School and YMMIA, and selected stake and ward leaders. The new Patriarch was called to speak at the first session of the conference. In introducing him, President David O. McKay, who was conducting, after tracing his lineage to the martyr Hyrum Smith, said, "Elder Smith's right to the office therefore is not only by lineage, but by direct inspiration to the President who holds the keys of this high priesthood." The Patriarch's words were brief, consisting of a testimony, an expression of support for the Prophet, and a prayer for strength and commitment. He was followed by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, who delivered a short but significant sermon. After reminding the brethren of their heavy responsibilities as holders of the priesthood, he explained the rewards that lay ahead for those who were faithful and diligent. Said he: "I wonder if we realize the greatness of our callings—yes all the elders in this church—do they realize that they hold the Melchizedek Priesthood? Do they know that through their faithfulness and their obedience, according to the revelations of the Lord, they are entitled to receive all that the Father has, to become the sons of God, joint heirs with our Elder Brother, Jesus Christ, entitled to the exaltation in the Celestial Kingdom?" (Conference Report, October 1942, p. 18.)

Here, in his own words, stated as clearly as he ever stated it, is the essence of all that Joseph Fielding Smith hoped and strived and struggled and prayed for. He wanted nothing less than to share with the Savior all that the Father has. (See D&C 84:38.) And he wanted everyone to receive the same blessings. To accomplish this, of course, required obedience to all of the commandments, ordinances, and covenants of the gospel. In this is found the reason and justification for the undeviating message Elder Smith delivered throughout his apostolic ministry. He wanted people to repent and to keep the commandments because he knew that this is the only way they can become exalted.

The reason Joseph Fielding and the other speakers at this first session spoke so briefly was because of the long time taken by President McKay to present the officers for sustaining vote and for President J. Reuben Clark to read a special message of the First Presidency. This wide-ranging message, whose obvious purpose was to strengthen the moral fiber of the Saints during the war, touched on many subjects of vital concern—chastity, the Word of Wisdom, parenthood, and unity. In addition, it contained pointed comments about the war and its causes and gave pertinent instructions to Latter-day Saints in the armed services and their families. "We pray . . . that you will live righteously," it read, "that you will be preserved, that God will hasten the working out of His purposes among the nations, so that peace may come and you be restored to your loved ones, as clean as the day on which you left them." (Conference Report, October 1942, p. 14.) The families of servicemen were urged to write regularly as were their friends and local priesthood leaders. As to the war, the message affirmed that it was the responsibility of the Church to renounce war and proclaim peace. "As those chosen and ordained to stand at the head of the Savior's church," it continued, "we must call upon the leaders of nations to abandon the fiendishly inspired slaughter of the manhood of the world now carrying on and further planned." (Ibid., p. 15.)

Sharing the concerns expressed by the First Presidency, Joseph Fielding prepared a series of lectures following the October General Conference that he titled "The Signs of the Times." In them he traced the awful happenings in the world against the background of the scriptures which had predicted that wars, desolations, and destructions would precede the second coming of the Savior. "At 8 p.m." he wrote on Wednesday, October 14, 1942, "I gave the first of six talks on 'The Signs of the Times' in the Lion House. The attendance was so large that they concluded to go next time to Barrett Hall." Several hundred people crowded into the Barrett Hall for each of the succeeding lectures to hear the apostle expound on subjects that the war had brought so prominently to the thinking of all. Intense publicity given to the lectures, both in the press and by word of mouth, generated a wide interest in them so that at the urging of those who had sponsored the lectures, Joseph reviewed and prepared them for publication. "The first copies of The Signs of the Times, with paper covers, were off the press today," he wrote on December 19. "I was promised cloth bound copies by Monday." These lectures were planned as a means of raising money for the renovation of the Lion House, all of the proceeds going for this purpose.

The doleful nature of these lectures, treating, as they did, the terrible winding-up scenes that will precede the millennial reign, were not calculated to lift Elder Smith's spirits. And news from abroad and events at home may have reduced his comfort level about Lewis. On Sunday, November 1, Elder Smith attended memorial services in his own ward in honor of Lt. Donald Poulton, who had been killed in the line of duty when his plane crashed in the Pacific. As he mourned with the family of this young man, little did the apostle know that in not too long a time, he would receive the same loving ministrations as neighbors and friends would join to share his grief at the death of Lewis, who also died in a plane crash.

Curiously, only a few days after he attended the memorial services for Lt. Poulton, Elder Smith made a diary entry about allied landings in North Africa, the area where Lewis would be based at the time of his death. Wrote he on November 12, 1942: "The papers report the last few days the landing of American and British on the coasts of Morocco and Algiers in Africa, and the utter rout of General Rommel and the Nazi forces in Egypt. The American troops have had to fight some of the French, but many have welcomed them. The terrific struggle is going on all over the world."

The following month, another of Elder Smith's sons would be enlisted in that struggle when, on December 21, eighteen-year-old Douglas was sworn into the United States Army. In reading his journal entry of that day, some of the frustrations, and even anger, Elder Smith had on seeing this obedient, exemplary son taken into military service at such a young age are evident. "This morning at 6:40, I left home taking my son Douglas and some of his companions down to be inducted into the army of the United States. It is a shame that boys 18 and 19 have to be called in to this service." Then followed pointed remarks about the ineptitude of some leaders and their wrong-headed decisions, about the satanic forces he saw at work in the world, and about the prophetic patterns found in the scriptures that he traced into the events of the day. "I have looked for years for this dreadful day which I knew would come," he wrote. "May the members of the church turn to the Lord in humility and faith and forsake all evil ways. This is our only protection."

Joseph Fielding was not only troubled that Douglas had been inducted into the army, but he was also annoyed that he and his companions had been taken only four days before Christmas and had been loaded into a truck like animals, packed together so tightly that they all had to stand up as they were driven to Fort Douglas, located on the east bench of Salt Lake City. This fort, and the street on which the Smith family lived, were named after Stephen A. Douglas, the United States senator whose debates with the Springfield, Illinois, lawyer had catapulted Abraham Lincoln into national prominence, which he then used as a springboard to the presidency. Unknown to his father, Douglas had received a pass to spend Christmas with his family. Instead of asking to be picked up, he decided to walk the several miles from the fort to his home. It was late when he arrived, and the entire family was in bed. Trying the front door of the darkened house, he found it locked. At the side of the house, he also found the kitchen door locked. Without keys and not wanting to awaken the family, Douglas decided to break in. He was able to jimmy a small window next to the kitchen door, inching it up high enough to reach in an arm to unlock the door from the inside. The operation was not as noiseless as the son had thought. Elder Smith, awakened by the racket, arose to investigate. He switched on the kitchen lights about the time Douglas surreptitiously closed the outside door. As the father saw this son dressed in uniform, the irrepressible son who as a small boy he had had to caution about tearing around the house, he was overwhelmed with emotion. With tears filling his eyes, the father strode across the kitchen to take the beloved son in his arms. To be embraced by his father was nothing new to Douglas; it was an almost daily occurrence. But the unusual circumstances on this occasion, the spontaneity of the father's action, and his unusual show of emotion demonstrated to the son as never before the depth of the father's love for him. It was a never-to-be-forgotten experience, to be cherished in memory and relived over and over throughout life.

The day after Christmas, Douglas was ordained an elder by his father. And that evening, at the sacrament service in the Garden Park Ward, he and eight other young servicemen were honored before leaving for their training bases.

The following afternoon, Elder Smith drove Douglas to the Fort to report in following his Christmas leave. "Jessie was with me," wrote Joseph, "and we turned our boy over to the forces of the U. S." Then, the concerned father repeated the lament he had made when his son was first inducted: "It seems a shame that boys 18 and 19 have to go to war." Although this son was involved in military action in Europe, he escaped from the war unscathed. The same was true of Reynolds, who was inducted into the Navy after his release from the Argentine Mission. Only Lewis was to pay the ultimate price.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
