Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Twenty

The War Wears On—Death of Lewis

With such a personal stake in its outcome, WJoseph Fielding Smith avidly followed the Wprogress of the war, regularly listening to Wnewscasts and scanning the daily newspapers. The month following Doug's induction into the army, the Combined Chiefs of Staff of the allied forces met at Casablanca to plot strategy. This occurred amid a flush of optimism for ultimate victory. Rommel and his Panzers had been crushed in North Africa; the Soviets had turned back Hitler's hordes at Stalingrad and were now on the offensive; and the Japanese were stalled in the Pacific. Out of this and later councils came the overall strategy to secure the Mediterranean first, thereby eliminating Mussolini, while preparing the enormous buildup necessary to defeat Germany and Japan. These plans matured apace with the conquest of Sicily during July and August 1943, the fall of Mussolini on July 25, and the unconditional surrender of Italy as announced on September 8. Then in December 1943, Dwight D. Eisenhower was appointed as supreme commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force with overall responsibility for the projected cross-channel invasion of the European mainland.

Notwithstanding the methodical way in which the allies had executed their strategy and the bright prospects for ultimate success, all informed persons knew that the price of victory would be exceedingly high, with hundreds of thousands of young men slaughtered or savagely wounded, tens of thousands of civilians indiscriminately killed or maimed, and ancient cities, rich in cultural treasures, pounded to dust by the relentless power of modern warfare. Joseph Fielding Smith was among those who foresaw what lay ahead and who winced at the consequences. On January 1, 1944, as he looked back on 1943 and contemplated the future, his mood was subdued and melancholy. "The year which has just closed has not been a happy one," he wrote on that date. "The words of our Lord and his prophets are being fulfilled. Peace has been taken from the earth. Fifty years have passed since President Wilford Woodruff declared that the angels who were waiting to reap the earth had been loosed and sent on their mission. He declared that calamity, trouble and distress would increase in the earth; and this is to precede the coming of the Lord. Today war is raging in nearly all parts of the earth and the countries where open conflict is not found, the people are partakers of the effects of the war and are suffering. We have three of our boys out, Lewis far away, perhaps in Egypt at this writing; George Reynolds, in South America and Douglas in the army service in New York at present. We are praying that the Lord will protect our boys and all others who are serving him."

The terrors and dislocations of war did not, of course, suspend the routines and rhythms of Elder Smith's official and private lives. So, the weekend of January 9 and 10, 1944, found him in Spanish Fork, Utah, where he had been assigned to reorganize the stake presidency. His companion was Joseph L. Wirthlin, a counselor in the Presiding Bishopric. They followed the customary procedure, interviewing the local leaders to get their recommendations about men whom they considered to be qualified to serve as the stake president. This was neither a popularity contest nor an election since as often as not the one finally selected was either not heavily recommended or was not recommended at all. It was rather an essential part of the process of selection through analysis and spiritual confirmation in cases where the new president had not previously been designated by direct revelation. Later as Elder Smith and Bishop Wirthlin reflected and prayed, they were impressed to call William J. O'Bryant as the new stake president. They invited the candidate to the home of the outgoing stake president, Henry Gardner, where they were staying, and interviewed him at length about his worthiness and other qualifications. By midnight on Saturday, Joseph Fielding and the bishop were satisfied they had their man—but a problem remained: Brother O'Bryant was employed by the Utah Idaho Sugar Company, and he was "fearful he would be in trouble with his employer." This fear was based on possible intrusion on his working hours caused by his duties as the stake president. This issue was easily resolved when Elder Smith called President J. Reuben Clark, who was on the board of the sugar company, "who said go ahead." President O'Bryant's counselors and new members of the high council were interviewed and called between midnight Saturday and the 2:00 p.m. Sunday afternoon session of the conference when all were presented and sustained. Afterward, they were set apart and blessed by the visitors.

"Most of these men are comparatively young," noted Elder Smith. "We expect them to take hold and labor faithfully." With that, the visitors returned home, leaving the new leaders in charge, responsible for the spiritual and temporal welfare of several thousand Latter-day Saints. No detailed instructions were given to the new leaders, whom the visitors barely knew, if at all. Their understanding of what to do was based solely on what they had observed their predecessors do, upon the scriptures, upon written instructions in handbooks, and upon the inspiration that would come to them as they struggled prayerfully to fulfill the mandate of the apostle.

Perhaps none of his contemporaries understood this procedure better than Joseph Fielding Smith. The son of a former president of the Church, grandson of the martyr Hyrum Smith, and great-grandson of the first Patriarch to the Church, Joseph had been raised from infancy with an understanding of the spiritual power that could be used in the management of his personal affairs, or, as at Spanish Fork in January 1944, in the management and direction of the Church.

While Joseph Fielding was fully conscious of his authority, he was always meek and mild mannered in exercising it. His character was devoid of arrogance, posturing, or self-importance. He never put on airs, never flaunted the prerogatives of his office, and never insisted on a strict observance of protocol. When, for instance, his bishop asked him to teach an MIA class, he responded willingly: "At 7:45 I met with the MIA class in Garden Park Ward," he wrote on Tuesday, January 4, 1944, "where we had an interesting time in the study of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. The class was well attended, altho there had been a recess over the holidays." This assignment from the leader of his ward continued for many months, even though it was a large ward with many able people who could have easily and effectively taught the class. Yet this senior apostle, who was heavily burdened with duties of worldwide scope, was humbly willing to accept an assignment from a subordinate Church official to teach a ward MIA class. And this was not an isolated case. Many times he acceded to requests to teach classes at the local level or to speak to small groups in a home setting. Such an instance occurred only two days before he taught the MIA class on January 4, 1944. "After the meeting [ward sacrament meeting]," he wrote that day, "I went to the home of Bro. Ted C. Jacobsen and met with a group of young people in a fireside chat, and answered their questions."

Some leaders are assiduous in teaching the families of others while neglecting their own. Joseph Fielding Smith could never be charged with that neglect. He seldom missed an opportunity to instruct and counsel members of his family, either individually or in a group setting. And after his children were married and out of the family home, he continued to call them together periodically to instruct and encourage them. "At night the members of my family assembled at my home in a study class," he recorded on Wednesday, January 12, 1944. "This we attempt to do each month, when other duties do not interfere. We cannot get them all together as some members are scattered." In this practice, Elder Smith emulated the example of his father, who followed a similar pattern.

While the continual round of church and family responsibilities were absorbing and enjoyable, Joseph could never quite elude the nagging worries generated by the war. And incidents of the kind reported on January 30, 1944, which occurred with ever greater frequency, removed the war from the realm of abstraction for Joseph Fielding and invested it with a very personal and terrifying aspect. "The morning papers," he recorded on that day, "reported that word had been received that Heber J., son of my brother Willard R., had been killed in action in Germany, November 26th. The report that he was missing was received shortly after the 26th of November and we had hoped that he was a prisoner. This is one of the sad things coming out of the war." As more relatives and friends became fatalities of the conflict, young men of virtue and faith who were cut off in the prime of life, Elder Smith seems to have reached an accommodation with the idea that war, like the God he worshipped, was no respecter of persons. Once set upon its murderous course, war was wholly indiscriminate, cutting down the righteous with the unrighteous. While he did not articulate the idea, his journal hints that for the first time he began to face the reality that his sons were at great personal risk and might not survive the war. Thus, it was with a sense of trepidation that Joseph Fielding saw a third son, Reynolds, taken into the armed services. "This morning at 6:45," he wrote on May 15, 1944, "we took our son, George Reynolds, to the Federal Building where he was taken into the navy. This brought back memories of our other boys being taken from us into the army. The world is in a frightful condition with war and bloodshed because mankind is uncivilized and cannot live in peace because of unrighteousness." The morning after he had put Reynolds on the train to the Naval Training Station in San Diego, the father wrote dejectedly: "I returned to the office filled with thoughts and memories of departing boys." A few years later, after the war had ended, Elder Smith elaborated on the feelings he had had about his sons' service in the armed forces. "It is a joy to be in the service of the Lord," he wrote to Milton following his departure for the mission field in April 1947, "but not in the service of his adversary, or be called upon to contend by force of arms against the Lord's adversary. We were very blue when we turned our boys in each instance over to Uncle Samuel, not knowing what the end would be, or whether they would return or not." Despite the uncertainties that faced his sons, Elder Smith retained a hope that they would be protected, which he nurtured up to the very day of Lewis's death.

Meanwhile, significant changes were being made in the organizations of the Church and in Elder Smith's responsibilities. At the April General Conference in 1944, Mark E. Petersen was called to fill the vacancy in the Twelve caused by the excommunication of Richard R. Lyman. The circumstances surrounding Elder Lyman's fall were most painful to all the members of the Twelve, but especially to Elder Smith and Elder Harold B. Lee, who had the unpleasant task of corroborating the facts that led to the excommunication. Elder Petersen was well known to Joseph Fielding and was a good friend who for many years had worked for the Deseret News. These two had much in common, sharing an interest in writing, a taut literary style, a conservative approach to interpreting the scriptures, and an outspoken opposition to transgression in all its forms. Neither ever pulled any punches in the pulpit. When either of them finished a sermon, no one who understood English should have had any doubt about the meaning of what was said. Still another link that bound them together was their wives, both of whom were fine musicians, Sister Emma Marr Petersen being a skillful organist and pianist.

Soon after Elder Petersen's call to the Twelve, Joseph Fielding received two special assignments that in the months to follow would occupy much of his time. The first was to give a series of Sunday evening sermons over the radio. Beginning in June, Elder Smith gave these sermons each week during the remainder of 1944. Because of the time required to prepare these talks and the need for him to be in Salt Lake City each Sunday evening, Joseph was excused from attending stake conferences during this period. He titled the series "The Restoration of All Things." The first sermon, "The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times," was given on Sunday, June 4. Jessie and her brother, Thaddeus, sang. Richard Evans introduced the speaker and the music. The scope of the series gave Elder Smith wide latitude in selecting the weekly topics to be discussed. And the powerful transmitter of radio station KSL over which the talks were given gave the apostle a large audience to whom he expounded his views on subjects he considered of vital importance. Included among these were "The Testimony of Martyrdom," "Is the Canon of Scripture Full?" "The Restored Church," "A Voice from the Dead," "A Marvelous Work and a Wonder," "The Witnesses of the Book of Mormon," "A Witness against the World," "A Parallel Evidence" (dealing with Dr. William Paley's "Evidence of Christianity"), "The Redemption of Judah," "The Times of the Gentiles," "The Coming of Elijah," "Faith, the Foundation of All Righteousness," "Pedobaptism," "Salvation for the Dead," "The Eternal Marriage Covenant," and "The Resurrection." On his final broadcast given the last day of the year, Elder Smith's sermon was titled "A Closing Testimony." In conclusion, Jessie sang "The Lord's Prayer." The wide variety of these and other subjects suggests the gospel scholarship that was necessary to prepare them in such a short time. It was an extraordinary achievement, admired and appreciated by many who either wrote or called Elder Smith to express their thanks. The only comment he made about these was this terse entry: "I have received some favorable comments regarding my talks."

The other special assignment Elder Smith received during this period was to serve as chairman of the Committee on Publications. The other members of the committee were elders John A. Widtsoe and Harold B. Lee of the Twelve and Elder Marion G. Romney, assistant to the Twelve. At the same time, a "Reading Committee" was appointed which included Christian Jensen, chairman; A. Hamer Reiser, secretary; and these members: Daryl Chase, ElRey L. Christiansen, H. Aldous Dixon, Frank Evans, and George Q. Morris. Elder Smith explained that "these committees were appointed to pass on all literature of a religious nature to be used in texts for our schools, seminaries and auxiliaries." These were some of the forerunners of the present-day correlation and curriculum departments of the Church that branched off from the Department of Internal Communications in the 1970s. While the Reading Committee did most of the detailed work of reading and analyzing the various texts and manuals, still Elder Smith's Committee on Publications did some of this work in addition to setting the course and giving overall supervision. "At one p.m., I was with the Committee on Publications," he wrote on September 27, 1944, "reviewing manuscripts until 4:45 p.m. and at 8 p.m. addressed the teachers and ward officers of the 27th ward. In the meantime, I was examining manuscripts."

Three days later, Salt Lake City received its first good storm of the summer when it rained steadily all day. This was also the day of the first football game of the season for the University of Utah. Mit was a starter. It would have taken more than a steady rain to have kept sixty-eight-year-old Joseph Fielding Smith away from a game where one of his sons was playing. So he and Jessie took their umbrellas and other rain gear and sat in the open stadium for two and a half hours to watch Mit play. Even though he mildly berated himself for doing this, Elder Smith was obviously pleased to be there. He wrote, "Jessie and I (foolishly) went to the University of Utah Stadium to see a football game in which Milton played as quarterback. His team won." The final score and the identity of the opponent apparently were thought to be irrelevant as they did not rate a bare mention in the diary. Nor would it have seemed to make any difference to the father had the son's team lost. What was important was the boy and his self-perception, which doubtless was enhanced because his parents were willing to sit in the rain all afternoon merely to watch him play.

What applied to Milton applied equally to all of Elder Smith's children. He cherished them and held out high hopes for each of them. It was his unqualified love for them and his expectations for the future that made the events of December 29, 1944, so difficult to accept. Under that date Elder Smith made this sad entry: "My son Lewis W. was killed today in the service of his country. He was returning from an appointment which took him to India. He spent Christmas day in Bethlehem and from all we know was on his way back to his base somewhere in Western Africa when the plane crashed. We received word from the government January 2 at 5 p.m." Having recorded the bare facts of his son's death, the grieving father then offered this appraisal of him: "If Lewis ever did or said a mean thing, I never heard of it. His thoughts were pure as were his actions. He labored as a missionary in Switzerland from October 1937 to February 1940, returning to the United States March 4, 1940 with the last group of missionaries, accompanying Prest. Thomas E. McKay out of Europe because of the war. He was taken into the service of the army March 4, 1942. While the published article states that he was a staff-Sgt., he was actually serving and had been [serving] in the army intelligence."

The suddenness and finality of Lewis's death was shocking to Elder Smith. While he had reluctantly recognized that war tragically touches both the guilty and the innocent, he seems about to have persuaded himself that an exception would be made in his case. "This word came to us as a most severe shock," wrote the distraught father, "as we had high hopes that soon he would be back in the United States. We had felt that he would be protected as he has escaped several times before from danger. It was hard for us to realize that such a thing could happen."

Once the reality of what had happened was fully absorbed, Elder Smith quickly regained his composure and began to make a rational appraisal of the situation. "As severe as the blow is," he wrote philosophically, "we have the peace and happiness of knowing that he was clean and free from the vices so prevalent in the world and found in the army. He was true to his faith and is worthy of a glorious resurrection, when we shall be reunited again." These feelings about Lewis were confirmed by correspondence the father later received from some of his son's associates in the army. "We got further word about Lewis from one of his companions, Gene F. Walburn," Elder Smith wrote in a letter to Lois and her husband. "He gave us the information regarding the accident to the plane and said the bodies were taken to Maiduguri, Nigeria, and buried in a 'beautiful military cemetery' there. One thing that helps us is the fact that each of the men who has written to us has testified to Lewis' clean life, his high principles and his integrity to his principles. When each writes this way without any consultation, it is a great tribute to our boy, son and brother. . . . Such words as these are comforting, and each has testified in the same manner about him. The beautiful thing about it all is that it is so true. A better boy could not be found. A more worthy one could not be taken. We are sure that he was called to some other work on the other side."

Five years after Lewis was buried in Nigeria, his body was exhumed and sent to Salt Lake City, where it was interred in the family burial plot. Elder Smith explained what happened in a letter to Milton, who was then serving in the Argentine Mission: "Friday morning, December 2 [1949] the body arrived with an escort, a sergeant named Strange, [who] remained until the services were over. The same day we met in the Larkin Mortuary, the family and some friends, and had a prayer, Elder Richard L. Evans offering the prayer, and then we went to the cemetery. It was a beautiful day just like spring, and for this we were grateful. At the grave, Bishop Joseph W. Bambrough made a few remarks, also Richard Gunn who was with Lewis in India and the last member of the church to see him. Then Bruce [McConkie] made a very fine talk which was impressive. We had no singing. Uncle Roy Taylor dedicated the grave. Then the military honors were paid him according to the custom in the army, and we laid his body away. Now we feel much better knowing that it is here and we are happy because we know he was clean and was worthy in every respect and entitled to every blessing that can be obtained."

When Lewis was killed, Reynolds and Douglas were still in the armed forces, and their safety continued to be a matter of anxious concern to Elder Smith, who eagerly searched their censored letters for clues as to their whereabouts. He also traced with avid interest the progress of the war in both the European and Pacific theaters. In Europe, the German legions were slowly being crushed by the giant pincers of the allied and Soviet armies; and in the Pacific, the island-hopping campaign of the United States had been inexorably pushing the Japanese back toward their home islands. By April 1945, the Allied cause seemed invincible. The U.S. invasion of Okinawa, presumed to be the springboard for the final assault on Japan, appeared to be a success; and a feeler from Germany's Heinrich Himmler on April 23 for a negotiated surrender clearly presaged the end of Hitler's mad adventure. Two weeks later, at Reims, the German high command signed a formal document of surrender with American and British generals; it was confirmed two days later at a second ceremony attended by Russian commanders. These events touched off jubilant celebrations in Europe and the United States. And they infused the allies with great enthusiasm and urgency to bring the conflict in the Pacific to an end.

Meanwhile, on May 14, 1945, exactly a week after the ceremony of surrender at Reims, eighty-eight-year-old President Heber J. Grant quietly passed away. Thus ended the ministry of the Mormon prophet who had presided over the Church for twenty-six and a half years, longer than any other president except Brigham Young. At the time, George Albert Smith, president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, was on a train traveling east toward New York City. In the early hours of May 15, a porter awakened President Smith to advise him that President Grant was dead. Leaving the train at the next stop, Buffalo, New York, George Albert Smith promptly arranged to return to Salt Lake City by train, there being no flight accommodations available.

Among the group that met President Smith's train upon its arrival in Salt Lake City were George F. Richards and Joseph Fielding Smith of the Twelve. Elder Richards, who, after President Grant's death, was second to George Albert Smith in apostolic seniority, would become the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the new administration. And Joseph Fielding Smith would then become the second senior member of the Twelve, although he would be the fourth in apostolic seniority, being outranked not only by President George Albert Smith and George F. Richards but also by President David O. McKay, who would continue to serve in the First Presidency as second counselor. The special meeting of the Twelve Apostles where the reorganization took place was held in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple on May 21, a week after President Grant's death. In addition to the changes already mentioned, at that meeting J. Reuben Clark was sustained and set apart as first counselor to President George Albert Smith in the First Presidency.

This reorganization had little effect on the duties and status of Elder Joseph Fielding Smith. It did, of course, bring him closer to the president of his quorum, so that on the occasions when Elder George F. Richards was out of town or indisposed, Elder Smith would preside. And there would be a greater inclination for the president of the Twelve to seek counsel from Elder Smith as the two of them sat side by side at quorum meetings.

The end of the war came with surprising speed. Less than three months after the death of President Heber J. Grant, the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima. Three days later, a second atomic bomb was dropped, this one on Nagasaki; and suddenly the war was over. The night after Japan formally signed the papers of unconditional surrender, Joseph Fielding and Jessie hosted a dinner in their home. The guest of honor was President George Albert Smith. Other guests were elders Ezra Taft Benson and Mark E. Petersen of the Twelve and their wives. "A very pleasant evening," President George Albert Smith wrote of the occasion. There was good food, good conversation, and good entertainment. The latter, of course, was provided by Jessie, who sang, and Emma Marr Petersen, who played the piano. And everyone joined in the conversation. The end of the war and what that portended for the Church and for the world at large was undoubtedly the topic most frequently discussed. This could not have failed to remind Joseph Fielding and Jessie of their trying experiences in Europe at the outbreak of the war six years before. And the discussions about what lay in the future most assuredly did not include the key role Elder Benson would play in the revitalization of the Church and its members in Europe after the war. A few months after this dinner, President George Albert Smith appointed Elder Benson to spearhead the Church's efforts to help rehabilitate the Latter-day Saints in the war-torn countries there. Because the parents of Elder Mark E. Petersen were both born in Denmark, Elder Benson's experience in that country in the aftermath of the war sheds an interesting light on the composition of Joseph Fielding and Jessie's guest list at their dinner: "The welcome for the Apostle [Ezra Taft Benson] in Copenhagen was enthusiastic," wrote Elder Benson's biographer, Sheri L. Dew. "The people of Denmark had survived the war perhaps better than those of any other European nation. The Danish saints had even sent welfare packages to distressed Latter-day Saints in Holland and Norway. Membership had steadily increased and tithing receipts in the Danish Mission had more than doubled. Ezra was astounded at the faithfulness under the conditions. The Danish Saints considered their circumstances a direct fulfillment of a prophecy that Elder Joseph Fielding Smith had made at the outbreak of the war—that because Denmark had allowed missionaries being evacuated from Germany and Czechoslovakia to enter, its people would not suffer for lack of food during the war." (Ezra Taft Benson, p. 204.) With the end of the war, Elder Smith and his brethren were anxious to turn their attention and energies to the work of the Church in its various phases.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
