Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Twenty-one

Acting President of the Twelve

In June 1945, the month after the death of President IHeber J. Grant, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith was called Ias president of the Salt Lake Temple. He would serve Iin that position for four years. This call was the culmination of many years of activity directly or indirectly related to the temple and the sacred work performed in it. Indeed, it would not be too much of an exaggeration to say that his involvement with the temple commenced many years before it was completed and dedicated. At least, he played the role of a sidewalk superintendent during the later years of its construction. When Elder Smith was born in 1876, the walls of the temple were only about half completed. The huge granite blocks used in constructing the walls were taken from a quarry near the mouth of Little Cottonwood Canyon some twenty miles from the temple site. It was once planned to construct a canal connecting the quarry to the temple site with the idea of floating the granite blocks down on barges. This canal was partially completed when it was decided instead to construct a spur track to the quarry, after which the stone was transported to the temple site on flatcars. As a little boy, Joseph Fielding had watched this process, both at the quarry and on Temple Square. At the quarry, when it was cold, the stone blocks were split by drilling holes, pouring in water, and waiting for the expanding ice to do its job. In warm weather, explosives were used. At the temple site, the rough blocks were fashioned into shape by the stonemasons and then hoisted into place with winches. Judging from the frequency with which Elder Smith mentioned it in later years, watching this process had a profound impact upon him and kindled in his mind keen anticipation as to how the temple would appear when it was completed and as to the nature and significance of the sacred ordinances to be performed there. His curiosity about the appearance of the structure was satisfied in 1893 when it was completed and prepared for dedication. Although he had not received his own endowments at the time, he was allowed to inspect the interior of the temple before its dedication and to attend the dedication services during the first week of April 1893. There, as an interested and serious seventeen-year-old, he watched and listened as the president of the Church, Wilford Woodruff, read the dedicatory prayer. The incident was all the more impressive to him because seated at the left of the Prophet on the top level of the east stand of the temple's assembly room was his father, President Joseph F. Smith, Wilford Woodruff's second counselor. Also seated in the assembly room were twenty-five hundred other Latter-day Saints who showed their appreciation for the temple and their joy at its completion by joining in the Hosannah Shout and by singing "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning" at the end of the service. This song, which was composed especially for the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, had been sung as the climax of all temple dedication services held afterward. The song's lyrics and its stirring, almost militant, music, sung in the holy house under such circumstances, produced an emotional response seldom equalled in any other setting.

Joseph Fielding Smith would have to wait for several years after the dedication before being initiated into the sacred ordinances of the temple. Then he would make solemn covenants that would define and influence his conduct for the remainder of his days. The impact of the temple experience upon Elder Smith is suggested by his consistent practice, followed until the time of his death, of imploring God in prayer for help in keeping his covenants.

But while the symbolism of the holy endowment would be withheld from him for several years after the temple dedication, the visual symbols shown in the building itself were intriguing and significant to Joseph from the beginning. The representations of the heavenly bodies on the outer walls, the sun, the moon, and the stars, taught symbolically that there are gradations hereafter as there are here and implied that one's status in the future is governed by one's earthly conduct. Etched there, too, on the outer walls were the all-seeing eye, suggesting God's omniscience, and the clasped hands, suggesting the filial relationship between God and his children. Inside the building were other symbolic representations, paintings of the creation, of the Garden of Eden, and of the world of mortality. On the knobs of the doors were representations of the beehive, symbolizing industry. So much about this temple stirred the imagination and aroused the desire for improvement and achievement. Indeed, the thoughts and aspirations planted there intimated that human potential is nothing less than to become like God. Such is the exalted nature of the things taught in the temple that it is not uncommonly referred to as the University of the Lord.

Five years after his call to the Twelve, Elder Smith was appointed as a counselor to President Anthon H. Lund in the presidency of the Salt Lake Temple. He served in this position for twenty years, during the last part of which he was a counselor to President George F. Richards. There he learned all the procedures involved in the administration of temple work. When, therefore, he was called as the president of the temple in 1945, Joseph Fielding Smith was prepared for that service in every way. He was sixty-nine years old at the time and had served as a member of the Twelve for thirty-five years. He had about him a benign, patriarchal quality that was accentuated by his white hair and his placid, kindly disposition. Moreover, Elder Smith's profound understanding of the doctrines of the Church and the significance of the temple ordinances lent an unusual air of authority and conviction to the instruction he gave to the temple workers and patrons.

The successful supervision of a temple requires the combination of a variety of skills. There is the facility itself, an expensive, complex building whose equipment and fixtures must be constantly maintained and repaired. Then the furnishings, the carpets, the draperies, and the woodwork must be regularly cleaned. Also, there is the preparation and serving of meals to the workers and patrons, the laundering of the clothing needed for the temple ordinances, and the purchase of food and materials. While these physical elements connected with the operation of the temple are important, its most vital aspect is the sacred ordinances performed there. To administer them correctly and efficiently entails elaborate training and supervision. Hundreds of temple workers must be called and trained in their duties. Supervisors are appointed to oversee various aspects of the work. This includes not only the administration of the ordinances themselves but also the checking, recording, and summation of the work performed, whether for the living or the dead.

While many qualified people assisted Elder Smith in carrying on the work of the temple, the final responsibility for every aspect of it rested with him. He took the responsibility seriously and performed it with his customary thoroughness. He was constantly aware of every aspect of the work and was anxious to see that it was done in the right way. He was especially concerned that the ordinances were performed accurately, clearly, and with the reverence their sanctity required.

For these reasons, during the four years Joseph Fielding Smith served as the president of the Salt Lake Temple, he was probably as busy as he was at any other time of his life. In addition to his work in the temple, he continued to serve in many other capacities connected with his apostolic calling. Among these was his work as president of the Genealogical Society, Church historian, chairman of the General Church Melchizedek Priesthood Committee, member of the Church Board of Education, member of the BYU Board of Trustees and Chairman of the Executive Committees of both of these, and also chairman of the Church Committee on Publications. And, of course, he continued to fulfill his responsibilities as a member of the Twelve, although because of his numerous other duties his assignments for stake conferences and mission tours were reduced.

During Elder Smith's tenure as the president of the Salt Lake Temple, he developed a closer relationship with the Genealogical Society, chiefly because he was the president of both. That relationship smoothed and expedited the processing of names for vicarious work in the temple. Joseph Fielding's connection with the Genealogical Society of Utah began in 1922 when he was named as the secretary and a director. Twelve years later, he became the president of the society, a position in which he served for thirty years. Ten years after Elder Smith became president of the Society, it was reincorporated as the Genealogical Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Also during Elder Smith's tenure as president, the society began its aggressive efforts to microfilm records throughout the world. When they were microfilmed, these records were catalogued and stored in Salt Lake City, where they were available to researchers who compiled the data necessary to have the vicarious work performed in the temple. L. Garrett Myers, one of President Smith's sons-in-law and a longtime superintendent in the Genealogical Society, described how the Society first became involved in microfilming records. (The superintendent gave a series of interviews conducted in 1976 by Bruce Blumell as part of the James Moyle Oral History Program.) "When we first started microfilming," said Garrett Myers, "I took some of these samples to President Smith and he told me at that time that he thought that it was in our interest to continue with the microfilming and to find out all that we could about the possibilities of using the records in our library that had been photographed. He felt that we would have to wait until we could acquire some equipment that would enable us to read the small print on the microfilm without using a magnifying glass. He said, 'Keep abreast of everything that's going on in the world in that field. The Spirit of Elijah has rested down on record keepers to such an extent that I feel that we should take an advantage of their interest in the field and their willingness to cooperate with us and help us in acquiring records. I feel very earnestly that we should not neglect any avenue that could be followed to enhance our acquisition of these records that can be obtained through microfilming. If you want to you can write this in your little black book and you'll find that it will be true.' I said, 'I will never need to record that because I will never forget it.' I thought that it might be well to put it down somewhere." (Myers Interview, p. 60.)

The first large-scale microfilming project was undertaken in early court records in Tennessee. The procedure followed there was, with some variations, followed elsewhere. For the privilege of microfilming the records, the Church gave the government agency, free of charge, a copy of the microfilms the Church made. From Tennessee, the microfilming was extended into other southern states and into the eastern and New England states as well. After World War II ended, these operations were also extended to Great Britain, Holland, Switzerland, Italy, Germany, Finland, and the Scandinavian countries. Later still, the work was extended to many other foreign countries and other parts of the United States. While numerous microfilmers in the field did the actual work, the motivating force behind it, as Garrett Myers indicated, was Joseph Fielding Smith. "He was a man of great vision," said George H. Fudge in his James Moyle oral interview. "When we were contemplating getting into microfilming back in 1938 . . . he could see the benefit of this microfilming and collecting records way back at that time. So it was men like Brother Joseph Fielding [who] have had a lot of vision." (Fudge Interview, p. 28.) George Fudge also reported how Elder Smith gave monetary support to this work in addition to the motivating impetus he provided: "President Smith . . . gave all of the royalties from the book, The Way to Perfection, to the Genealogical Society. That automatically came, and still does even now [as of January 1976]. I'm sure there are other books where he's done the same thing that I'm not aware of, but I do know that The Way to Perfection was one of those and we still get checks on a regular basis. He contributed some books originally to the Society, to the library. So he's been a great mover." Aside from the insight these statements give us into the behind-the-scenes impact of Elder Smith's leadership, they also throw light on his modesty. His diaries will be searched in vain for any reference to his philanthropies. He gave in silence with no expectation of receiving praise for his charity. It apparently was sufficient for him that he, the recipient, and the Lord knew. It is only from the reports of others that we learn about it.

These oral interviews by those who were most closely associated with him in the work of the Genealogical Society also reveal facets of Elder Smith's leadership style. Garrett Myers, for instance, reported on how Joseph Fielding first introduced him to his new associates as their superior. "He took me and introduced me to the members of the research department first and said, 'This is Garrett Myers. He'll be a sort of a straw boss in this institution.' And that's about all he said." (Myers Interview, p. 7.) Later, the superintendent was given the responsibility to take care of the records and finances of the society and described the way in which this delegation was made. "One day he [Elder Smith] came into my office," said Garrett Myers, "and he had his arms full of journals and check books and ledgers. He threw them down on my desk and said, 'I don't want to see these again' and walked out. He didn't say any more to me, I assumed from that he wanted me to take care of them which I did. I took care of them for four or five years." (Ibid., p. 39.) Elder Smith had the means to know whether the work was being done as he intended. Knowing the superintendent as he did, it was unnecessary to spend time in needless explanations.

This incident suggests another facet of Elder Smith's personality. "He was very closed mouthed," said Garrett Myers, "and never talked unless it was absolutely necessary. I've seen him in groups where . . . he'd wait for hours without saying a word unless it was specifically asked. If it was just a friendly gathering . . . he sat there and listened and never spoke." The apostle always lost this reticence when subjects of doctrine or the scriptures came into the conversation. Then he spoke out forcefully and, if need be, he would argue the point. "I know once or twice that President McKay questioned him. . . . Brother Smith said, 'No, President McKay, this is the way that it is.' " On one such occasion, Harold B. Lee, who was present, in confirming Elder Smith's statement is reported to have said, "Oh, that is a direct quote from the Doctrine and Covenants."

In giving his appraisal of Elder Smith's mentality, Garrett Myers said: "There wasn't a member of the General Authorities, in my opinion, that was his equal in knowledge and alertness. I would say that in front of any of the brethren. He had a mind as sharp as a razor." (Ibid., p. 41.) It was this aspect of his personality that, according to Garrett Myers, sometimes caused him to show irritation or impatience. "He was somewhat hasty and a little irritated when he had to listen to something he already knew well and it was clear to him." (Ibid.) He also commented about his father-in-law's punctuality and his penchant for hard work. "Brother Smith was punctual in every way," said he. "The Historian's Office was opened exactly at eight o'clock and it was closed at five—not one to thirty seconds after five, but at five." And to illustrate the apostle's work habits, he told of an instance when he and a companion had an early morning appointment with him: "Just before eight o'clock we were ready to go into his office and he came out the door. We said, 'We came to fill our appointment with you. We've been waiting outside.' He said, 'Well, why didn't you come in when you first got here?' We said, 'We didn't know you were here. We didn't see you go in while we were here.' He said, 'I've been here since five o'clock. You could have come in any time after five and it would have been alright with me." (Ibid., p. 42.)

Elder Smith's heavy work schedule made long hours on the job an absolute necessity. Mention has already been made of the other duties he had during his tenure as the president of the Salt Lake Temple, including membership on the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University and chairman of its Executive Committee. Joseph's first official connection with this board occurred when he was called to fill a vacancy caused by the death of his cousin John Henry Smith, who was a counselor in the First Presidency at the time of his death in October 1911. This began a sixty-year affiliation with this board that ended only with President Smith's death in July 1972. Following a major restructuring of the educational arm of the Church, Elder Smith became chairman of the Executive Committee of the BYU Board of Trustees on April 18, 1939. The other members of the Executive Committee were Elders Stephen L Richards, John A. Widtsoe, Joseph F. Merrill, Charles A. Callis, and Albert E. Bowen of the Twelve. Three of these, Stephen L Richards, Charles A. Callis, and Albert E. Bowen, were lawyers; the other two were professional educators, Elder Widtsoe having once served as the president of both Utah State University and the University of Utah, and Elder Merrill, one of the first Latter-day Saints to receive a Ph.D., once having served on the faculty of the University of Utah. Both Elder Widtsoe and Elder Merrill had once served as Church Commissioner of Education. Despite the limited nature of his formal education, Elder Smith felt no sense of inferiority in directing the work of this key component of a major university. It was this committee that had the most direct and continuing contact with the president of the university and his staff and therefore was in the best position to exert a positive influence on the course the university would follow.

Through all the years of his affiliation with Brigham Young University, Joseph Fielding Smith took his responsibilities most seriously and discharged them with uncommon diligence. His participation in the meetings of the full board and the executive committee and the meetings of the BYU Board of Trustees and its executive committee was not perfunctory. He carefully studied the issues facing these bodies and brought to their meetings his best thinking, which he shared in his usual deliberate style. While he was impressed with the growth in size and reputation the institution had experienced since its beginnings, he foresaw a greatly expanded role for it in the future. And while he looked upon the temple as "the University of the Lord," he regarded Brigham Young University as "The Lord's University." Therefore, BYU was, in his view, entitled to the best of everything so it could take its place as one of the great universities of the world. His vision of its future was expressed in a letter he wrote to President Ernest L. Wilkinson on December 4, 1951. In it he expressed the expectation "to see Brigham Young University grow and become very great, with an expansion that will cover all fields that are of value to the members of the church, including, of course, the teaching of faith in God and in the mission of our Redeemer and also that of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I can see where this school can become a great power for good, not only to the members of the church but to all good people throughout the world." (Wilkinson papers.)

Elder Smith's role as a leader in the development of Brigham Young University casts him in a new light. From a strictly ecclesiastical point of view, he was perhaps more conservative than any of his brethren. His sermons were invariably grounded in the scriptures, whose precision and certainty, as he interpreted them, did not allow for any latitude in meaning. He was scornful of those who argued for a more liberal construction of the scriptures or who advocated policies or practices that deviated from the pattern of conduct established in the past. The notable exception to this attitude, of course, occurred in the case of the Patriarch, when President Grant made a change in established procedure through inspiration. In all other cases, however, Elder Smith insisted on a strict compliance with established procedure and norms. Yet, alongside that strict, conservative attitude in ecclesiastical matters was a creative, somewhat daring point of view in others. This side of Joseph Fielding Smith's personality was revealed repeatedly during the years he served as a leader of the Brigham Young University. A notable example was the construction of the physical science center on campus. Designed to house the departments of chemistry, physics, and geology, this 214-room building was to have more floor space than the total of the five largest academic buildings on campus at the time. It was intended to be a world-class science facility, incorporating the best of what Dean Carl F. Eyring (for whom the building was named), found in other similar facilities on campuses throughout the country. At the time this building was first proposed, it had a projected price tag of $250,000 to $300,000. By June 1946, when it came before the board for final vote, that had ballooned to $950,000. The actual cost turned out to be almost two million dollars. The enormous size and the cost of this building generated strong opposition from influential members of the board, who threatened the project. "But," it is reported, "Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, then chairman of the Executive Committee of the Board of Trustees, made a strong appeal on behalf of McDonald's proposal for the building." (History of BYU, 2:439.) Elder Smith's influence was a key factor in obtaining final approval for the project. The differences of opinion among members of the Board of Trustees of BYU over the construction of the physical science center reflected a basic difference in philosophy over the role of the university. One view, persistently advocated by Elder Joseph F. Merrill and others, was that the chief role of BYU was as a teachers' college to prepare students with bachelor's and master's degrees to teach in primary and secondary public schools and in Church seminaries and institutes. This group conceded that BYU might offer a doctorate in religious education but not in any other field. As already indicated, Joseph Fielding Smith and others held a different view, foreseeing that BYU would ultimately take its place as a major university, providing graduate training in many fields. So, those who advocated the first view saw no need for the kind of sophisticated, expensive physical science center that was finally approved.

Elder Smith was not always successful in winning support for his views and projects involving Church education. A notable example of a lost cause involved the proposal to establish a network of junior colleges that would become branches of Brigham Young University. This proposal was presented to the General Church Board of Education in the latter part of 1957. Spearheaded by Joseph Fielding Smith, chairman of the Executive Committee, with strong support from Presidents Stephen L Richards and J. Reuben Clark, counselors in the First Presidency, this proposal was approved by the board on December 6, 1957. At the same time, it was agreed that the enrollment at the university would be limited to a maximum of 15,000 students. The rationale supporting the proposal was that all students would receive religious instruction, that the teachers would not be restricted in teaching religious principles as they related to secular subjects, and that the distinctive qualities of Latter-day Saint culture could best be taught and preserved on the junior-college campuses. On the authority of that decision, the Church purchased about 1,650 acres of land in five states for a total of more than $8 million dollars as a preliminary to establishing a junior college network. This included purchases in Salt Lake City, Utah; Idaho Falls, Idaho; the San Fernando Valley north of Los Angeles, California; Anaheim, California; Portland, Oregon; Fremont City, California, south of San Francisco; and Phoenix, Arizona. Meanwhile, there were discussions about purchasing other junior-college sites in the eastern and southern parts of the United States, in Mexico, and even in Europe. However, none of these was consummated.

It was the original intention that the junior colleges in the network would each have a maximum enrollment of 5,000 students. As the number of site purchases multiplied and as the costs mounted merely for the purchase of raw land, serious second thoughts began to assail some of the Brethren. Could the Church really afford to do this, notwithstanding the acknowledged advantages? The Church would not only become obligated to construct and continuously maintain costly facilities on these sites, but there would also be the even greater cost, in the long run, of paying the salaries of the administrative staff and the faculty required to operate them. Pointed to as a precedent was the decision in the 1930s, driven by financial considerations, to dispose of the Church academies, whose construction had been originally advocated by Karl G. Maeser of BYU. With this came a reemphasis of the idea that the seminary and institute program could provide many of the advantages of the junior colleges at far less cost. Moreover, those who opposed the plan for a network of junior colleges pointed to the rapid growth of the Church in outlying areas, particularly in the Latin American countries, and the impossibility of providing secular education for members in those areas and in other areas of potential growth. Taken together, these arguments became compelling as a matter of practical necessity. Under these circumstances, and with the intervening deaths of Presidents Stephen L Richards and J. Reuben Clark and the planned resignation of Ernest L. Wilkinson to run for the United States Senate (three of the strongest advocates of the junior college concept), Elder Smith joined with the other members of the General Church Board of Education Executive Committee in recommending abandonment of it. (Minutes of March 5, 1963.) The minutes spell out the rationale of the committee: "The cost would be prohibitive to furnish college work to all of the church . . . thinking of the thousands of our people in foreign countries who need the opportunity for education, and where our money for education could be more profitably spent in furthering the kingdom." The decision, therefore, was based on economics, not on any inferiority of the plan originally supported by Elder Smith. He was realist enough to know that sometimes there are good things we want but, at the moment, simply cannot afford.

Nevertheless, Elder Smith held firmly to the idea that BYU was designed to become one of the greatest institutions of higher learning in the world. (See Alumni Meeting Addendum, April 8, 1950, BYU Archives.) And he was prepared, therefore, to do all within his power and within reason to bring that about. So, in 1952, Elder Smith and the other members of the BYU Executive Committee recommended the immediate allocation of $500,000 for the acquisition of land around the university, notwithstanding the opposition of many who strongly opposed the expansion of the campus. Elder Smith sided with Elder Harold B. Lee, who was a member of his committee, who told Elder Smith at the time: "There are those who feel if we buy these properties, we'll never use them but are land grabbers. Others say that if we don't, we're short sighted. When the history of this school is written, I would rather go down as a land grabber." (History of BYU, 2:680.)

Elder Smith was a strong advocate of increasing opportunities for continuing education by adult Latter-day Saints. One way he did this was through sponsorship of off-campus centers directed by Brigham Young University. With the strong backing of the Executive Committee of the Church Board of Education, of which Elder Smith was chairman, Brigham Young University created four off-campus centers: the BYU-Ricks Center, the BYU-Ogden Center, the BYU-Salt Lake Center, and the BYU-California Center. The opening of these centers was usually announced to local priesthood leaders, stake presidents and bishops, in a letter from Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, acting as chairman of the Executive Committee of the General Church Board of Education. "This new service center," read the letter from Elder Smith about the opening of the BYU-Ogden Center, "is a forerunner of the type of adult education center which it is contemplated the Church Unified School System will organize in various places where there is a substantial church membership." (Ibid., 3:717.) When they were originally established in the 1950s, these BYU off-campus centers were intended to provide "audio-visual and other teaching aids, special lectures related to the fundamentals of the Gospel and other leadership training courses." (Ibid.) However, in 1969, Brigham Young University began a graduate program at the California center leading to a doctor's degree in education. Most of the credit leading to this degree could be obtained in local classes. Only limited residence work was required on the BYU Provo campus, which could be met by attending summer sessions.

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith was, of course, a strong advocate for higher education for the young as well as for older members of the Church. He demonstrated this not only by his long history of support as a member of the boards and as chairman of the executive committees of the Church Board of Education and the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University but also by the example of his own family. He strongly encouraged his children to obtain higher education within the limits of their time and resources. And he was always very proud and supportive of his children in their quest for university training. In this we see not only a wise recognition of the worldly advantages of higher education but also an affirmance of his basic beliefs that the glory of God is intelligence and that knowledge acquired during earth life will be useful in the hereafter.

Insofar as his schedule allowed, Elder Smith participated in the activities on campus, attending sporting and cultural events and joining in various ceremonials. He regularly attended graduation exercises and the related open houses sponsored by the president of the university. It was Joseph Fielding Smith who, in May 1950, turned the first shovelful of dirt for the construction of the George Albert Smith Fieldhouse. And it was he who dedicated the Harris Fine Arts Center and the Wilkinson Center on campus.

When BYU President Howard S. McDonald decided to accept the presidency of a college in Southern California, Elder Smith was appointed as the chairman of the search committee to find a successor. The result of that search was the recommendation that Ernest L. Wilkinson be appointed as the new president of Brigham Young University. While there were vast differences in the training, personality, and style of these two men, they were one in their vision of the potential of Brigham Young University, and they worked in tandem throughout the administration of President Wilkinson to help bring that about. They formed an interesting partnership. President Wilkinson was an aggressive, creative, and resourceful executive who had fixed ideas about what he wanted to do and boundless energy in pursuing them. But, as the president of BYU, he was working within a strict framework that he had never before had to deal with. As a highly successful attorney, it was unnecessary for him to consult with anyone other than himself to decide what to do or how to do it. At BYU, however, any major plan or proposal had to clear the Board of Trustees of the university, which was comprised of the First Presidency, designated members of the Twelve, and certain others. But, at the door to the board room stood the Executive Committee, whose chairman was Joseph Fielding Smith. It was this man, with forty years of experience as a member of the Twelve, who understood the ways, the wisdom, and the wariness of the hierarchy of the Church, who held the key to success of anything Ernest Wilkinson hoped to do as the president of Brigham Young University. Had not these two men shared the same vision, the history of BYU during Ernest Wilkinson's term as president would have been far different.

At the outset, President Wilkinson and Elder Smith had three main goals: to significantly increase the size of the student body; to expand the physical plant of the university to accommodate the increased enrollment; and to improve the status and qualifications of the faculty. The aggressive recruitment of potential students for BYU began in May 1951. This was the month following Elder Smith's designation as the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. In this capacity, he made the assignments to other General Authorities to attend stake conferences. Beginning in mid-May, he began assigning faculty members from BYU to accompany General Authorities to their conference assignments. This arrangement was continued from May to mid August, during which BYU faculty members participated in 179 conferences in stakes west of Denver, Colorado. At these conferences, the faculty members described the advantages of a BYU education and reviewed with prospective students the academic and cultural menu available there. This effort resulted in a 14-percent increase in enrollment, notwithstanding that most universities were then experiencing a decline in enrollment because of the Korean War. The following year, this recruitment program was discontinued because of complaints from other schools in Utah that its result was to reduce their own enrollment. However, with the unification of Church schools in 1953, the recruitment program was resumed but with a different format. At this time, faculty members from the eighteen institutes of the Church, Ricks College, and Brigham Young University accompanied General Authorities to stake conferences where Church members were made acquainted with the Unified Church School System and were encouraged to attend not only BYU but also Ricks College, LDS Business College, and LDS institutes and seminaries. This and other recruitment efforts produced remarkable results at Brigham Young University. Between 1951 and 1957, enrollment increased from 5,300 to 10,500.

The crush of the increased enrollment placed heavy pressure on housing accommodations, which resulted, during the following years, in the construction of Heritage Halls to house women students and Helaman Halls to house men students. Later, housing was provided for married students.

In 1953, a master plan for the physical development of the campus was cleared by Elder Smith's Executive Committee and approved by the Board of Trustees. In addition to the housing facilities already mentioned, this plan contemplated the construction of major academic buildings, which, in time, were completed. These included the Harvey Fletcher Engineering Building, the Student Service Center, the David O. McKay Building, the Benjamin Cluff Jr. Botanical Laboratory Building, the Howard S. McDonald Student Health Center, and the Joseph F. Smith Family Living Center.

Four years later, a second master plan for buildings on the campus was cleared by Elder Smith's Executive Committee and approved by the Board of Trustees. Then followed another massive building program that created the BYU Motion Picture Studio, the J. Reuben Clark Library, the Jesse Knight Building, the William H. Snell Industrial Education Building, the Abraham O. Smoot Administration Building, the Alumni House, the Ernest L. Wilkinson Center, the Physical Plant Building, the Franklin S. Harris Fine Arts Center, Cougar Stadium, the Dairy Products Laboratory Building, and the Stephen L Richards Physical Education Building. Along with the construction of these and the other new buildings, a major landscaping project was undertaken to beautify the campus and to tie all its structures together into a unified whole. As the plant expanded, the student body grew apace, so that by the time Elder Smith completed his tenure as the chairman of the Executive Committee, it had expanded to more than 20,000; and one of his first acts after becoming president of the Church was to set a cap of 25,000 on BYU enrollment.

The two key figures in the phenomenal growth of the physical plant and the size of the student body of BYU, moving it toward the status of a major university, were Ernest L. Wilkinson and Joseph Fielding Smith. It was the university president who provided the essential executive drive to keep up the momentum, while Elder Smith, the wise and experienced apostle, skillfully navigated critical matters over the potential shoals of institutional opposition or inertia.

The third goal focused on at the beginning of the Wilkinson administration was to improve the status and qualifications of the faculty. An important preliminary step was the restructuring of the colleges at the university. At the beginning of the Wilkinson tenure, there were five colleges and the division of religion. At the end, there were thirteen undergraduate colleges and the graduate school. In the early years, Elder John A. Widtsoe played a key role on the Executive Committee in this restructuring, bringing into play his vast experience as a president of two universities. More important than this restructuring to the status and effectiveness of the university, however, was the recruitment and retention of qualified members of the faculty. Here, Elder Smith played a more active role. A root problem in recruitment and retention was the low salaries paid to faculty members. With the support of Elder Smith and the executive committee, significant increases in faculty salaries were obtained. Through 1960, for instance, overall salary increases totalled 62.4 percent, while the cost of living increased only 16.5 percent. Meanwhile, with an improved academic structure, increased salaries, and an expanding campus and student body, faculty recruitment picked up rapidly. Creative means were used to achieve it. A list of Latter-day Saint educators on university faculties around the country was prepared. From this, prospective new faculty members for BYU were identified, and aggressive efforts were made to recruit them. Even members of the Quorum of the Twelve became involved in this effort; they were asked to be alert to potential prospects as they attended stake conferences. Meanwhile, existing members of the faculty were encouraged to seek graduate degrees at prestigious universities and were given sabbatical leaves to accomplish this. As a result of these efforts, during the rapid growth of the university from 1951 to 1971, the full-time faculty grew from 244 to 932; and the number of faculty members with doctoral degrees increased from fifty to more than five hundred. The improvement in the university's academic and professional standing during this period is also suggested by the increase in the number of scholarly articles published by members of the faculty. In the academic year 1956-57, 72 were published compared to 292 in 1970-71.

When Elder Smith became president of the Church in 1970, he also became president of the Board of Trustees of the Brigham Young University. While he had more authority over BYU as the Church president, he did not have the close relationship with it he had had while he was the chairman of the Executive Committee. Still, he retained a vital interest in the university and continued to participate in activities on the campus. On April 18, 1971, for instance, ninety-five-year-old President Smith addressed the first student-body devotional ever held in the Marriott Center. Over twelve thousand students gathered on that occasion to hear him speak. The occasion may have brought him nostalgic memories of the time, almost sixty years before, when he first became a member of the Board of Trustees. Then, BYU was only a small, obscure school housed in a few buildings below the crest of Temple Hill. Now on the hill was a sprawling campus with the largest full-time student body of any private university in the United States and a distinguished faculty to match. In this could be seen a partial fulfillment of the vision President Smith and many others had held of the future of the Brigham Young University, "The Lord's University."

On September 30, 1950, only nineteen days after Ernest Wilkinson accepted the presidency of BYU, Joseph Fielding Smith passed another milestone. On that date, he was formally sustained as acting president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Actually, he had been performing the duties of that office since the death of Elder George F. Richards on August 8, 1950. After Elder Richards's death, President David O. McKay ranked second in apostolic seniority. Ordinarily, he would then have become the active president of the Twelve. However, at the time, he was also the second counselor to President George Albert Smith. Therefore, President McKay assumed only a titular role as president of the Twelve, while the actual responsibility to perform the duties of that office was given to Elder Joseph Fielding Smith.

At the time, Elder Smith was seventy-four-years old. Behind him lay forty years of service as a member of the quorum he was now to direct. The duties of the office were well defined, based upon revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants and upon experience gained since the first members of the Twelve were called in 1835. Actually, the revelation announcing the call of the Twelve was received in June 1829, about a year before the Church was formally organized. In it, the Twelve were identified as those "who shall desire to take upon them my name with full purpose of heart." (D&C 18:27.) Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were then designated to "search out the Twelve" who would have the requisite desire. (Ibid., verse 37.) Their main duty would be "to go into all the world to preach [the] gospel unto every creature." (Ibid., v. 28.) They were also empowered to ordain "evangelical ministers" or patriarchs, and to ordain all other officers of the Church (D&C 107:39, 58), "to open up the authority of [the Church] upon the four corners of the earth, and after that to send [the gospel] to every creature." (D&C 124:128.) Finally, the Twelve were designated as "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world," forming a "quorum equal in authority and power" to the First Presidency. (D&C 107:23-24.) Around these core responsibilities had gathered a host of other duties pertaining to the growth of the Church through missionary work and the direction of the Church and its members. On becoming the executive officer of the quorum, Elder Smith had, therefore, acquired vast authority to influence the Church and its members at all levels.

Those who were most directly affected by President Smith's leadership, the members of his quorum, were an unusual group of men. Next to him in seniority was Stephen L Richards, a distinguished lawyer who would later become President David O. McKay's first counselor in the First Presidency. Then came John A. Widtsoe, who, as already mentioned, had served as president of Utah State University and the University of Utah before his call to the Twelve. Joseph F. Merrill, as previously noted, was an educator. Albert E. Bowen, who sat next to Elder Merrill, was a brilliant lawyer, noted for his classic eloquence. Then followed a group of younger men who, in the years ahead, would exert a powerful influence on the growth and stability of the Church: Harold B. Lee, an educator and government leader who had played a key role in the development of the welfare program; Spencer W. Kimball, whose forte was his work and influence with those of Lamanite ancestry; Ezra Taft Benson, a nationally known agricultural executive; Mark E. Petersen, a newspaper editor and publisher; Matthew Cowley, a lawyer and electrifying speaker; Henry D. Moyle, another lawyer who had also become a wealthy businessman; and Delbert L. Stapley, the scion of a distinguished Arizona Mormon family who was called to the Twelve at the same time Joseph Fielding Smith became its acting president. It will be seen that among those whose work President Smith was to direct were three future presidents of the Church.

President Smith undertook his labors as presiding officer of the Twelve in the same spirit he had undertaken all other assignments he had received in the past. He approached it with a combination of faith, humility, and self-confidence. These qualities are embodied in this poem he composed, which was published in an article that announced his call as the acting president of the Twelve:

By faith I walk on earth's broad plain, With hope forever in my breast; If valiant to the end I'll gain A glorious mansion with the blest. O Father, lead me by the hand, Protect me from the wicked here, And give me power that I may stand Entrenched in truth, to me made clear. The best is not too good for me That Heaven holds within its hand O may I falter not but see Thy kingdom come o'er all the land. (Improvement Era, April 1950, p. 317.)

Later, the other members of the Twelve lauded Elder Smith in a tribute that focused on the main qualities of his leadership and the guiding principles of his administration. They wrote: "We who labor in the Council of the Twelve under his leadership have occasion to glimpse the true solidity of his character. Daily we see continuing evidence of his understanding and thoughtful consideration of his fellow workers in making our assignments and in coordinating our efforts to the end that the work of the Lord might move forward. We only wish that the entire church could feel the tenderness of his soul and his great concern over the welfare of the unfortunate and those in distress. He loves all the saints and never ceases to pray for the sinner. With remarkable discernment, he seems to have but two measures in arriving at final decisions. What are the wishes of the First Presidency? Which is best for the kingdom of God? In his profound gospel writings and his theological dissertations, he has given to his associates and to the church a rich legacy which will immortalize his name among the faithful." (Ibid., July 1956, p. 495.)

1992 Deseret Book Co.
