Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Twenty-two

President of the Twelve

Elder Smith's tenure as acting president of the ETwelve was short lived, lasting only six months. EPresident George Albert Smith passed away on EApril 4, 1951, his eighty-first birthday. Five days later, David O. McKay was ordained as the ninth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple, where the ordination took place, it was Joseph Fielding Smith who nominated Elder McKay to become the new president; and it was he who acted as voice in the ordination. During the same meeting, Elder Smith was sustained as the new president of the Twelve. Reciprocating the service he had rendered, President McKay then set Elder Smith apart.

The historic dimensions of this meeting were enlarged when President McKay selected J. Reuben Clark as his second counselor. Some were upset by this action, regarding it as a "demotion" since President Clark had served as first counselor to both Heber J. Grant and George Albert Smith for nearly two decades. During that time, David O. McKay had served as the second counselor. Typically, Joseph Fielding Smith had nothing to say about the incident. It seemingly was a matter of indifference to him. His reaction would probably have been the same, even if Elder Clark had been given no place at all in the new First Presidency. The crucial thing was the desire of the new Prophet. If, therefore, President David O. McKay wanted J. Reuben Clark to serve as his second counselor, or not to serve at all in the First Presidency, so be it.

It was during this period that the rich legacy of Elder Smith's profound gospel writings and theological dissertations began to dawn on the general membership of the Church. Over the years, Joseph Fielding Smith had built up a vast body of doctrinal literature on almost every aspect of the gospel. In his sermons, correspondence, books, and column "Your Question," published for years in the Improvement Era, few if any gospel subjects had escaped his attention and his concise analysis and comment. However, these were so diffused over a period of forty years, in various places and at different times, that few really understood the significance of Elder Smith's achievement until they were gathered and arranged in a logical, meaningful pattern. This laborious project was undertaken by Elder Smith's son-in-law, Bruce R. McConkie, who was then a member of the First Council of the Seventy. Working early and late (during what his wife, Amelia, half jokingly calls "her" time) and in intervals between when he could squeeze out a few minutes for the task from his duties as a General Authority, Elder McConkie painstakingly knitted together a three-volume set of the sermons and writings of Joseph Fielding Smith entitled Doctrines of Salvation. The first volume, published in 1954, focused on the plan of salvation, including the Godhead, the premortal existence, the creation, the fall, the atonement, covenants, gospel dispensations, Joseph Smith and the Restoration, and the Church and kingdom of God on the earth. The second volume, published in 1955, was organized around the theme of salvation—"What it is; how to gain it; and the laws which pertain to it." Here are chapters about the three degrees of glory, exaltation, celestial marriage, salvation for the dead, and the resurrection. The third volume, published in 1956, treats a variety of subjects including priesthood organization, the scriptures, apostasy, the covenant race, the signs of the times, and the exodus of modern Israel. All these subjects are liberally documented with scriptural citations. And Elder Smith's treatment is phrased in his customary clear and concise style. Prepared with the object of clarity, not literary adornment, they represent a significant contribution to the doctrinal literature of the Church and doubtless will be one of the main things for which Elder Smith will be remembered by future generations.

During the compilation of these volumes a significant change was made in the organization of missionary work. The modern revelations clearly designate the Twelve as the agency to direct the work of proselyting throughout the world. However, in 1951 when Elder Smith became the President of the Twelve, that responsibility had been divided among many different groups, in addition to the Twelve. These included the Radio, Publicity and Mission Literature Committee, the Mission Home Committee, the stake missionary programs under the direction of the First Council of the Seventy, the missionary appointment committee, and the Indian Relations Committee. To avoid overlapping duties and to streamline the work, in 1954 all authority and responsibility for missionary work throughout the world was placed under the Missionary Committee, comprised of the members of the Twelve, with Joseph Fielding Smith as chairman.

In this capacity Elder Smith embarked on an international tour during the following year. With him were Jessie, Herald Grant Heaton with his wife and baby, and eighteen missionaries. As the travelers sailed from the California coast in the fore part of July 1955, their ultimate destination was Tokyo, Japan. Their ship, the President Wilson, made its customary stop at Pearl Harbor, where stores were taken aboard and where some passengers left the ship and others boarded. This busy Hawaiian port, with its conglomeration of seagoing vessels—men of war, passenger ships like the President Wilson, tankers, and bulky cargo ships—reminded Joseph Fielding and Jessie of their honeymoon visit seventeen years before, which was three years prior to the Japanese attack on December 7, 1941. Mute evidence of that attack still remained in the harbor as a grim reminder of the shocking event that had thrust the United States into World War II and had instantly transformed Japan into a much-maligned enemy. In the meantime, however, the shifting tides of war and peace had worked another astonishing change, converting Japan into a friendly trading partner in the burgeoning world economy. With this change had also come a relaxed Japanese attitude toward occidental religions, with the result that the Church had begun an aggressive proselyting effort there with spectacular success. Thousands of native Japanese had joined the Church within just a few years as Mormon missionaries had traveled among the islands of Japan to preach the message of the restoration. Indeed, the growth had been so rapid that one of the chief purposes of President Smith's visit was to divide the Japanese Mission and reorganize proselyting work in the Far East. The apostle's traveling companion, Herald Grant Heaton, was to become the president of the new mission.

A few days after leaving Pearl Harbor, the passengers aboard the President Wilson joined in an impromptu celebration whose object was the Mormon apostle. The occasion was President Smith's seventy-ninth birthday on July 19, 1955. As the diners waited for their dessert that evening, an announcement came over the ship's intercom that it was the birthday of the distinguished passenger, Joseph Fielding Smith, president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. With a flourish and amid enthusiastic applause, waiters, dressed in Italian attire to carry out the Neapolitan theme of the evening, brought in a beautiful birthday cake and placed it on Elder Smith's table. Atop the cake was a single candle, which Joseph ceremoniously lit and then blew out as all the diners joined in singing the traditional "Happy Birthday."

Fortunately, the voyage from Oahu to Tokyo was on a placid sea that allowed outside activities—turns around the deck for exercise, shuffleboard or skeet shooting for diversion, and lounging in the deck chairs to read, visit, snooze, or meditate. Such a routine was calculated to ease away anxiety and produce a languid feeling of repose and well being. This interlude was a welcome change to Elder Smith, whose agenda was usually crammed with an unending series of meetings, interviews, and telephone calls, interspersed with study, research, and writing.

However, even here the apostle could not escape the mandate of his calling, even were he disposed to try to do so. Aboard was a new mission president and a corps of missionaries who would be looking to him for signals about how they should conduct themselves. Therefore, he was not off stage and never could be as long as the apostolic mantle rested on him. So, consistent with his customary habits of moderation and restraint, Elder Smith took his recreation in small doses. There was correspondence to handle, plans to formulate, diary entries to make, and talks to prepare. Moreover, there was counsel to give to the new mission president and questions to be answered for the eighteen missionaries, who likely felt a vicarious sense of self-importance at sharing a sea voyage with the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. And the diaries of most of them likely were lined with entries about the great man and the wisdom he imparted, entries that, in the years ahead, would provide many moments of quiet reflection and remembrance.

The President Wilson eased into Tokyo Bay on July 25, 1955. Waiting at the pier were Hilton A. Robertson, president of the Japanese Mission; his wife; elders from the mission office; and several members, including some U.S. military personnel stationed in Japan. After greetings all around and clearing customs, President and Sister Smith were driven to the mission home. When the travelers had regained their land legs and freshened up, they were feted at a reception where a group of Japanese singers provided the entertainment. As Jessie's reputation as a singer and entertainer had preceded her, she was invited to sing. The Japanese natives were surprised and pleased that one of her numbers was sung in their own language.

The apostle spent two days in the Tokyo area, visiting various army groups stationed there. The United States had maintained a significant military presence in Japan during the intervening decade since the war ended. Among these troops were many devoted Latter-day Saints who, imbued with missionary zeal, had played a key role in the growth of the Church in Japan. President Smith's purpose was to counsel and encourage these people. In the process, he was introduced to many nonmember army officials who received him cordially.

On the last day of his stay in Tokyo, Joseph was flown back to mission headquarters by helicopter after visiting an outlying military installation. This gave him an unusual view of Japan's sprawling capital city and its environs. From that vantage point, he saw how the Sumida River bisected Tokyo and how some of the numerous canals within the city formed concentric courses, enclosing small islands. On the innermost of these stood the imperial palace, enclosed by a high wall. Off to the southeast, seventy miles away, Mount Fuji, Japan's tallest mountain, could easily be seen.

Two days after arriving in Tokyo, Elder Smith traveled to Karuizawa for a conference attended by missionaries, service personnel, and other members. There, for three days, the visiting apostle directed a series of meetings to instruct and motivate those in attendance. During one of these, the congregation formally approved the division of the Japanese Mission to create the Northern Far East Mission, comprised of Japan, Korea, and Okinawa, and the Southern Far East Mission, comprised of Formosa, Hong Kong, the Philippine Islands, and Guam. Herald Grant Heaton was sustained as president of the Southern Mission, and Hilton A. Robertson was sustained as the president of the Northern Mission. Since all the members living in what was formerly the Japanese Mission were affected by this action, the division was presented for approval at all the other meetings held by Elder Smith during his tour of the area.

On Monday, August 1, the apostle and the two mission presidents, accompanied by Lt. Colonel Robert H. Slover and Captain Hildebrand, flew to Seoul, Korea. The next day, following a meeting with missionaries, service personnel, and Korean Saints, Elder Smith and a small group went to the top of a hill overlooking Seoul, the ancient capital of the kingdom of Chosen, where he dedicated the land of Korea for the preaching of the gospel. Jessie was unable to accompany her husband there. Nevertheless, she participated in this historic event vicariously. Unknown to President Smith, the American Army Officers had brought one of her recordings with them. Attaching a speaker to a nearby pole, they played her rendition of "The Heavens Were Opened" following the dedicatory prayer. "It was a thrill to hear her voice," wrote the apostle, "although she wasn't there."

By this symbolic act, the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles formally introduced the restored gospel into a nation that for centuries had been dominated by beliefs in Buddhism and Confucianism. In not so long a time, the seed then planted would flourish in an extraordinary way among a people whose ancestral devotions produced a warm congeniality toward a religion that stressed the eternal significance of families. Within three decades, that seed would grow into a vigorous, thriving Latter-day Saint community comprised of many stakes and missions and with a beautiful temple in Seoul, where the Korean Saints could be linked to their ancestors in an eternal, binding chain.

Near the spot where President Smith offered the dedicatory prayer stood a monument erected in memory of those who had been killed in combat. Among these dead were many Americans, including some Mormon boys, whose blood had been spilled on foreign soil so far from home. It was a source of amazement to President Smith and his brethren that out of such tragic circumstances emerged a result wholly inconsistent with the carnage and destructions of war. For in Korea, as in Japan, the first baptisms of Korean Saints after World War II were performed because of proselyting carried on by Latter-day Saints in the armed forces of the United States. In Korea, that process began shortly after the end of the war in August 1945 when the U. S. Army's Seventy-seventh Division landed at Inchon, Korea, the port nearest Seoul. Latter-day Saint members of that division, and those who replaced them later as part of the army of occupation, lost little time in planting the seeds of the gospel among the Koreans. Several years later, the number of Latter-day Saint soldier-missionaries was greatly increased with the surprise landing of General Douglas MacArthur's army at that same port of Inchon during the Korean War. The landing was a surprise because there is a greater tidal fluctuation at Inchon than at any other major port in the world, creating large areas of mud flats during ebb tide. Therefore, seagoing ships must time their arrival and departure so as to avoid being left stranded on the mud flats that are exposed when the tide recedes.

These forces of occupation included many returned missionaries and other dedicated members of the Church, who missed few opportunities to share their religious convictions. The efforts of these industrious Saints created a primary base of Church members that was strengthened and built on when the Japanese Mission was created and full-time missionaries were sent to Korea. As Elder Smith divided that mission and formally dedicated Korea for the preaching of the gospel, he marveled at the phenomenal growth that had taken place and at the inscrutable ways of the Lord that had brought proselyting opportunity and success out of the chaos of war.

Leaving Seoul, President Smith and his party traveled to Munsani-ni, near the line of demarcation between South Korea and North Korea, where a special meeting was held. Then, going to Pusan via Seoul, he held a combined meeting with Korean members, service people, and missionaries. At both Seoul and Pusan, the apostle ordained priests and deacons so they could hold their meetings and administer the sacrament; and he set apart Dr. Kim Ho Jik, an elder, as the president of the Korean District, with Frederick Shumway, an American serviceman, and Houk Yung Gil, a native Korean, as counselors.

Returning to Japan, the apostle held additional meetings at Tokyo and Osaka, following which he flew to Okinawa. There, on Sunday, August 14, in the presence of a large group of members, Elder Smith dedicated this island for the preaching of the gospel. It was here that the last great battle of World War II was fought, a battle that involved many Latter-day Saints who were members of the armed forces, including five men who were unknown to each other at the time but who would later become General Authorities: Elders Neal A. Maxwell and Paul H. Dunn of the Seventy-seventh Division of the army, Elder H. Burke Peterson of the Corps of Engineers, and Elder Durrel A. Woolsey and the author, who were members of the amphibious forces. And involved directly or indirectly in that final battle were some Japanese or Okinawans who were not then members of the Church but who later joined. President Smith's dedication of this island for the preaching of the gospel took place ten years to the day after the surrender of Japan, and it served, in a sense, as a belated benediction to the bloody hostilities that had agitated much of the world for many years.

President Smith would perform two other dedications of "isles of the sea" during this tour. The first was the dedication of the Philippine Islands, which took place on Sunday, August 21, at a beautiful grove near Clark Field outside Manila. At the time, there were no known members of the Church in the Philippines other than the Americans who were there because of military obligations. The final dedication took place at the island of Guam on August 25 as President and Sister Smith were returning to the United States.

In reporting on this tour during the October General Conference, President Smith expressed his love for the new members of the Church whom he had met. And he paid a special tribute to the missionaries and to the Latter-day Saint service people who were stationed abroad. Of the latter, Elder Smith, quoting a nonmember chaplain, said, "I keep two of these young men of your faith with me all the time. If I lose one of them, if he is called away, I get another. . . . I keep them with me all the time because they are dependable." (Improvement Era, December 1955, p. 918.)

Elder Smith spent Monday, January 2, 1956, in a way sports fans around the world would applaud. "I remained home most of the day," he wrote, "and saw football games played in Miami, Florida; Dallas, Texas; and Los Angeles, California; also the parade at Pasadena. A very marvelous thing wherein we saw the plays of the teams clearly. "While intermittently sampling the contents of Jessie's refrigerator, the apostle also "entertained visitors during the day." Soon to be eighty years old and still in robust health, he enjoyed life to the fullest. His advancing age did not diminish in the least his interest in all that went on about him. Indeed, it was during this period that he developed an avid interest in flying—and not flying in commercial aircraft, which he had been doing for many years. He became interested in flying in the fastest, most modern military jets. His favorites were the Thunderbird and Sabre Jets. Typically, he referred to Thunderbirds as "T-Birds." Elder Smith was introduced to this unusual recreation by Colonel, later General, Alma G. Winn of the Utah National Guard, whom he had met through Jessie. When Elder Smith showed an interest in his work, Colonel Winn invited the apostle to take a spin with him. Joseph accepted with alacrity. His maiden flight was on June 9, 1954. "Colonel Alma Winn invited me to take a ride with him in a jet plane," he wrote on that day. "It was a wonderful experience to travel in such a plane at about 500 miles per hour." This was the beginning of a novel recreation that would continue until Joseph was almost ninety. Only two weeks after this first flight, Elder Smith went up again with Colonel Winn. "We could see in all directions," he wrote excitedly, "into Idaho, Wyoming, Nevada and as far south as lower Utah or beyond. It was a wonderful sight." Through Colonel Winn, Joseph Fielding also met General Maxwell E. Rich and Colonel Roland R. Wright of the Utah National Guard. These four men forged a fast friendship that centered around their shared interest in jet aircraft. On November 13, 1954, five months after his first flight in a T-bird, Elder Smith enjoyed an experience with these three that he recorded in language tinged with ecstasy: "This is my father's birthday," he wrote on that date. "I went up in a jet plane with Colonel Alma Winn; and General Maxwell Rich of the Utah National Guard [went] with Colonel Roland R. Wright in another plane. We pierced the dark heavy clouds up into the clear sunshine. It was the most beautiful scene I can remember, as the tops of the highest peaks penetrated the clouds like islands. The clouds on top were perfectly white [and those] below extremely dark, with some rain falling later."

The news of Elder Smith's avid interest in jets circulated around Church headquarters with lightning speed. Everyone was surprised; most seemed delighted; a few were probably envious; and at least one was appalled. That one was President J. Reuben Clark, who was obstinately opposed to flying and who used his considerable influence and authority to keep all his brethren out of the air. On one notable occasion, following a meeting where it was decided that one of the brethren would fly to Washington, D.C., President Clark sought out the brother, who was one of his protÃ©gÃ©s, and said "Look, kid, you go by train." (As related to the author.) President Clark had flown in a plane only once, which was apparently enough to convince him that it was dangerous and not an acceptable way for him or anyone else to travel. So, when the president of the Twelve took up flying in jets, President Clark launched a campaign to get him to stop. While he was reluctant to order his apostolic senior, President Smith, to cease and desist as he had done with his protÃ©gÃ©, President Clark hinted that he ought to give it up. It was then that Elder Smith sought to turn the tables and convince President Clark of the safety and the joys of jetting. How he did it remains a mystery, but two years after President Smith began to fly in jets, he persuaded President Clark to accompany him to the airport to at least check the plane out. He reported the results on June 15, 1956: "At the close of the board meeting [board of education]," wrote Elder Smith on that day, "Jessie and I took President J. Reuben Clark to the airport, where he was shown the workings of a jet plane; and then Col. Alma Winn took us for a ride . . . over the city. [It was] the 2nd time Prest. Clark was in a plane." A week later, Colonel Winn came to President Smith's office "with pictures of President Clark sitting in a saber-jet" which the two of them took to the president's office. He remained unconvinced. As far as is known, President Clark never again went up in a plane, carrying his aversion to flying to his grave. President Smith, on the other hand, continued to enjoy his hobby as often as he could find time to do so. On his eightieth birthday, July 19, 1956, for instance, the month after his abortive attempt to win over President Clark, he went for a long spin with Colonel Winn. With President Smith at the controls part of the time, the two friends flew south to Fish Lake, then north to the Utah-Idaho border and back again to the Salt Lake City airport. A week later, in a show of appreciation and friendship, Elder Smith invited his flying buddies to the Millcreek cabin. "In the canyon," he wrote on July 27. "We invited General Maxwell E. Rich, Colonel Alma G. Winn and Col. Roland Wright and their wives to come and have supper and spend the evening. They came at 6 p.m. and we had a very pleasant evening together. This is the last day we can spend in the canyon this summer." And on Labor Day, September 3, Elder Smith and Jessie accompanied General Rich and Colonel Winn to inspect the Utah National Guard base at Camp Williams, south of Salt Lake City. Six years later, August 17, 1962, at a special program held at Camp Williams, President Joseph Fielding Smith received the honorary rank of brigadier general in the Utah National Guard and was given a general's uniform as a surprise. And in 1964, the eighty-eight-year-old apostle was given the Minuteman Award in recognition of his support of the National Guard. Over the years, he had intermittently delivered sermons at their Sunday worship services.

While Elder Smith's enthusiasm for flying never diminished, he unaccountably took a dim view of space travel. During a stake conference held in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on May 1 and 2, 1962, a reporter questioned him about the plans of the United States to put a man on the moon. "I answered that they might, but evidently if so he might have difficulty to get back again." This comment was picked up and reported by the national wire services, producing a wholly unexpected reaction. "I am flooded by letters in relation to it," wrote the apostle, "with some editorial criticism." Although he never answered publicly, he confided this response to his diary: "The fact is . . . mortal man has no business trying to get on the moon, for earth is a probationary state and in mortality we are expected [to stay on] this earth." Elder Smith never attempted to reconcile the inconsistency of that view with his carefree enjoyment in flying at 30,000 feet above the planet in a sabre jet. Undoubtedly, President J. Reuben Clark would have immensely enjoyed his attempts to do so.

Elder Smith's periodic flights with his military friends provided an important diversion from the grinding schedule he maintained as the president of the Twelve. Despite his advancing age and the prerogatives he enjoyed in directing the work of his quorum, he insisted on fulfilling his share of stake conference assignments. So, during the first half of 1956, the year when he celebrated his eightieth birthday, he presided at conferences in the Denver, Colorado; Long Beach, California; Ogden, Utah; North Rexburg, Idaho; North Sacramento, California; Hurricane, Utah; Mount Pleasant, Utah; Burley, Idaho; Seattle, Washington; Santa Barbara, California; Palmyra, Utah; and St. George, Utah. On average, this octogenarian was on the road every other week during this period. And, some of the trips were long and tiring as was the trip to Seattle, Washington, on the weekend of May 19 and 20. It was necessary for him to leave Friday evening, May 18, to accommodate a tight travel schedule. He arrived in Seattle at 1:00 p.m. Saturday in time to commence a series of meetings that afternoon and evening, including meetings with stake missionaries, the stake presidency, welfare workers, and priesthood leaders. This last meeting ended at 9:30 p.m., although he was not in bed until almost 11:00. Early the next morning, he held a special meeting with the stake presidency, high council, and bishoprics. He "talked to them on several matters, including moral conditions." Then followed general sessions at 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., after which he ordained and set apart three bishops, set apart eleven counselors in bishoprics, set apart new counselors in the stake mission presidency, and ordained six seventies. He was on the train all day Monday, arriving home at 10:25 p.m. Then at 7:30 the following morning, Tuesday, May 22, he attended a missionary committee meeting. Considering that Elder Smith was then fifteen years beyond the normal retirement age and that this was but one thread in a complicated fabric of activity, one senses the enormous reservoir of self-discipline and drive necessary to propel him forward from day to day. What he did, of course, was typical of other General Authorities, whose schedules were equally overcrowded. The wife of one of the Brethren, seeing this for the first time at close range, said half in jest and half seriously, "If the job description of a general authority were published in the help wanted section of the classified ads, there would be no applicants."

But, there were many compensations that made Elder Smith's life and ministry full and satisfying. Not the least of these was the joy he experienced in regularly meeting with his Brethren in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple. Here on most Thursdays he could be found with the First Presidency and the Twelve, counseling together about worldwide interests of the Church, bearing testimony, and renewing their covenants of apostolic responsibility. And twice each year, he joined with his Brethren and with leaders and members from around the world in the general conferences. Here he was not only involved in speaking in the general sessions but also in giving instructions to special leaders in attendance; to mission, stake, and temple presidents; and to patriarchs. President Smith had special responsibility as to the patriarchs since they reported directly to him. He was painstakingly careful about preparing for the general conferences, devoting special attention to the talks he delivered, knowing that unlike stake conference talks, they would be recorded and preserved as a permanent record, available for review into the indefinite future, perhaps for all time. He especially wanted his testimony to be preserved for future generations so that they would know that he knew that the gospel is, indeed, true. Of all the testimonies he bore during the sixty years of his apostolic ministry, none was more complete and moving than the one he bore during the April 1956 general conference, five years after he became president of the Twelve. "This afternoon I wish to bear testimony to the restoration of the gospel," he said on Saturday afternoon, April 7, "to the mission of our Redeemer, to the call of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the establishment of this work in the dispensation in which we live, known as the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. I know absolutely that Jesus Christ is the only Begotten Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, the Savior of men insofar as they will repent of their sins and accept the gospel. Through his death he redeemed all men and took upon him that sacrifice which would relieve us of our sins that we may not answer for them if we will accept him and be true and faithful to his teachings. I am just as fully satisfied, because I know, that the Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith and revealed to him the great truth which had been lost because of the wickedness of the world; that they are separate distinct personages; that the Father and the Son, together with the Holy Ghost, constitute the Godhead, the great ruling power of the universe; that Jesus Christ volunteered to come into this world to redeem it; that John the Baptist came to the Prophet, as did Moroni before him, and Peter, James and John later, to give authority and to usher in the Kingdom of God anew in this dispensation in which we live, because men had turned away from the truth. . . . I am grateful for my membership in the Church, for the opportunity that has been mine to serve. My desire is to prove true and faithful to the end." (Conference Report, April 1956, pp. 58-59.) The expressions of gratitude and desire with which he ended this testimony are keystones in understanding the character of President Joseph Fielding Smith. To him, Church membership signified that he had taken upon himself the name of Jesus Christ, his King and Redeemer. And the "opportunity" to serve others was simply a means of demonstrating love and appreciation for his Savior. The desire "to prove true and faithful" was undoubtedly a chief force in motivating him to stay at his task from day to day. So frequently did President Smith express this desire, in his sermons, prayers, and daily conversation, that it became almost a motto for him. Indeed, his grandson Joseph F. McConkie used it as the title for the biographical sketch he wrote of his grandfather. One need only look at his life in its totality to see how this prophet lived up to the demanding standard he had set for himself.

The last six months of 1956 were a repetition of the first six. They consisted of an unbroken chain of meetings, trips, and family duties, interspersed with some recreation. During the summer break, he and members of the family were able to use to good advantage the two spectator chairs he had received as a Father's Day gift. "Accompanied Milton to the softball park," he noted on August 21. "I was supposed to throw out the first ball, but meetings interfered and I was late." The night before, Elder Smith had attended a banquet for all the ball players where he "received a trophy for past interest in the encouragement in sports by the youth of the Church." Earlier in the summer, the apostle had dedicated the all-Church softball park on Second West and Twentieth South in Salt Lake City. Also during the break, he and Jessie had accompanied Richard and Alice Evans to the Lagoon amusement park for the annual outing of the members of the Tabernacle Choir and their partners. And, he and Jessie had been the guests of President David O. McKay in attending the premier showing of Cecil B. DeMille's The Ten Commandments. He called it "the most wonderful, magnificent performance I have ever seen."

President Smith ended the summer break by attending conference in Duchesne, Utah. "Conditions financially are poor, but people happy," he wrote. "Some of them, however, need repentance. I preached the Gospel to them, and stressed their duties." President Smith was never reluctant to speak his mind and to call people to repentance, if he felt they needed it. This caused some to bridle at his preaching. Soon after Joseph Fielding Smith became president of the Twelve, Elder Spencer W. Kimball wrote to his wife from Canada to say a bishop in Lethbridge had complained that "he talks like Joseph Fielding Smith and I don't like it." Elder Kimball than commented about those who have "itching ears," adding that he was proud to be thought "a sitter at the feet of President Joseph Fielding Smith." (Edward L. Kimball and Andrew E. Kimball, Jr., Spencer W. Kimball, p. 279.)

In the waning months of 1956, members of the Church in the Montpelier, Highland, Yellowstone, Fillmore, and West Jordan stakes had the opportunity to hear the straightforward, unadorned preaching of the eighty-year-old president of the Twelve. And in between these conferences, he participated in another general conference where he was equally forthright in instructing the general membership in their duties and about the consequences of their failure to perform them.

While President Smith enjoyed every aspect of his work, attending stake conferences, mission tours, general conferences, and fulfilling his headquarters assignments, his work in the temple seemed to be the most satisfying of all. The quiet dignity of the building in which were performed the most sacred and solemn ordinances seemed most congenial to his personality and character. Because of this, he and Sister Smith were especially pleased to be invited to attend the dedication of the Los Angeles Temple in March 1956. They left Salt Lake City by train Thursday night, March 8, with other General Authorities and their wives. Arriving in Los Angeles Friday morning, they barely had time to check into the hotel before attending a luncheon with President and Sister McKay hosted by leaders of the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce. At the same time, other of the Brethren and their wives attended a luncheon hosted by the Los Angeles Rotary Club. By this means the city leaders expressed appreciation for the magnificent building that had been constructed on Santa Monica Boulevard on the former estate of movie star Harold Lloyd. The site had been purchased in 1937 during the administration of President Heber J. Grant. Work on the building was delayed until 1951, when, in September, five months after he became the president of the Church, President David O. McKay broke ground for the building and dedicated the site. As the construction proceeded during the ensuing five years, all Los Angeles had watched with interest as the distinctive building took shape atop a hill near Westwood Village, two miles west of Beverly Hills. When the main tower topped out at over two hundred and fifty feet, the temple was visible for miles around to residents of the most exclusive areas of the sprawling city. And the thousands of motorists who daily streamed by on Santa Monica Boulevard had come to assume a somewhat proprietary attitude toward the sacred building, which ultimately covered almost four and a half acres of the thirteen-acre site. When at last a fifteen-and-a-half-foot gold-leaf-covered statue of the Angel Moroni was put in place on the pinnacle of the main tower and graceful palm trees were planted on top of the lower levels of the building, the temple, with its carefully manicured grounds, indeed became an object of civic pride. In token of this, over 700,000 visitors were ushered through the building during a two-month period preceding the dedication. And the already mentioned luncheons, hosted by the city's leaders, demonstrated dramatically that the Latter-day Saints and their beautiful temple were welcome.

As the second-ranking apostle in attendance, and having served for many years as a counselor or as president of the Salt Lake Temple, President Smith played a key role in the dedication proceedings. He and Sister Smith attended all eight of the dedicatory sessions held over a period of four days, March 11 to 14. And he spoke at the Sunday and Tuesday afternoon sessions, dwelling on the eternal impact of the sacred ordinances to be performed in the temple. Because of his superior scriptural knowledge and his extensive experience in temple administration, President Smith, perhaps more than anyone else present, grasped the deeper significance and importance of the building and of the occasion that had drawn him there.

These services could not have failed to remind President Smith of the circumstances surrounding the death of his fellow apostle Matthew Cowley. In December 1953, the First Presidency and the Twelve and their companions had traveled to Los Angeles to attend the cornerstone-laying ceremonies of the temple. On Saturday, December 12, the day after the ceremony, President Smith had said good-bye to Elder Cowley, who intended to remain in California for a few days. The next morning, Sunday, December 13, 1953, Elder Cowley died peacefully in his sleep at about 4:45 a.m. He was only fifty-six years old, twenty-one years younger than the president of his quorum. The following April, the vacancy in the Twelve caused by Elder Cowley's death was filled by eighty-year-old George Q. Morris, who was two years older than President Smith. The combined apostolic service of these two brethren totaled only sixteen years, compared to the sixty years served by President Smith, all of which emphasizes the irregular patterns seen in the times of call and terms of service of members of the quorum over which Joseph Fielding Smith now presided.

Two years after the temple dedication in Los Angeles, President and Sister Smith traveled to England to participate in the dedication of the London Temple. They left Salt Lake City by plane on Tuesday, September 2, 1958. To break up the long trip and to minimize the jet lag, they decided to stay overnight in New York City. Waiting to meet them at New York's La Guardia Airport were Eastern States Mission president Theodore Jacobsen and his wife, Florence, who was President Smith's niece, a daughter of Willard Smith, President Smith's brother. The travelers were driven to the Plaza Hotel by President and Sister Jacobsen; there they spent the night. The following afternoon, the Jacobsens again chauffeured President and Sister Smith, driving them to La Guardia, where they caught a transcontinental flight destined for London. There was an intermediate stop in Shannon, Ireland, where they had breakfast, before flying on to Heathrow Airport in London. From Heathrow, they were driven to the Grosvenor Hotel, which would be their headquarters for the next six days.

Also staying at the Grosvenor were President and Sister David O. McKay. Other members of the official party included elders Henry D. Moyle, Richard L. Evans, and Hugh B. Brown of the Twelve; Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, assistant to the Twelve; and Bishop Thorpe B. Isaacson of the Presiding Bishopric. Elder Hinckley, who had been sustained as an assistant to the Twelve at the previous April General Conference, had arrived in London earlier in order to coordinate the final arrangements for the dedication.

Unlike the Los Angeles Temple, which is located in the midst of a bustling urban neighborhood, the London Temple is located on the outskirts of the city in a rural setting. On Friday afternoon, September 5, President and Sister Smith accompanied some of the other visitors to the temple for a final inspection tour before the dedication, which was scheduled to commence the following Sunday. There they visited the various rooms of the temple, which were receiving a final cleanup following the open house, which had ended only two days before and during which more than 75,000 guests were shown through the building.

Being only one-sixth its size, the London Temple was dwarfed by the one at Los Angeles. However, the picturesque setting of this building, on a thirty-two-acre site amid ancient English farming lands, gave it a special rural charm that the Los Angeles Temple could not match. Inside the building, the visitors found the same quiet peace and dignity that typify all temples, along with the symbolic trappings that distinctively set them apart from all other earthly buildings.

The dedicatory services, presided over by President David O. McKay, commenced on Sunday, September 7, 1958, and continued through Tuesday, September 9, with two sessions each day. President Smith was again specially recognized, speaking at sessions on both Sunday and Monday. As always, the conclusion of each session produced an extraordinary emotional response as those in attendance joined with the choir in singing "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning."

The morning after the last dedicatory session, Brother and Sister Smith flew out of London, destined for Zurich, Switzerland. The President left with a heavy heart. In meetings with the European mission presidents held before the temple dedication, it was reported that several missionaries in the French Mission were in apostasy. President Smith, as chairman of the missionary committee, assigned Elder Henry D. Moyle to look into the matter and to give direction to the mission president. As a result, several missionaries were excommunicated. The anguish this brought to the missionaries and their families and the setback to the work in France were matters of grave concern to President Smith. The cause of the difficulty—the failure to stay close to the mandates of the scriptures and to follow priesthood direction—confirmed the validity of the counsel the president of the Twelve had repeatedly given throughout his ministry. But this could not allay the dreary feelings the incident aroused.

Elder Smith's spirits began to revive on reaching Switzerland. He and Jessie were met at the Zurich Airport by mission president Jesse R. Curtis and were driven directly to Bern. That evening, Wednesday, September 10, a meeting was held in Bern with missionaries of the Swiss-Austrian mission. A principal reason for President Smith's revived spirits can be inferred from this diary entry for that day: "Here we had the privilege of seeing our grandson, Douglas Myers, who is a very successful missionary, at present laboring in Vienna."

The following day, the apostle spent several hours in the temple at Bern, giving counsel to the temple presidency, who, after three years since the temple dedication in 1955, were now well schooled in temple administration but who still had many questions to ask President Smith. He answered all of them patiently and at length, making sure the temple presidency fully understood. There was no work in the Church more fraught with eternal significance than the work in the temple, and President Smith and all his brethren were doubly anxious that it be performed in the right way and with the right spirit.

At Jessie's persistent and good-natured urging, President Smith agreed the following day to accompany a group to a resort high in the mountains, where they had a pleasant lunch while admiring the rugged landscape, punctuated by the towering, jagged peaks of the Alps. His reluctance to go stemmed from a concern that any missionaries who might learn of the outing would take license from it to use their time sightseeing instead of proselyting. Of course, he was acutely conscious of the occasion during his mission to England when he and a group of missionaries had toured on the continent while visiting the World Fair in Paris. Yet, he knew also that many of the philosophies of missionary work had changed during the intervening half century and that now such activities were frowned upon. But, the apostle's concerns were overridden by a desire to accommodate the legitimate wishes of his wife. So, he went along, although it is safe to assume that he did not do so with any great enthusiasm.

The following day, the Smiths accompanied President and Sister Curtis to Basil, where the mission home was located. Visiting this place evoked a flood of memories, for it was here, nineteen years earlier, before the war broke out, that they had visited with their son Lewis and President and Sister Thomas E. McKay. Now, both President McKay and Lewis were gone, the former having passed away only nine months before.

The travelers spent two days in Basil, during which Elder Smith counseled with the mission president and held meetings with the missionaries and local members and leaders. They were driven to Zurich on Tuesday, September 16, and caught a plane to London. There, on the same day, President Smith formally dedicated the London Mission Home. Present, in addition to the mission president, his wife, and the mission staff, was Elder Henry D. Moyle, who had just returned from Paris.

On Tuesday, September 18, Elder and Sister Smith traveled from London to Southampton by train and boarded the Queen Elizabeth for the return voyage to the United States. This floating hotel, which was almost as long as two of Salt Lake City's blocks, was the largest and most luxurious of the superliners of the Cunard-White Star Line. It had been completed in 1940 as a troop ship but after the war had been fitted out as a cruiser, capable of accommodating almost twenty-three hundred passengers in complete comfort.

The five-day voyage to New York City was typical for the Atlantic. "Stormy day," the apostle noted on Sunday the 21st, three days out of Southampton. Earlier that day, he had held a worship service with several missionaries and other members who were aboard. The next day, he followed up with another meeting, attended only by the missionaries. "Many questions asked," Elder Smith reported. Aside from these meetings, "reading and watching the ocean" were the main activities of the Smiths during the voyage. "We took no part in the sports and other entertainments," the apostle explained. "Horse racing with dice and other games of chance are the chief amusements." After watching these a time or two as he passed by, Elder Smith noted suspiciously, "In these games, I noticed that the ship's officers always won."

The Queen Elizabeth berthed majestically at the New York waterfront on Tuesday afternoon, September 23, amid the customary confusion. On the pier to greet the travelers were President and Sister Jacobsen. Spotting them there and waving, the Smiths expected to join them promptly since their luggage consisted only of two suitcases, which they carried with them. But, it took more than an hour to clear customs. President Smith was obviously irked. "I never before saw so much confusion and lack of order at any port in Europe or elsewhere than we had here in New York," he wrote with complete candor. "After our cases were checked and I passed through the gate, I was called back and made to try it over the second time." The eighty-two-year-old traveler would likely have let the incident pass without comment were it not that after going through the procedure twice, he was stopped again. The watch he was wearing had set off the metal detection device at the final check point.

Once the hassle with customs was over, things took on a rosier hue. The Jacobsens drove their guests to the mission home, where a warm meal and relaxed conversation awaited them. President Smith was obviously proud of this niece and her husband. Three years after this visit in New York, Florence Smith Jacobsen would be called as the general president of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association and would serve in that position until November 1972, four months after President Joseph Fielding Smith's death. Thus, during the entire period of his presidency, his brother Willard's daughter would lead all of the young women of the Church.

Back in Salt Lake City, President Smith resumed his headquarters duties, but not for long. After participating in the October 1958 General Conference, he began preparing for a trip into the Pacific. By mid November, everything was ready. On Saturday evening, the 15th, he and Jessie were driven to the Salt Lake City Airport over streets filled with slush from a mid-autumn storm that had deposited several inches of snow on the valley during the day. The conditions at the airport were good, however, with the runways cleared of the slush and with sufficient visibility to enable their plane to San Francisco to land and take off. They were met at the San Francisco International Airport by J. Leonard Love, president of the Northern California Mission, who drove them to the mission home. Here they spent the night. "We had a very pleasant visit at the home," noted the apostle. The Loves were friends of long standing. Trading on that friendship, Leonard Love had persuaded Elder Smith in the mid thirties to dedicate the Yalecrest Ward chapel in the Bonneville Stake, where he then served as bishop. A memento of that occasion, a large Bible autographed by Joseph Fielding Smith, had graced the Yalecrest Ward pulpit ever since then. This and other shared experiences had bound these couples together, providing grist for a long, enjoyable conversation—perhaps too long for the eighty-two-year-old apostle, who was scheduled to leave early the next morning for a flight to Honolulu. However, this flight was delayed and rescheduled for a midafternoon departure, which made it possible for the Smiths to attend Sunday School in San Francisco with President and Sister Love. After a light lunch at the mission home, Elder and Sister Smith were driven to the San Francisco Airport, where they boarded their plane for Hawaii.

Waiting for them at Honolulu was Elder Smith's nephew Joseph F. Smith, the son of Hyrum M. Smith, who had served briefly during the 1940s as Patriarch to the Church. Illness had necessitated his release. Afterward, he had moved to Hawaii, where he had regained his health. At the time of his uncle's visit in November 1958, he was on the faculty at the University of Hawaii. Following the unexpected death of his brother Hyrum in 1918, Joseph Fielding Smith had assumed a role of surrogate father to Hyrum's children, including this son, Joseph F. For this reason, the apostle enjoyed spending the night at his nephew's home and accompanying him to the temple at Laie on Monday. This afforded a welcome opportunity to visit and to catch up on family news.

Elder Smith and Jessie were taken to the Honolulu Airport Monday evening to catch their plane to Auckland, New Zealand. Since Brother Jensen of the Genealogical Society was to accompany them, the others in the party left the travelers at the departure gate, assuming they would leave on time. But, because of unforeseen delays, they waited in the airport for several hours, finally leaving Honolulu at 3:30 the next morning. They arrived in Auckland, New Zealand, November 19 at 8:45 p.m. and were met by the mission president, Heber Simpson, and his wife, Lily.

What followed that night signaled the kind of schedule the Smiths could expect during the three months they would remain in New Zealand and Australia. President Simpson stopped long enough at the mission home to leave the visitors' bags and to let them freshen up before driving them to the chapel. There, according to President Smith, "the Maori Saints met us with their usual Maori welcome." Although he had heard reports about the outgoing exuberance of these saints, they had scarcely prepared him for what he found here in Auckland. The vigor and enthusiasm of their response was like a tonic to the apostle, who should have been exhausted after the long trip with its unscheduled delays. But he spoke to them at some length, and Jessie delighted them with a song. It was after midnight when they retired.

The travelers remained in New Zealand a week, holding a series of meetings with the missionaries and members, before flying to Sydney, Australia. They would spend a month in "the land down under," following the typical pattern of a mission tour. After holding the customary meetings in Sydney, interspersed with courtesy visits to local dignitaries and stops at places of historic or cultural interest, the Smiths traveled in turn to Brisbane, Canberra, Melbourne, and Adelaide. All along the way, the President of the Twelve was greeted with awe by the members, who, in the isolation of this vast land, seldom saw a General Authority of the Church, let alone one of such high rank. And President Smith gained a new appreciation of Australia's vastness when, after leaving Adelaide, his party headed west toward faraway Perth. Along the way, they crossed the famous Nullarbor Plain, whose descriptive Latin name meaning "no tree" suggests the barren nature of the terrain.

President and Sister Smith returned to Auckland in late December and took a breather for several days, during which they celebrated Christmas and New Year's Day at the mission home and laid their plans for an extensive tour of New Zealand that would occupy them for the next five weeks. It was no picnic, especially for a man who was pushing eighty-three. Traveling by automobile and by air, the president of the Twelve and his wife were taken into most communities in New Zealand where there were members or missionaries. Often they stayed in the homes of the Saints, where the facilities were usually not what they were accustomed to. With a different bed almost every night, a diet that was often inadequate, and a schedule that would have been considered hectic by a man half his age, Joseph Fielding Smith went willingly to every place the mission president had scheduled a meeting—or rather, meetings. "District meetings all day," he wrote on Sun-day, January 11, while in Hastings. "Auxiliary, genealogical, public. I spoke at each. Jessie sang. We have colds contracted several days ago." The next day they drove to Nuhaka, holding a general meeting at night. "We (all four) stayed at the home of Sister Solomon, whose husband has not been baptized," explained the diarist. "I was presented with a small clock in a shell—very beautiful." On Tuesday the 13th, they "drove over winding mountain roads to Gisbourne." There they stayed at the home of an Elder M. Poulson, a former missionary, who had married a Maori wife. "Meeting at night," reported Elder Smith, "entertainment followed until midnight. Our nights are usually very late following meetings." The next day, the travelers flew to Wellington, where they spent a day at the mission home writing letters and regrouping before traveling by automobile during the following several days to Palmerton, Wangari, Moksu, Waitangi, Kaikohe, and Waimaku. At this last place, a late meeting was held after supper. "No conveniences," noted the apostle. This was not said by way of complaint or criticism, as Elder Smith was always grateful for the "wonderful kindness of the people." And he was amazed by their generosity, for almost everywhere he and Jessie stayed, their hosts showered them with gifts. "Had a wonderful reception at night," he wrote on January 27 while at Tauranga, "and received gifts, or tokens of remembrance." One of these was a carved cane, which President Smith prized. The last meeting of the mission tour was held at Otorahanga on Friday, January 30. "Left in rain; got bogged; had difficulty in getting out," the apostle recorded succinctly. With that, the party returned to Auckland, where a stake conference was held on Saturday, January 31, and Sunday, February 1.

After this conference, only one week of the South Pacific tour remained. Except for a meeting with the mission office staff and a trip to Hamilton, where President Smith spoke to the student body of the college, it was a period of relaxed, low-key activity, devoid of meetings and pressure. Monday was devoted to letter writing, and that night the Smiths attended the movie South Pacific with their hosts, President and Sister Simpson. "Did some pressing and laundry work," the apostle recorded on Tuesday. "The trips through New Zealand have been very hard on our clothes."

On Thursday, Elder Smith and Jessie went to the airport to meet Belle S. Spafford and a traveling companion who were visiting New Zealand and other South Pacific areas in the interests of the Relief Society. Most of Friday was spent trying to straighten out a kink in their travel plans. With that problem solved, the travelers boarded their ship, the S.S. Monterey, on Saturday afternoon, February 7, 1959. "Reception by Maori members on ship and greetings," Joseph noted appreciatively. "Wonderful reception."

With intervening stops at Suva and Pago Pago, it was a nine-day voyage to Honolulu. At both ports, President Smith went ashore, where he spoke to the missionaries and Saints. And at Pago Pago, he gave blessings to twelve people who pleaded for them. He never refused those who came for blessings of comfort and healing.

The Monterey was buffeted by tropical storms the first six days of the voyage. The weather was so foul at Pago Pago that the ship's captain refused to take her out at noon Wednesday, the scheduled time of departure. Instead, she sailed early Thursday morning, February 12. "Rough sea all day," wrote Elder Smith on that day. "Rain. Spent most of the day quietly." In the evening, Jessie responded to a request to conduct the community singing aboard ship. She also sang a solo, "Such Beautiful Things." When the one in charge said that it was the best performance they had ever had, Jessie's wholly objective husband reported, "I think it was!" For her efforts, Jessie was rewarded with an eight-day desk clock.

There can be little doubt that President Smith's life was prolonged and made happy by the energy and the enthusiasm of Jessie Evans Smith. Her attitude was perpetually optimistic and sunny. She had a bright, genuine smile and an infectious, deep-throated laugh that had a musical quality to it. She undoubtedly had her share of disappointments and setbacks and experienced times of sadness. But her music was like a talisman that could dispel gloom or despondency. A song sung in her deep contralto voice, or a number played on the piano, or an exuberant leading of others in song could lift her and those around her into a new mood of happy thought and reflection. And, as President Smith's entry aboard the Monterey implies, no one was more appreciative of Jessie's talent than was he. Repeatedly over the years, the apostle expressed the feeling that the Lord had "led" him to this unusual woman and that it was "intended" that she should be his wife.

With the Smiths aboard the Monterey was a neighbor from Salt Lake City, Elder Robert Evans, who had completed his mission and was returning home. On their first Sunday after leaving Auckland, the three of them met alone for prayer and worship. The second Sunday, they joined in the nondenominational service held on board, where, on request, Jessie sang "If Christ Should Come Tomorrow." Joseph noted ruefully that the implications of the song "evidently had no effect on the congregation." This remark reflected his annoyance at a condition he found on the ship. "Most of the women smoking cigarettes, and most of the men cigars or cigarettes," he wrote disapprovingly. "All of them with few exceptions, drinking in the liquor room between time. Both men and women running around with no more clothes on than nature demands. Gambling on dice, horse racing or bingo is the only sport—and the ship always wins." Because of his outspoken tendencies, there can be little doubt that if the eighty-two-year-old apostle had been invited to speak at the service, the audience would have heard a never-to-be-forgotten sermon on repentance.

Waiting to greet the travelers at the pier in Pearl Harbor was a group of members, bearing leis and singing the customary Hawaiian greeting song. Among the well-wishers were President Harry S. Brooks and President Jay Quealy. That evening, the Smiths were guests at a dinner hosted by President and Sister Quealy and attended by a group of the stalwarts in the local Mormon community, including the Clissolds, the Brooks, and the Woolleys. The next morning, Wednesday, February 18, the visitors attended a devotional at the Church College in Laie, where Elder Smith spoke and Jessie sang. And that afternoon, having had their fill of shipboard travel, the couple flew home to Salt Lake City, where they were met by members of their family.

Soon after returning from this extended tour, President Smith began to plot a trip into South and Central America, an area he had never visited. A few years before, in 1954, President David O. McKay had stopped briefly in Latin America in returning from a trip to South Africa. He had met with members and missionaries in Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina; had flown across the Andes to Santiago, Chile, where there were no missionaries and only two known members of the Church; and had touched down in Peru, Panama, and Guatemala before returning to Salt Lake City. He told reporters on arriving home: "There is one definite observation I would like to make, and that is the need of more cordial relations between the United States and South American Republics. The North American attitude of superiority engenders ill will throughout these southern republics and should be changed if we are to bring about a better and more cordial spirit of cooperation." (Church News, February 1954.) Toward this end, it was decided in 1960 that the president of the Twelve would make an extended tour of Latin America, visiting the six missions that then existed there—the Brazil North and South, Uruguay, Argentine, Andes, and Central America missions. This historic trip was to take three months. And the vast area to be covered, the inadequate transportation in some remote areas, and the danger of disease or infection in a strange environment made it clear that it would be strenuous.

However, these and other negative factors had no deterring effect on President Smith. The eighty-four-year-old apostle planned his itinerary with the enthusiasm of a young man.

The trip was historic because no General Authority had ever covered as large an area in Latin America over such a long period of time as was now projected for President Smith. In the 1850s, Elder Parley P. Pratt of the Twelve had traveled to Valparaiso, Chile, where he spent several months. Then, in 1925, Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the Twelve visited Argentina with Elders Rulon S. Wells and Rey L. Pratt of the First Council of the Seventy, dedicating South America for the preaching of the gospel in December of that year. And we have already noted the brief visit President David O. McKay made in 1954. Now, however, the president of the Twelve, who was the chairman of the missionary committee of the Church, was to travel extensively in many countries of Latin America, visiting and instructing the missionaries and preaching the gospel to members and nonmembers alike as the opportunity arose. It was an auspicious occasion, therefore, when, on October 13, 1960, members of his family and associates from Church headquarters gathered at the Salt Lake City Airport to wish President Smith bon voyage. Jessie and Elder A. Theodore Tuttle of the First Council of the Seventy were his traveling companions. At New York City, they boarded a ship for Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Unlike many voyages on the Atlantic, often noted for its turbulence, the ten-day cruise to Rio was, according to Jessie, "as smooth as if we were riding in the air." Indeed, she said it was necessary to go on deck to see if the ship was moving. At Rio, the travelers were met by W. Grant Bangerter, president of the Brazil mission, which was headquartered inland at So Paulo. Fluent in Portuguese, the language of Brazil, President Bangerter, who would later become a General Authority of the Church, was a Church veteran in Brazil, having served there as a young missionary twenty years before. In those early days, many missionaries from the United States went to Brazil to work among the German-speaking people who had migrated there and had settled in communities in the south like Joinville, which had the appearance of a German village transplanted from the fatherland. Later, missionaries began to proselyte among those who spoke Portuguese so that in So Paulo, President Smith found strong branches, led mostly by Brazilians, where only Portuguese was spoken. A few years before the apostle arrived in Brazil, an aggressive proselyting effort had reaped a good harvest of strong, dedicated converts who would form the nucleus of the stake that would be organized in So Paulo in 1966, the first stake in all of South America. Chief among these converts were Helio da Rocha Camargo, Walter Queroz, and Saul Messias, who were studying for the protestant ministry at the time of their conversion, and all of whom would later become stake presidents and mission presidents. Helio Camargo, of course, later became the first native Brazilian to serve as a General Authority of the Church.

With President Bangerter and his wife, Geraldine, the three visitors held many meetings in the Brazil mission, which included the vast area north of So Paulo. The pattern established there would be followed in all of the other missions to be visited during the tour. President Smith, Elder Tuttle, and the mission president and his wife did all the preaching, while Jessie sang. Occasionally she would sing a song in the native language, which was always appreciated by the Saints. Since President Smith and Elder Tuttle spoke only English, they had to rely on translators in the general meetings, which significantly limited the scope of their teaching. However, the core of President Smith's teachings throughout the tour were the same as the ones he had emphasized from the beginning of his ministry. He admonished his listeners to learn their duties as Church members by studying the scriptures and to obey the principles they contained. He also urged them to become perfect through persistent effort, day by day.

Interspersed with the public meetings were meetings with the missionaries. Here the brethren were not limited in their ability to communicate since the missionaries spoke English. In these meetings, President Smith usually focused on the spiritual and mental preparation for effective missionary work through prayer and diligent study, while Elder Tuttle stressed the "how to" aspects of the work. Teaching in tandem in this way, they made an effective team.

Leaving the Bangerters, the visitors traveled to Curitiba, Brazil, where they joined Asael T. Sorensen, president of the Brazil South mission, and his wife. Here the pattern set in So Paulo was repeated. On the coast, they visited the twin cities of Santos and So Vicente, the latter, which was settled in 1532, being the second oldest European settlement in Brazil. The oldest is Olinda in the north, settled by the Portuguese in 1530. Large and modern cities such as these two and So Paulo and Rio de Janeiro brought home to the visitors the fact that the European influence here predated that in New England by seventy-five years, a fact not understood by most North Americans. It was an understanding of this fact, as much as anything else, that radically altered the perceptions of LDS leaders about the growth potential for the Church in Brazil.

From Southern Brazil, the party traveled to Montevideo, Uruguay, where Arthur M. Jensen presided over the Uruguay-Paraguay Mission. Here the shift in language to Spanish made little difference to the brethren from Salt Lake City because they didn't speak or understand it, either. From this point to the end of the tour, the native language would be Spanish. Crossing the La Plata River, which at its mouth is so wide as to make it look almost like part of the ocean, the party traveled to Buenos Aires, Argentina. There Lorin N. Pace presided over the Argentine Mission. As already indicated, it was here in Buenos Aires, thirty-five years before, that Elder Melvin J. Ballard had dedicated all of South America for the preaching of the gospel. The seeds planted then had taken root, so that at the time of President Smith's visit in 1960, there were flourishing branches in Buenos Aires and other Argentine cities, many of which President Smith and his party visited.

Crossing the towering Andes by air, the travelers flew to Santiago, Chile, where they were met by J. Vernon Sharp, the president of the Andes Mission, which included Chile and South American countries to the north. In this long, stringlike country, which nestles against the bony spine of the Andes, the visitors found ten small but growing branches with a total membership of about seven hundred. Considering that six years earlier President David O. McKay had found only two members there, Billy Fotheringham and his wife, the growth, while small in numbers, was phenomenal in terms of percentages. And even the numerical growth in the succeeding twenty-six years would be phenomenal, increasing to 169,000 by the end of 1986. The visitors anticipated that growth as they continued their tour. "Elder Tuttle told the Elders assembled for the missionary conference," noted the Church News in its issue of January 7, 1961, "that the church is now in a new period of growth." Referring to Elder Smith's participation in this conference, the article continued: "President Smith told the missionaries that the qualities needed for success in their work includes greater faith, hope, charity, love and temperance. He admonished them to strive to perfect themselves and seek after godliness by being diligent in all of their days."

Before participating in this missionary conference, which was held in Santiago, President Smith and his party had visited the various branches in Chile. This had taken them to Valparaiso, on the Atlantic coast, not far from Santiago. It was here on November 8, 1851, that Elder Parley P. Pratt had arrived with his wife, Phoebe, and Elder Rufus Allen. Elder Pratt, who was the first apostle of this dispensation to set foot on South American soil, remained in Chile only four months. He left because of a lack of funds and the inability to speak Spanish, which, in turn, made it impossible to obtain employment. However, while there he collected various works of history and literature in Spanish, which he expected to use in preparing for the translation of the Book of Mormon and other Church literature. His tragic assassination in 1857 prevented him from bringing that projected work to fruition. Also while there, Elder Pratt's wife gave birth to a child who lived only a short while and who was buried near Via del Mar, thought by some to be the site of the landing of the Lehi group. President Smith and his party were unable to locate the gravesite of the Pratt infant, who was the first child of Latter-day Saints to be buried in South America.

From Santiago, President Smith's party traveled north to Lima, Peru, the headquarters of the Andes Mission. Here they were shepherded around by President Sharp as they visited the several branches and held instruction meetings with the missionaries. While in Peru, the visitors also traveled into Ecuador, where the Church was just gaining a foothold.

The last stop on the tour was in Guatemala. There the Smiths were met by Victor C. Hancock, president of the Central America Mission. There followed the usual round of meetings with members and missionaries before enplaning for home.

Gathered at the Salt Lake City Airport to meet the travelers were five members of the Twelve and other General Authorities, as well as members of President Smith's family. The president of the Twelve, who would be eighty-five-years old within a few months, was as alert and vigorous as his young companion, Elder Tuttle, who was only about half his age. Elder Tuttle "praised President Smith as a 'great traveler' who had energy to spare when other members of the party were tired." (Church News, January 14, 1961.)

President Smith and Jessie were driven to their apartment in the Eagle Gate, where they had lived for almost ten years. Not long after Joseph Fielding became president of the Twelve, he and Jessie decided that their lives would be greatly simplified were they to sell the Douglas Street home and move to an apartment. This would free them from the responsibility of caring for the yard, arranging for snow removal in the winter, and negotiating for the seemingly endless repairs that living in a home entailed. The Eagle Gate was only a half block from President Smith's office and a block and a half from the Tabernacle, which Jessie visited frequently for rehearsals and performances of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir. Their apartment was a spacious unit on the main floor of the Eagle Gate, looking out on Brigham Young's Beehive House and, beyond, on the Church Administration Building and the Salt Lake Temple. This location also put them within easy walking distance of the downtown shopping district, which was especially attractive to Jessie, who enjoyed nothing more than a shopping spree. And she often succeeded in persuading her husband to join her in these outings. Their apartment was filled with choice mementoes of the many trips they had taken together, family pictures and portraits, and many specimens of Aunt Jessie's skill as a quilter and crocheter. It was a comfortable, homey, and happy place that included a large living room, dining room, kitchen, bedroom, and a study for President Smith. There was ample room for Jessie's baby-grand piano in the living room and space for some of the president's choice books and his private papers. And in an upstairs attic were stored some of the priceless artifacts that had belonged to his ancestors, including some personal effects of his grandfather, the Patriarch Hyrum Smith.

The Eagle Gate had good security so that the Smiths could leave for a weekend—or for three months, as when they made their tour of South America—confident that their apartment and its irreplaceable contents would be adequately protected. Aside from the conventional means of security provided by the owner, which was one of the commercial arms of the Church, the multi-storied building was occupied mostly by members of the Church, who were very solicitous and protective of the Eagle Gate's most famous and beloved tenants—Joseph Fielding and Jessie Evans Smith.

Here in the very heart of Salt Lake City, the Smiths lived a very full life. Although President Smith turned eighty-five the July following his return from South America, he was in excellent health and was able to enjoy to the fullest the many attractions the city had to offer. He and Jessie ate out frequently, usually in company with friends or members of their family. During a period of five weeks in the summer of 1962 when President Smith turned eighty-six, he and Jessie sampled the cuisine of restaurants that specialized in Mexican food, Greek food, and seafood. They frequently attended the movies as well as the cultural events staged in the Tabernacle or elsewhere—the symphony and an occasional opera. And President Smith immensely enjoyed television, especially the sporting events. So, on January 1, 1962, he and Jessie "invited Bishop Simpson and Bishop Brown of the Presiding Bishopric to come and watch the football games, principally the Rose Bowl." The apostle added, "While watching the game we also conversed on various subjects. Things were so interesting that the day soon passed and it was evening before the brethren left." It must be remembered, too, that it was during this period that President Smith was very much into flying. This man, now pushing ninety, was as interested in and alert to everything going on about him as a man in his fifties. And yet, the beginning of the most distinctive period of his life still lay eight years in the future. There can be no doubt that his intense enjoyment of every facet of life at such an advanced age traces in large part to the influence of his charming and effervescent wife, Jessie Evans Smith. Life around her was nothing less than fun. And they both enjoyed it to the fullest.

On returning from South America, President Smith's official duties continued at their usual hectic pace. Having gained the reputation of being the Church's supreme gospel scholar, much of his time at headquarters was now occupied in responding to questions put to him. "I answered correspondence which comes in on all questions and from all parts of the earth," he noted on February 15, 1962. Many of these were repetitious and could be answered merely by copying what had been written to previous questioners. Others involved complicated issues that required careful research and draftsmanship. And a few were obviously designed to lead the apostle into a doctrinal trap or a contradictory position with other answers he had given. These were usually handled either by referring the correspondent to the scriptures, or, in extreme cases, by ignoring them. In answering questions on Church history, he often relied on research by members of his staff in the Historical Department. But, in matters of doctrine and scriptural interpretation, he usually relied only on his own knowledge or personal research.

While this activity was time consuming, it constituted only a part of his headquarters duties. His main occupation was to give direction to the brethren of the Twelve, as well as the Seventy and the Presiding Bishopric, insofar as their work involved ecclesiastical assignments. As the Church expanded internationally, President Smith was hard put to provide General Authority coverage for stake conferences. "The First Presidency have engaged so many of the Brethren in foreign duties," he noted on May 5, 1962, "that it is very difficult to meet all conferences and many stakes have to go without visitors." The problem was solved in a few instances by combining the Saturday priesthood leadership meetings of two adjoining stakes and allowing the General Authority to alternate in attending separate general sessions on Sunday.

There were aspects of the international development of the Church that troubled President Smith. A chief one was financial. "Attended the expenditures committee," he noted on June 12, 1962. "We are spending great sums, buying prospective sites for meeting places in foreign lands as well as at home. I wonder where all the money will come from." Later, when expressing the same concern, he concluded that the expenditures committee . . . is well named." At the same time, he expressed mild concern about the de-emphasis on the concept of gathering to the land of America the thrust for international growth had produced. In the years that followed, his thinking on this subject underwent a gradual change toward the idea that the concept also entailed a gathering to spiritual Zion, which could be anyplace in the world where stakes of Zion had been established. Thus, it was during his prophetic tenure that the first international area conference was held in Manchester, England, whose main focus was to emphasize that the members of the Church in the British Isles should remain in their own lands, gathering to the stakes that had been or would be created there.

It was during this year that the Smiths decided to dispose of their Millcreek cabin, which had become an onerous burden, not a joy as in the past. It had been vandalized several times, and the Forest Service, which owned the underlying land, had imposed more restrictions. Also, the municipal government had increased its service fees. Moreover, the Smiths were able to use the facility no more than two weeks of the year. So, they sold it, but not without feelings of ambivalence due to the enjoyment it had given them over the years. So, during the recess this year, instead of going up Mill Creek Canyon for diversion, they twice traveled out of state. In early July, with Jessie at the wheel of their new Rambler, they drove to Jacob Lake, located on the Kaibab Forest in northern Arizona. "This is a very peaceful, restful place," the apostle noted on July 9. The four days they spent there amid the pines were wholly unstructured. They read quietly, wrote in their journals, visited, and took occasional walks. They also befriended the young Latter-day Saint students who worked at the lodge to earn money for the coming school year. "At night," Elder Smith noted the day after their arrival, "we met with the young people in their MIA session, and I occupied most of the time instructing them." The visitors were touched when, at their departure, the young people presented them with "a very excellent cake" they had baked specially for them.

Later in the month, the Smiths traveled alone to Idaho, where they spent four days near Mack's Inn at a cabin owned by their son-in-law Hoyt Brewster. Here their daily regimen was much the same as at Jacob Lake, except that no one else was nearby as the cabin was in a secluded area.

Such interludes of peace and quiet reflection, free from the demands of their tightly organized schedules, provided a much-needed break in their routine. Back in Salt Lake City, the Smiths attended the finals of the Church-wide softball tournament, where Joseph distributed awards to the finalists and the key players.

Judged by any standard, President Smith qualifies as one of the most extraordinary travelers of his time. Aside from his extensive international travels, he made thousand of trips over the years in the United States by plane, train, automobile, and, in the early days, by horse-drawn vehicles. Consider a four-day trip he made in late September 1962 to attend a stake conference in Snowflake, Arizona, a remote Mormon colony almost seven hundred miles from Salt Lake City. Traveling by automobile, he and Jessie arrived shortly after noon the second day. Pausing only long enough to deposit their bags and to freshen up, the eighty-six-year-old apostle immediately commenced a series of meetings that occupied all Saturday afternoon. Late in the evening, the Smiths were driven in "heavy rain and darkness" to Clay Springs, where the president dedicated a new chapel. "We returned to Snowflake in rain and mud," he reported, ending his terse entry with "all well." The following day, Sunday, after two long general sessions where he was the main speaker in both, he set apart several officers from the Snowflake Stake, then did the same for officers from the Flagstaff Stake who had driven to Snowflake for this purpose. Finally, in late afternoon, they left for home, driving until dark overtook them at an Indian trading post on the Navajo Reservation, where they spent the night. They covered the last five hundred miles on Monday. On Tuesday morning, President Smith was in his office shortly after 6:00 a.m. to clean his desk before a series of meetings that started at 7:00 a.m.

Shortly after returning from Snowflake, he and Jessie had what was for them a novel experience, which he described in this diary entry of September 27, 1962. "I returned home to prepare with Jessie for a television broadcast over channel 7, our subject dealing with the writings and philosophy of Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. The broadcast commenced with a piano solo by Jessie. We then discussed the philosophy of Emerson and Thoreau, dealing [mainly] with the principle of compensation."'

At the October General Conference, N. Eldon Tanner was called to fill the vacancy in the Twelve caused by the death of George Q. Morris, who had died in April. Elder Tanner had served for two years as an assistant to the Twelve prior to this last call. And the following year, in October, he would be called as a counselor to President David O. McKay in the First Presidency, illustrating again the shifting nature of primacy among the hierarchy of the Mormon Church. From October 1963, when he became a member of the First Presidency, until 1970, N. Eldon Tanner had supervisory responsibilities over President Smith, even though he had had General Authority status only since 1960. Then, at the death of President McKay, Brother Tanner again became subordinate to President Smith, serving as his second counselor.

At the time of the call of Elder Tanner to the Twelve, there were other members of that quorum who had been called after Joseph Fielding Smith became its president—Marion G. Romney, LeGrand Richards, Richard L. Evans, Howard W. Hunter, and Gordon B. Hinckley. In addition, Adam S. Bennion and George Q. Morris had been called afterward but had passed away before Elder Tanner joined the quorum. Moreover, Hugh B. Brown had also been called afterward, but at the time of Elder Tanner's call he was serving as a member of the First Presidency. This means, of course, that during a period of only eleven years, there had been nine changes in the membership of the Twelve, more changes than during any comparable period of Church history. Yet President Smith took these many changes in stride, patiently giving counsel and training to the new brethren as they joined the other apostles. By contrast, during the seven years between 1963 and 1970, there were no changes in the personnel of the Twelve.

There was a year's hiatus after the October 1962 General Conference before President Smith decided on another international tour. This one would take him to Australia again. Except for his short trip to Manchester, England, in 1971, it was to be his last. Undoubtedly a strong inducement for him and Jessie to make this trip was the presence in Melbourne, Australia, of Bruce and Amelia, as Elder McConkie presided over the Southern Australia Mission. They timed their departure on November 20, 1963, to coincide with the refulgence of spring in the southern hemisphere. Two days before leaving, Elder Smith went to the LDS Hospital to visit President David O. McKay, who had been "confined" for several days. "I found him cheerful," noted the President of the Twelve, "and was informed that he was to return to his home soon." President McKay's confinement resulted from a mild stroke he had suffered. This and other ailments would, within two years, bring about a historic change in the First Presidency.

The travelers changed planes at the San Francisco International Airport for the long flight to Australia. With an intermediate stop in Honolulu, they arrived at Sydney on the 21st. Waiting to meet them at Sydney was the mission president, Morgan Coombs, who took them immediately to the mission home. There they spent a relaxed day adjusting their internal time clocks and preparing for the coming weekend. They were met here by President Harry Brooks, who had been assigned to participate with President Smith in stake conferences scheduled in Brisbane, Sydney, and Melbourne. On Saturday the 23rd, the three of them flew to Brisbane, where, over the weekend, they held a stake conference with the usual crowded schedule of meetings, interviews, and settings apart. Elder Brooks gave special instruction about stake missionary work and home teaching while President Smith was the main speaker at all meetings, always delivering solid doctrinal sermons. Jessie sang, to the delight of all. She was also called on to speak briefly sometimes, peppering her remarks with amusing anecdotes about herself and President Smith, which, as always, had the tendency to soften the image projected by her husband's somewhat stern and somber pulpit presence. That transition always became complete when she would playfully persuade him to join her in one of their famous "do its."

The following day was spent in all-day missionary report and testimony meetings, where the apostle gave wise counsel to the missionaries and, as was his custom, responded to their doctrinal and historical questions. That night, he counseled the stake leaders.

Returning to Sydney on Tuesday, the travelers spent the rest of the week there, enjoying a Thanksgiving Day feast on Thursday with the Coombs family and holding meetings with the missionaries and with local leaders. A stake conference was held in Sydney over the following weekend.

On Monday, December 2, the travelers arrived in Melbourne, where they were met enthusiastically by the McConkies and their children. Here President and Sister Smith settled in for ten delightful days with the members of their family. Of course, there were intermittent meetings with missionaries and local leaders, and over the weekend a stake conference was held. But this left time for visiting in order to post each other on the news of the family. The apostle also spent leisure hours during several days browsing in the McConkie library, where he took a special interest in a volume on Australian history. Though nearing ninety, Joseph Fielding Smith retained an avid curiosity toward books in general, although a few, chiefly the scriptures and history, took precedence with him.

The Smiths flew out of Melbourne on Thursday evening, December 12, and, with an overnight stop in Honolulu where they cleared customs, arrived in Salt Lake City Saturday morning. There they were met by their son Douglas and the Church's travel agent, Franklin J. Murdock, and were driven to their apartment in the Eagle Gate. The following summer, shortly before President Smith's eighty-eighth birthday, he was privileged to ordain this son a Bishop to preside over the Bonneville Ward in the Bonneville Stake, where the apostle had lived for so long. As he had never served as a bishop himself and since Douglas was the first of his sons to serve in that capacity, the father was particularly interested in his son's service there and never missed an opportunity to attend meetings in the Bonneville Ward.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
