Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Twenty-three

Counselor in the First Presidency

Joseph Fielding Smith's extensive travels as president Jof the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles had given him Jan insight into the international character of the JChurch second to none, not excluding President David O. McKay. President McKay, of course, had spent an entire year in the early 1920s traveling around the world with Hugh J. Cannon, visiting Church members and units in many lands. At the time, however, the Church had gained no real foothold in the international areas, except in Great Britain and Europe. Even there, however, because of the concept of gathering to the United States, which had siphoned off large numbers of the more able and dedicated members, the Church units were weak, often being led by missionaries from the United States and housed, for the most part, in rented, substandard buildings. Also, President McKay had traveled extensively to many parts of the world after becoming the president of the Church. Most often, however, these were essentially ceremonial visits for the purpose of dedicating temples or chapels or performing other symbolic acts. On the other hand, President Smith's visits to Europe, the Far East, the Pacific, and South America were lengthy tours, occupying weeks or months during which he held numerous meetings in small branches, visited the members in their homes, and counseled and instructed missionaries about their work.

Viewing these tours in retrospect, they seem almost to have been arranged deliberately to help prepare Elder Smith for the time when he would become president of the Church. An event that occurred in 1965 could also be interpreted in this way. On October 29 of that year, Joseph Fielding Smith was set apart as a third counselor to President David O. McKay, whose incumbent counselors were Hugh B. Brown and N. Eldon Tanner. At the same time, Thorpe B. Isaacson was set apart as a fourth counselor to the Prophet. In the summer of 1963, President McKay had suffered an accident at his Huntsville farm that had triggered a series of health problems. As he was preparing to mount his favorite horse, Sonny Boy, something spooked the animal, causing it to bolt and run. The Prophet clung to the reins and was dragged for some distance before the horse was brought to a halt. Not long afterward, President McKay suffered a stroke. These circumstances required that he be hospitalized in November 1963, with a slight impairment of speech and some paralysis in his legs. During the two years that followed, prior to the call of the additional counselors, the Prophet's condition worsened. This, added to the increasing burden of the First Presidency as the Church continued its rapid growth, dictated the need for President McKay to seek additional help.

At the first meeting of the enlarged First Presidency on November 9, 1965, President David O. McKay elaborated on the reasons and the historical precedent for calling the additional counselors: "I welcome you as counselors in the First Presidency," he recorded in his diary on that date, "and acknowledge with hesitancy that I am not so well as I used to be and called you brethren as counselors in the First Presidency to help carry the work. I pray the Lord's blessings to attend us in this quorum of the First Presidency. It is nothing new in the Church. The Prophet Joseph Smith had several counselors; President Brigham Young had seven at one time, I think; and this will constitute the quorum of the First Presidency. I should like to meet regularly with you and to take up matters . . . as the occasion requires."

Because it was decided that President Smith would continue his active roles as president of the Twelve and as Church historian, his duties in the First Presidency were necessarily limited. However, he attended all of the meetings of the First Presidency when he was in Salt Lake City, as also the council meetings held regularly in the temple, where he provided important insights into decisions that needed to be made. He was therefore privy to all official matters pertaining to the Church at the highest levels.

Thorpe B. Isaacson's intended role was to provide assistance in various financial and business matters. Regrettably, his ability to help with the work was destroyed when in early February, 1966, less than four months after his call as a counselor, President Isaacson suffered a massive stroke. Two years after that, in April 1968, Alvin R. Dyer was called as a fifth counselor in the First Presidency to fill the role originally intended for Elder Isaacson.

The four years and three months President Smith served as a counselor in the First Presidency provided important additional training for his ultimate service as president of the Church. Here he gained a perception of the work of the Church he had never had before. Previously, he had seen only bits and pieces of it. But here, at the pinnacle of Church leadership, he was able to see with clarity how the various aspects of the work were fitted together into a consistent, unified whole. The work of the Presiding Bishopric, especially, came into clearer focus for President Smith as he filled this new niche. Previously, his relationship with these brethren had been minimal, consisting chiefly of the few occasions during the year when all the General Authorities were brought together for spiritual refreshment and for the annual meeting of the Council on Disposition of the Tithes. But these meetings provided no real insight into the vast scope of the work of the Presiding Bishopric in temporal affairs. As a member of the First Presidency, however, Elder Smith participated in lengthy, weekly meetings where the Presiding Bishopric reported on every aspect of their work and where policies and procedures designed to govern the temporal affairs of the Church were formulated. This opened up to President Smith a whole new vista of Church mechanisms and functions.

Part of this awakening to the temporal side of the Church also came from President Smith's new exposure to the extensive business holdings of the Church. Over the years, he had served on the board of directors of a few of the corporations owned or controlled by the Church. But he had never before seen the full scope of the Church's involvement in these.

Finally, Elder Smith's elevation to the presiding quorum of the Church brought home the extensive power vested in that quorum, and especially in its presiding officer, the Prophet. Here existed, then, the final earthly authority as to all executive, legislative, or judicial matters affecting the Church in its worldwide operations. And routinely the meetings of the First Presidency entailed the exercise of all these vast and varied powers. So, in a given meeting, the Brethren might at one point exercise their executive authority as they decided matters involving the announcement of policies or procedures previously decided upon. They might then don their legislative hats as they formulated plans for the future. And, finally, they might turn to an appeal from the judgment of a stake disciplinary council and exercise final judicial authority.

During the first months of Elder Smith's service in the First Presidency, most of the meetings were held in the First Presidency's Council Room in the north end of the main floor of the Administration Building at 47 East South Temple in Salt Lake City. While, as indicated, President McKay had suffered some physical impairment as a result of his stroke, he could still move about with assistance. Here the members of the First Presidency would gather around their council table and, with their secretary, Joseph Anderson, taking minutes, handle the matters that had accumulated since they last met. These meetings were held almost daily during the work week. The separate, private offices of President McKay and his counselors Hugh B. Brown, N. Eldon Tanner, and Thorpe B. Isaacson were located in the corners of the main floor of the Administration Building, while President Smith retained his private office on the third floor in the Historical Department. All, however, had ready access to the council room that they shared as a quorum.

As President McKay's physical condition began to deteriorate, it became necessary to hold most of the First Presidency meetings in the Prophet's apartment in the Hotel Utah. The Brethren would walk there from the Church Administration Building next door, carrying in their briefcases any documents to be considered. Sometimes they would travel to Huntsville, Utah, during mild weather to meet in the small bungalow that the McKays had had constructed there.

In addition to attending the meetings of the First Presidency, President Smith participated in other ways in helping to carry on the work of the First Presidency. He followed through on matters relating to the aspects of the work with which he was most familiar—temple and missionary work and matters pertaining to the Historical Department and to the Twelve. He also represented the First Presidency at various ceremonial functions and participated with the others in conducting and speaking at the general conferences. For instance, at the October General Conference in 1966, the year following his call to the First Presidency, Brother Smith was the concluding speaker at the third session and gave the keynote address at the general priesthood meeting. He also conducted the fourth and the final sessions of the conference.

The change in his status effected no change whatsoever in President Smith's focus as a speaker. The Saints who attended the third session Saturday afternoon heard a powerful sermon on the second principle of the gospel. "From the observations that we make as we travel from one place to another," said President Smith in his discourse, "and from what we read in the public press, we are of necessity forced to the conclusion that repentance from sin is extremely essential throughout the world today." (Conference Report, October 1966, p. 60.) From that premise, the speaker, using extensive scriptural references, portrayed mortality as a time of testing, emphasized that redemption from sin comes only through the Savior, and warned of judgments that would fall on the unrepentant. "And thus we might quote indefinitely from the ancient prophets," he said in conclusion, "in relation to the troubles, destructions, wars, and plagues which are to come upon the inhabititants of the earth—yea, even Zion also—unless the people repent." (Ibid., p. 61.) In his keynote address at the general priesthood meeting, President Smith traced the origin and chain of priesthood authority and then gave emphasis to one of his favored themes: priesthood responsibility. "The world today is torn asunder," he said. "Evil is rampant upon the face of the earth. The members of the Church need to be humble and prayerful and diligent. We who have been called to these positions in the priesthood have the responsibility upon our shoulders to teach and direct the members of the Church in righteousness." (Ibid., p. 84.)

The opening address of the October 1966 General Conference was given by President David O. McKay. Because of the weakness in his legs, he was unable to stand at the pulpit unaided. So a tall stool was provided for him, and he sat while delivering the talk. It was the last time he ever spoke in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. His remaining talks this conference were read by his son, Robert McKay. And at all subsequent general conferences until the time of his death, President McKay's talks were read by Robert or someone else. The Prophet's disabilities, of course, imposed heavier burdens upon President Smith and the other counselors.

Four months before the October 1966 General Conference, while President McKay was still fairly mobile, he and President Smith took a trip to Missouri to visit Adam-ondi-Ahman and other historic sites nearby. During sixty years of service as a General Authority, President McKay had never visited these places. In going there for the first time, the Prophet was anxious to have with him the Church historian, who was also his counselor and longtime apostolic associate.

The two old friends, ages ninety-three and and ninety, left the Salt Lake City airport the first week in June 1966. With them were the Prophet's eldest son, David Lawrence McKay, and Elder Alvin R. Dyer, assistant to the Twelve. At Kansas City, the party was met by several local leaders who served as guides and hosts. The visitors were driven to Independence, Missouri, where, before beginning the tour, they were taken to the mission home to freshen up.

The first stop was on River Boulevard in front of a small frame chapel owned by the Hedrikite Church. This is the high point of a sixty-three-acre tract that, in the 1830s, the Prophet Joseph Smith designated as the site for the temple of the New Jerusalem. The visitors then passed the nearby auditorium of the Reorganized Church, east of which is a twenty-three-acre site, owned by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that is part of the temple property.

Crossing the Missouri River, the visitors were driven north to Liberty. Here the party paused to visit the famed Liberty Jail, where, during the winter of 1838-39, the Prophet Joseph Smith, his brother Hyrum, and some of their associates were imprisoned for four months. As the group examined the crude and cramped dungeon, President Smith explained that in 1963, he had dedicated this historic structure and the modern rotunda that encloses it. President Smith also explained that it was in this unlikely place that Hyrum Smith, his grandfather, had first laid eyes on his father, Joseph F. Smith. The infant, who had been born at Far West on November 13, 1838, was soon after brought to the prison by his mother, Mary Fielding Smith, so the father could see and hold him.

The visitors were then driven further north through the pleasant, rolling countryside typical of the area, covered with a blanket of green—trees, hedges, and intermittent corn fields that, in early June, had not yet reached their full growth. Passing through Gallatin, the seat of Daviess County, the party crossed the Grand River, which makes its way through the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and drove upward over an ungraded road to Tower Hill, which overlooks the valley. Here the visitors examined some ruins reported to have been identified by the Prophet Joseph Smith as an ancient prayer altar. Driving down a narrow, winding, unsurfaced road into the valley, the party passed the remains of the old Lyman Wight home, one of the few visible evidences of a Mormon community that had been established there in the 1830s, presided over by bishop pro-tem Vinson Knight. In the valley the visitors had a good view of a bluff area called Spring Hill, where many homes of the Latter-day Saints were built. Also in the valley, President Smith and others rehearsed the extraordinary events that the Prophet Joseph Smith had predicted would occur there in the future.

The visitors then turned southward, traveling to Far West in Caldwell County. Here they found no physical evidence of the thriving Mormon community that had once existed, except the four cornerstones of the old temple site that had been dedicated there. Joseph Fielding pointed out to President McKay the area west of the temple site where his father had been born, as also the approximate location of the old town square where, following their arrest, the Prophet Joseph Smith and Hyrum had been loaded into a wagon for the trip south, where, it was feared, they would be executed.

Because of time limitations, the party was unable to visit other places of historic interest in Missouri. But the trip, short though it was, had been sufficient to provide President McKay with an overview of significant events that had occurred there. This formed the basis for a later decision of the First Presidency to construct commemorative monuments at the Far West temple site and a visitors' center near the temple lot in Independence.

Two years later, President Smith returned to Missouri with several of the General Authorities. At the direction of President McKay, whose deteriorating health made it impossible for him to go there, President Smith first went to Far West, where he dedicated the monuments that had been constructed at the temple site during the two-year interval. These contained excerpts from revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants about Far West and significant events that had taken place there. From there, the party went to Independence, where President Smith broke ground for a visitors' center to be constructed near the temple lot that had been designated by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The day chosen for the groundbreaking had been carefully selected. It was August 3, 1968, the 137th anniversary of the date when the Prophet Joseph Smith first dedicated the area. The printed program for the event contained the following statement made by the Prophet Joseph Smith on August 3, 1831: "I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated unto the Lord for the possession and inheritance for the saints, and for all the faithful servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time, in the name of Jesus Christ, having authority from him." The program also contained a lengthy statement of President Joseph Fielding Smith that alluded to the Prophet's statement and to the apparent concern of some members of the Church about it: "Some of the members of the Church seem to be fearful lest the word of the Lord should fail. Others have tried to convince themselves that the original plan has been changed and that the Lord does not require at our hands this mighty work which has been predicted by the prophets of ancient time." President Smith then assured the audience, "We have not been released from this responsibility, nor shall we be. The word of the Lord will not fail. . . . The release from the building of the temple in 1833 did not . . . cancel the responsibility of building the city and the house of the Lord at some future time. When the Lord is ready for it to be accomplished, he will command his people, and the work will be done."

Because of President McKay's declining health, President Smith performed other ceremonial functions that ordinarily would have been handled by the president of the Church. So, three days after the exercises in Independence, President Smith went to New York, where he represented the First Presidency at the annual Hill Cumorah pageant. It was the first time he had seen this drama, and he was duly impressed. "It was excellent, magnificent," he wrote. "We heard every word, and the lighting was perfect. It brought tears to our eyes."

The participation of the First Presidency in events such as this was an essential part of the work. Because of the wide publicity given to them, they helped focus the attention of the members on themes and doctrines central to the mission of the Church. These are the things of which traditions are made, things that, in a sense take on a life of their own, helping to propel the Church toward its destination.

Behind the scenes, however, away from the view of the public, the First Presidency, day after day, performed the detailed work necessary to maintain the Church in proper order and aimed in the right direction. From the time of his call as a counselor, Elder Smith was intimately involved in the discussions and decisions of the First Presidency that marked the onward progress of the Church. A nagging issue of the day, which heavily influenced Elder Smith's dual roles as a member of the First Presidency and the president of the Twelve, was the restrictions imposed by the war in Viet Nam. A month before Brother Smith became a member of the First Presidency, the Church adopted a missionary quota of two per ward per year in order to comply with the requirements of selective service. This fueled many adjustments in proselyting activities because of reduced numbers of missionaries and increased shepherding concerns as more Latter-day Saints were siphoned off into military service. Steps were taken to obtain more LDS Chaplains, to furnish service personnel with the scriptures and other Church materials, and to instruct local leaders how to prepare young people for the moral challenges of military service. And as casualties mounted in the war, the local Church leaders were instructed in how to provide nurturing care for the wounded and for the families of those who had been killed. President Smith's participation in deciding issues arising out of the Viet Nam War was always colored by his own experiences as a father who had sent sons to war and who had suffered the anguish of losing one of them.

Shortly after Elder Smith's call to the First Presidency, discussions were commenced about organizing a stake in So Paulo, Brazil. It was a matter of first importance, as there were then no stakes in all of South America. President Smith's ideas about this issue were important because of the insights he had gained during his extensive tour of South America a few years before. He had seen the potential of the area, had met the leaders, and was confident that creating a stake would securely anchor the Church there and would provide a stronger foundation for future growth. Once the decision had been made, Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Twelve and Elder Franklin D. Richards, assistant to the Twelve, were assigned to effect the organization of the stake, which took place on May 1, 1966. Soon after, the international outreach of the Church was demonstrated again when the First Presidency approved the creation of a branch in Debnica Kaszub, Poland. This action, which was finalized in October 1966, was of special significance to President Smith as it revived memories of an October twenty-seven years before when he and Jessie sailed home from the Netherlands, the month after Germany invaded Poland. And in March 1967, further evidence of the rapid internationalization of the Church appeared when the First Presidency authorized a unified Church magazine that was to be published in nine different languages.

The general conference that convened the following month, April 1967, was one of historic significance. It marked the one-hundredth anniversary of the completion of the Salt Lake Tabernacle. As President Joseph Fielding Smith rose to conduct the afternoon session on Thursday, April 6, he stood at the pulpit that had been occupied by every president of the Church except Joseph Smith. Brigham Young had spoken there many times, admonishing, encouraging, and cajoling the Saints as they sat upon the building's hard, wooden benches, said in jest to have been deliberately made uncomfortable by Brother Brigham to ensure that his audiences remain awake and attentive. Through the intervening century, this extraordinary structure, with its vaulted dome and its mighty organ, was a constant reminder of the discipline and diligence of the pioneers who had built it in the wilderness during the years of their poverty. Of the General Authorities present on the stand of the Tabernacle at this session, Joseph Fielding Smith was the only living link to Brigham Young. President David O. McKay, of course, was also alive when President Young passed away in August 1877. However, he was fatigued from attending the morning session and so remained in his apartment in the afternoon, watching the proceedings on television.

Among the speakers introduced by President Smith at this session of the conference was Victor L. Brown, second counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, who provided the Saints with further insight into the rapid internationalization of the Church. Bishop Brown noted that several months before, the First Presidency had directed the Presiding Bishopric "to establish a translation, publishing and distribution organization, with the charge that Spanish speaking members of the Church in Mexico, Central America and South America were to receive the literature and materials of the Church in their own language and that they were to receive them at the same time they were received by the members of the Church in the center stakes." (Conference Report, April 1967, p. 35.) The bishop also said that soon after, the Portuguese, Finnish, Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, Dutch, German, French, Italian, Samoan, Tahitian, and Tongan languages had been added to this mandate. He then traced the process by which a vast organization had been put into place to carry out the simple directive of the First Presidency. Without attempting to label it as such, Bishop Brown, by his report, taught the rank and file of the Church an important lesson in the principles of authority, delegation, and accountability. And in the process, he parted the curtain far enough to partially reveal the vast power vested in the First Presidency, the presiding quorum of the Church. This quorum, of which President Smith was a member and over which he would later preside, could, as in this case, in a sentence set in motion a chain of events whose ripple effect would extend around the world and into the indefinite future. Being keenly aware of the vast consequences of their decisions, these men were careful about what they said and did so that a directive like this one, to organize a translation department, would ordinarily be preceded by a series of discussions during which the matter would be carefully analyzed and its impact weighed and calculated. Yet there were times when the Prophet, infused with revelatory light, might speak and act without premeditation or counsel, giving instructions with far-reaching effect. Such was the manner in which the whole system of international proselyting was begun when the Prophet Joseph Smith, without any preliminaries, whispered to Heber C. Kimball in the Kirtland Temple that he should open the door to the preaching of the gospel in England. The consequences of that whispered instruction are well known.

The semi-annual conference in October 1967 marked another centennial event. A hundred years before, Joseph F. Smith was sustained as a member of the Twelve. Joseph Fielding's father had actually been ordained an apostle the year before as the result of an action reminiscent of the instruction Joseph Smith whispered to Heber C. Kimball. Following a meeting of some of the brethren attended by twenty-nine-year-old Joseph F. Smith, President Brigham Young, without prior consultation, was prompted to ordain the young man to the apostleship. The results of that action are also well known. And well known, too, is an action taken at the semi-annual conference in 1967 that illustrates a prophetic initiative based upon consultation and analysis. At this conference the First Presidency called sixty-nine men to serve as regional representatives of the Twelve. The rapid growth of the Church had placed an almost impossible burden of administration and supervision upon the General Authorities. After long deliberation by the First Presidency and the Twelve, this action was taken to help lighten that load. However, since Joseph Fielding Smith continued to serve as president of the Twelve, the action also tended to increase his personal burden, since the activities of these sixty-nine men would be subject to his overall supervision.

The decisions made by the First Presidency, like the call of regional representatives of the Twelve, ordinarily affected only the internal operations of the Church. Occasionally, however, an issue came before that body with implications not only for the Church and its members but also for the general public. Such was the issue of liquor by the drink, which surfaced in Utah in 1968. A group of citizens, spearheaded by local business people and strongly supported by a major Salt Lake City newspaper, had begun campaigning to amend Utah's strict liquor laws to permit the sale of liquor by the drink at licensed restaurants and taverns. Their argument was that the existing laws, which allowed the sale of liquor only by the bottle at state liquor stores, was a major deterrent to tourism and to the scheduling of national conventions in Utah. Because of the moral implications of the issue as far as the Church was concerned and because of fear that a change in the laws would alter the social ambience of the community and increase the likelihood of use of liquor by young people, the First Presidency officially opposed the proposed amendments to the laws in May 1968. At the same time, the Brethren openly authorized priesthood officers and quorums to distribute literature and to circulate petitions on the subject. Aside from his official involvement in this campaign as a member of the First Presidency, President Smith, at a strictly personal level, aggressively opposed the legislation because of a deeply held belief that liquor was one of the scourges of civilization. He attributed many of the sexual sins, against which he had spoken so openly and persistently over the years, to the use of alcohol. And he deplored the loss of health, much marital discord, and the increase in crime and public funding that could be traced to the use of liquor. These were the major considerations that, on this rare occasion, caused President Smith and his brethren to abandon their customary policy against official Church involvement in public issues.

Meanwhile, the First Presidency continued to decide a myriad of issues involving the on-rolling work of the Church. President Smith had more than the customary interest when, in December 1968, approval was given to begin the microfilming of public and private records in both Poland and Korea. These would be added to the mounting accumulation of genealogical records from around the world safely stored in the Church's mountain vault east of Salt Lake City. President Smith's direct involvement in the beginning of microfilming by the Church and his extensive experience in vicarious temple work gave special personal significance to such a decision. The scope of the Church's involvement in gathering and preserving family records had given it international prominence among archivists and genealogists. It was that prominence that caused the First Presidency to authorize the genealogical department to spearhead the organization of a world conference on records that convened in Salt Lake City in August 1969.

Meanwhile, other facets of the work increased the international exposure of the Church. One was the continuing expansion of missionary work, marked by the inauguration of a two-month language training period for missionaries assigned to labor in foreign lands, and by the introduction of Mormon missionaries in Spain in January 1969. Another was the authorization given by the First Presidency for the Tabernacle Choir to sing at the International Exposition in Montreal, Canada, in August 1967. Four months later, on December 17, the choir presented its 2,000th broadcast. By this time, the performances of the choir, with the accompanying narrative and sermonettes by Elder Richard L. Evans, had become such a fixture of Sunday radio and television programming that to many these broadcasts had become their "church." The choir's reputation and public exposure were further enhanced when, in January 1969, it was invited to perform at the inauguration of President Richard M. Nixon. Aside from his official involvement in the activities of the choir, President Smith took a personal interest because of his wife's role as one of its soloists. He never tired of hearing her sing, nor did he ever fail to laud her performances or to express pride in her talent.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
