Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Twenty-four

President of the Church

From the time he was ordained to the apostleship Fand inducted into the Twelve at age thirty-four, FJoseph Fielding Smith knew there was a possibility Fhe might one day become president of the Church. At his ordination on April 7, 1910, his father had given him every key and authority necessary to lead the Church. At the time, however, these were in a suspended state, to become effectual only if he survived to become the senior, living apostle and to be ordained as the president of the Church by the other living apostles. But while this was a possibility from the day of his ordination, the likelihood of it becoming a reality was shrouded with uncertainty. Elder Smith was sufficiently mature then to know that life was tenuous at best and that there was no guarantee he would live long enough for the possibility to become reality. And eight years later when his brother Hyrum died unexpectedly while still a young man, the uncertainty about the length of his own life was undoubtedly increased. However, when he reached age ninety in comparatively good health, and with President David O. McKay in a state of poor health, Joseph Fielding, perhaps for the first time, probably began to face up to the likelihood that he would one day become president of the Church, with all of the unrelenting responsibilities that position entails. In such circumstances, perhaps no one prayed more consistently and fervently for the continued health and well-being of President David O. McKay than did his counselor and longtime friend and associate, Joseph Fielding Smith. And Joseph's prayers were matched by his frequent gestures of love and concern for the ailing Prophet, including impromptu visits when he and Jessie would give the president and his wife little delicacies like some of Jessie's homemade jelly or when President Smith and others would call to give the Prophet priesthood blessings.

The unsought-for moment came on Sunday, January 18, 1970, when President David O. McKay quietly passed away, ending a notable career. At the moment of President McKay's death, Joseph Fielding Smith became, in fact, the head of the Church by reason of his position as president of the Twelve. President Smith was notified immediately of President McKay's death. He went first to the McKay apartment in the Hotel Utah, where he offered his condolences to Emma Ray McKay, the deceased Prophet's widow. Then, with members of his quorum, President Smith cooperated in working with the McKay family to make funeral arrangements.

The Salt Lake Tabernacle was filled to capacity when Joseph Fielding Smith stood at its pulpit to eulogize and pay last respects to his departed friend. Theirs had been a long and pleasant association. During the sixty years they had shared the apostleship, cross words had never been spoken between them. Of course they had had differences of opinion, but these had been expressed courteously, without rancor or bitterness. As a result, a great reservoir of mutual respect and trust had been built up between them that effectively absorbed any lingering residue of controversy.

The vast and complicated network of Church interests, commitments, and responsibilities dictated the need that the office of Church president not be vacant for too long. While, as indicated, President Smith functioned as the de facto president of the Church from the moment of President McKay's death, to have continued that arrangement indefinitely would have created needless procedural complications and delays. Therefore, President Smith and his brethren of the Twelve decided to meet soon after the funeral to formally consider the question of reorganizing the First Presidency. The meeting was held in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple on January 23, 1970. Fourteen apostles were present on that occasion: the twelve members of the Quorum of the Twelve as it existed at the death of President McKay, and elders Hugh B. Brown and N. Eldon Tanner who, at that time, were serving as counselors in the First Presidency. Also present was Joseph Anderson, secretary to the First Presidency.

The agendum for this meeting was short in form but long in duration and importance. The single issue before the Brethren was whether the First Presidency should be reorganized. If that issue were decided in the affirmative, there were procedural steps that would follow automatically. Ample time was taken to discuss the issue and all of its ramifications in detail. Each member of the quorum expressed his views, taking whatever time he wanted. All agreed that the reorganization ought not to be postponed; too many complications would be created by delay. And there were no detriments to going forward. So, after everyone had had his say, Elder Harold B. Lee moved that Joseph Fielding Smith be ordained as the tenth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That motion was seconded by Elder Spencer W. Kimball and carried unanimously. Joseph Fielding Smith then sat on a chair in the center of the room, and the other thirteen apostles surrounded him, each placing his right hand on the head of President Smith and his other hand on the shoulder of the one standing to his left. Elder Lee acted as voice in ordaining President Smith and in setting him apart as the president, Prophet, seer and revelator of the Church. This formality was completed, satisfying the preordained requirements for fully investing President Joseph Fielding Smith with all the keys, powers, and authority necessary to direct the Church.

At this point, President Smith took his place alone in the center chair behind the desk in the west end of the council room. There he announced that after prayerful consideration, he had been impressed to nominate Harold B. Lee as his first counselor and N. Eldon Tanner as his second counselor. On motion duly seconded, these nominations were approved unanimously. The settings apart of the counselors were then performed. Since he was then second in apostolic seniority, Brother Lee was also sustained and set apart as president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. And because Elder Lee's duties in the First Presidency would make it impossible to lead out in administering the affairs of the Twelve, Elder Spencer W. Kimball was sustained and set apart as the acting president of the Twelve.

Certain sensitivities were connected with this reorganization. Elder Hugh B. Brown, who had served faithfully for several years as a counselor to President David O. McKay, was not called into the new First Presidency. Elder Brown, who was then eighty-seven years old, was not in good health. And because President Smith was even older and was not in the vigor of youth, he understandably felt the need for younger and more active counselors. Elder Brown willingly took his place in the Twelve, where he served until the time of his death. While Elder Brown undoubtedly understood the logic and the wisdom of President Smith's decision, he may also have felt some pangs of regret at having to sever associations and prerogatives he had enjoyed for so long. And the failure of President Smith to retain either Elder Alvin R. Dyer or Elder Thorpe B. Isaacson in the First Presidency perhaps involved similar sensitivities, although not in the same degree as with Elder Brown, and especially not with Elder Isaacson, whose physical disabilities had made it impossible for him to serve at all during the last four years of President McKay's tenure.

With these formalities behind them, the new First Presidency were prepared to go forward with their work. Because President Smith and President Tanner had both served in the previous First Presidency, they were fully aware of what had gone on before and about unfulfilled plans that had already been laid. Moreover, President Lee, who by this time had been a member of the Twelve for almost thirty years, understood most aspects of the work and required little time to become fully conversant with all the duties of the First Presidency.

Because President Smith's advanced age made it impossible for him to carry a heavy administrative load, he delegated broadly to his counselors from the outset. He relied most heavily on President Lee on ecclesiastical matters, while President Tanner was looked to for counsel on financial and business matters, a role he had played in the previous First Presidency. President Smith reserved to himself all final decision-making authority, whether in the ecclesiastical or the temporal field.

There was an excellent rapport among the members of the new presiding quorum. During all the time President Harold B. Lee had served in the Twelve, President Smith had had a personal affection for him and an admiration for his doctrinal soundness, administrative ability, and deep spirituality. And while President Tanner had served as a General Authority only a few years, President Smith had seen him function long enough in the First Presidency to have confidence in his ability and trustworthiness.

The day following the temple meeting, President Smith held his first press conference. It convened in the Church Administration Building, where representatives of the news media were in attendance. In addition to local newspeople, representatives of the national wire services were also present because of the widespread influence of the Church, because of the oddity that some people in the twentieth century believed in living prophets, and because the newly ordained prophet was almost ninety-four years old. President Smith was assisted by his counselors, who, with him, responded to a variety of questions about the Church and its policies past and future. Because the new presidency had been in place for such a short time, there was no attempt to sketch the future direction the Church might take, other than to affirm that all would be done in accordance with divine inspiration.

The installation of the new First Presidency entailed numerous staff and physical adjustments at Church headquarters. Over a period of weeks, President Smith moved into the presidential suite that had been occupied by President David O. McKay in the northeast corner of the main floor of the Church Administration Building. This move was tinged with much nostalgia for President Smith as it required that he vacate offices in the Historical Department that he had occupied for many years. We must assume his comfort level in the new quarters was raised considerably when he brought with him a rolltop desk that had been used by his father, assorted knickknacks and mementoes he had accumulated over the years, and a large safe in which were stored many historic documents and sacred artifacts that had been under his exclusive control for many years. This safe was placed in the First Presidency's large vault on the main floor of the Administration Building. Its contents, in the years ahead, would provide grist for numerous unfounded rumors and speculations and, in some instances, would evoke demands that its contents be inventoried and made available for public scrutiny.

Concurrent with President Smith's move, President Harold B. Lee moved from offices upstairs to a suite in the southeast corner of the main floor of the Administration Building formerly occupied by President Hugh B. Brown. President Tanner remained in the suite he had previously occupied across the foyer west of President Lee's office.

President Smith retained the services of his faithful secretary, Ruby Egbert, who had been with him for many years. However, because of his new, more visible role and the increased responsibilities that accompanied it, all agreed President Smith needed an executive secretary who could handle his correspondence, help plan his agenda, assist with routine procedural matters, serve as a buffer against unscheduled intrusions, and be available on call to assist the president in any other way. The person selected for this job was D. Arthur Haycock, who had performed a similar service for President George Albert Smith.

The need for an executive secretary was soon illustrated when President Smith's office was flooded with correspondence from well-wishers, from persons inviting him to speak, or from those offering advice or seeking personal interviews. Of the latter, one of the first persons of international prominence to seek an audience with President Smith was General William C. Westmoreland, U. S. Army chief of staff, who had played a key role in military operations in Viet Nam. He was accompanied to the interview by Major General Maurice L. Watts, Utah adjutant general, and by Elder Marion D. Hanks, assistant to the Twelve, who served on the Church Military Relations Committee and had personal knowledge of conditions in Southeast Asia, having visited LDS service personnel there to counsel and to encourage them. Visitors who sought an audience with the Prophet often wanted to serve some personal or public purpose by having their photograph taken with him and by having the visit publicized in the press. Because the distinguished visitor, and indeed the entire United States military establishment, had had a bad press during the Viet Nam War, General Westmoreland, regardless of the reasons that had prompted him to seek the interview, was undoubtedly pleased to have his picture appear in the newspapers at the side of the benign Prophet.

Not long after the visit of General Westmoreland, President Smith prepared to make his first trip out of Utah in his prophetic role. His purpose was to install Myrthus W. Evans as the new president of the Los Angeles Temple. While it was fortuitous that this was his first official act performed away from Salt Lake City, it was symbolic of the preferential status temples and temple work occupied in President Smith's priorities. Especially as he grew older, the importance of temples loomed larger in President Smith's thinking, coloring his attitudes and his sermons.

Back in Salt Lake City, the Prophet worked with his counselors to complete arrangements for the April General Conference, the keystone of which would be the Solemn Assembly. It was at this meeting, scheduled for April 6, 1970, the 140th anniversary of the organization of the Church, that Joseph Fielding Smith would be presented to the general membership for sustaining vote as tenth president of the Church. And other significant matters would be presented that required careful and prayerful consideration. Chief among these was the action of filling the vacancy in the Twelve caused by the elevation of Elder Harold B. Lee to the First Presidency. This was an action fraught with the most far-reaching consequences and not to be taken lightly. Considering that Joseph Fielding Smith's call to the Twelve was actually the trigger that propelled him into the prophetic office sixty years later was enough to give him serious pause before making the decision, a decision that, through inspiration, only he could make. Of course, in making that decision, he had the assistance of his counselors and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. So he used them in the way they were customarily used in making decisions of such importance. Each of them was asked to submit a list of three names of men whom they considered worthy and able to serve as a member of the Twelve. These individual lists were then consolidated by the counselors into a single list containing fifteen names that was then presented to President Smith. After carefully scanning the list, the Prophet, without hesitation or discussion, identified forty-six-year-old Boyd K. Packer, an assistant to the Twelve, as the one to be called. This prophetic decision did not signal any purely personal preference on the part of President Smith. Still less did it signal any predominant superiority of the one selected over the others on the list. What it did signal was that the Lord had identified the one to be called for reasons best known to Him. The aptitudes, training, and temperament of Elder Packer would be significant as his ministry unfolded, affording opportunity for the full play of his qualities of character in a way that only the Lord could have foreseen.

In preparing for the conference, and in looking ahead to the future leadership needs of the Church, President Smith and his brethren decided to call three additional assistants to the Twelve: Joseph Anderson, longtime secretary to the First Presidency; David B. Haight, prominent California businessman and church and civic leader, who at the time was serving as a special assistant to the president of Brigham Young University; and William H. Bennett, well-known educator. At the same time, it was also decided that elders Thorpe B. Isaacson and Alvin R. Dyer would also be sustained as assistants to the Twelve, positions they had occupied before being called as counselors in the First Presidency. The action with respect to Elder Dyer was wrenching, both for him and for President Smith and his brethren. That Elder Dyer had been ordained an apostle by President McKay seems to have planted in his mind the idea that he might be called to fill the vacancy in the Twelve. And President Smith, being conscious of that, did not want to wound the feelings of one with whom he had served in the First Presidency. Yet personal feelings could not be allowed to enter into the decision. Time, the eternal healer, soon salved over these feelings, leaving no scar.

The sixth general session of the conference held on Monday morning, April 6, 1970, was the Solemn Assembly. President N. Eldon Tanner conducted the session and President Harold B. Lee presented the Prophet and the other General Authorities for sustaining vote, using the elaborate procedure of voting by quorums, priesthood holders, and the general Church membership. Immediately afterward, President Smith was called on to respond. He first expressed humility at the call, gratitude for his many blessings, and appreciation for the inspired leadership of his predecessor, President David O. McKay. The Prophet then expressed what proved to be the keynote of his administration. Said he, "And since we know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them (1 Nephi 3:7), we are most humbly confident that this work will continue to prosper." (Conference Report, April 1970, p. 113.) The Prophet then acknowledged our Savior as the head of the Church, testified of the divinity of the work, and expressed appreciation for his counselors and the other General Authorities. He characterized President Harold B. Lee as "a pillar of truth and righteousness, a true seer who has great spiritual strength and insight and wisdom, and whose knowledge and understanding of the Church and its needs is not surpassed by any man." (Ibid., p. 114.) And he called President N. Eldon Tanner a man "of perfect integrity, of devotion to the truth, who is endowed with that administrative ability and spiritual capacity which enables him to lead and counsel and direct aright." (Ibid.)

His prior ordination as the head of the Church having been sustained by the members at the general conference, President Joseph Fielding Smith was fully and finally prepared to launch his prophetic administration. His work was divided into four general categories: counseling and planning with the inner core of leaders; ceremonial functions and administrative work at Church headquarters; performance of ecclesiastical duties at home and else-where; and speaking at various public functions. As to the latter, the Prophet was in such great demand that it was impossible to accommodate everyone. So, he had to pick and choose among the many invitations he received. The ones he accepted reveal his special interests and concerns. Typical of these was one on May 2 when he addressed some two hundred handicapped seminary students who had gathered in Salt Lake City from Utah and several adjoining states. The following day found him in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, where he spoke to an overflow audience of University of Utah students who had gathered for their annual spring fireside. In early June, he spoke at a banquet that culminated a successful effort to help raise funds to assist a Salt Lake black congregation construct their chapel. And later in the month, he addressed a capacity crowd of MIA leaders assembled in the Salt Lake Tabernacle for the annual June Conference. Ceremonial functions during this period included visits from Felix Schnyder, Swiss ambassador to the United States; Afioga Afoafouvale Misimoa, Samoan secretary general of the South Pacific Commission; and G. Homer Durham, Utah commissioner of education. And behind the scenes, the Prophet counseled with his brethren about many things, some of which resulted in decisions with far-reaching consequences or that indicated new trends of President Smith's administration. In May, for instance, the brethren began to invite staff personnel to attend the first Thursday meeting of all General Authorities where they reported on various aspects of the work. So, on May 7, Antone Romney and Daniel Ludlow were present in the upper room of the temple to report on the status of the correlation program. The following month, Rex Skidmore attended that meeting to report on the teacher training program. Later, Wendell J. Ashton and Hugh W. Pinnock came to discuss a handbook for new bishops, and Doyle Green discussed the plans for the three new Church magazines, the Ensign (which replaced the Improvement Era), the New Era, and the Friend. These plans included the elimination of all advertising from the Church magazines. Still later, staff personnel from the Presiding Bishop's office came to explain new policies and procedures governing the construction of Church buildings.

Coincidental with this effort of the new administration to keep all of the General Authorities up to date on new developments in Church administration was the effort to involve the Quorum of the Twelve more directly in the decision-making process. So, the new First Presidency began to take to the temple meetings on Thursday for information and discussion most matters of importance that had been previously discussed in the meetings of the First Presidency.

Such a matter surfaced in early June when the Brethren discussed at length whether the position of Church commissioner of education should be reinstated. When that issue was decided in the affirmative, there was extended discussion about who should be appointed to fill it. Out of the several able men discussed, Neal A. Maxwell was selected. The call was extended to him at a meeting of the First Presidency on June 19, 1970, where he willingly accepted. Soon after, the new commissioner, with the aid of a search committee and the approval of the Brethren, selected Dallin H. Oaks as the president of Brigham Young University; later, Henry B. Eyring was selected as president of Ricks College.

Another such matter entailed the appointment of several brethren of the Twelve to monitor political actions and attitudes and proposed or existing legislation that could benefit or injure the Church. This group, whose functions extended worldwide, evolved into what was later called the Special Affairs Committee. Its purpose was not to exert political influence or to support or oppose political candidates but merely to assess the political environment and its trends that could affect the Church. Later, when political issues arose that had moral implications about which the Brethren felt impelled to speak out officially, it was this committee that spearheaded the action taken.

In mid-July, President Smith made his first trip outside the United States as president of the Church when he and President Tanner traveled to Mexico City. There special meetings were held with members and missionaries, and courtesy calls were made on government and civic leaders.

This trip coincided with extended discussions and study about having separate Spanish-speaking units of the Church in the United States. There were advocates on both sides of this issue among the Brethren. Some felt that separate units allowed the minority members wider opportunities for participation and growth; others felt that separation tended toward fragmentation and created an undesirable "two church" image. The issue, which became more urgent as the number of minority language groups increased, was ultimately resolved by allowing separation while encouraging consolidation as soon as language and cultural barriers would allow it.

On returning from Mexico, President and Sister Smith went to Laguna Beach for a few days. There they enjoyed the quiet and serenity of the cottage on the bluff overlooking the sea. Back in Salt Lake City, the Prophet was involved with the Brethren in preparing for the planned visit of President Richard Nixon on the evening of July 24. President Nixon had sought the interview as an obvious means of promoting the candidacy of Republican senatorial candidate Laurence J. Burton in his attempt to unseat incumbent Democratic Senator Frank Ted Moss. While President Smith and the other General Authorities were well aware of the political motivations behind the visit, they agreed to it because it was the settled policy to grant audiences to distinguished visitors, regardless of their political affiliations.

There were special sensitivities about the planned visit, which had been widely publicized in advance, because of the unpopularity of President Nixon among a large and vocal minority. That unpopularity had lingered from the days almost twenty-five years before when Mr. Nixon, as a young congressman, had been a key player in the work of the House Unamerican Activities Committee that resulted in the perjury conviction of prominent Democrat Alger Hiss, an accused Communist conspirator. Nor had his reputation among Democrats been enhanced when, in a campaign against Helen Gahagan Douglas, he had persisted in referring to her as "the Pink Lady," implying that she had Communist ties or sympathies. And more recently, his unpopularity had ballooned because of his policies governing the involvement of the United States in the Viet Nam War. The depth of the antagonisms toward the nation's chief executive was illustrated by the threat of a radical element of the opposition party to stage a "nude-in" in front of the Church Administration Building to disrupt the photo opportunity for candidate Burton.

All this created concern among the Brethren because of the possibility that the visit would offend some faithful members who opposed Mr. Nixon politically, as they also opposed the chief beneficiary of his visit, Laurence Burton. There was concern also that the volatile feelings of the radical element could erupt into an embarrassing or even dangerous confrontation at the doorstep of the Church Administration Building.

Against that background the president of the United States arrived at the Salt Lake City Airport the evening of July 24. (Earlier in the day, President Smith had led the traditional Pioneer Day Parade down Main Street.) Among the presidential party were Mrs. Nixon, daughter Tricia, and George Romney, a Latter-day Saint and member of the president's cabinet. David Kennedy, another LDS member of the cabinet, was already in Utah, having participated in the Pioneer Day Parade in the little town of Randolph, Utah, his birthplace. A snafu in protocol created an embarrassing situation at the airport. Because this was intended to be a strictly Republican show, Utah's Democratic governor, Calvin Rampton, was not invited to join the welcoming party at plane side. He went there anyway, either to show respect to the president as Utah's chief executive or to make sure that the Democrats were not completely aced out of the pageantry. Whatever his motivation, the governor almost had to force his way into the receiving line. He was unable, however, to join the motorcade that accompanied President Nixon to the Church Administration Building.

A crowd of several thousand had assembled in front of 47 East South Temple to welcome the distinguished visitor. Awaiting at curb side to greet him was President Smith and his counselors. After the usual formalities, members of Mr. Nixon's staff efficiently arranged everyone on the steps of the building for the event that had brought the president of the United States to Utah. Standing at the side of the First Presidency, President Nixon made a few remarks extolling the virtues of the Latter-day Saints while behind him and a few steps above, in full view of the television and the still cameras, stood candidate Laurence Burton. Those pictures, of course, appeared on all the local television stations and were splashed on the front pages of newspapers across the state. The intended implication, as far as the politicians were concerned, was that such close proximity to the First Presidency meant Church endorsement of Laurence Burton's candidacy. Once that photo-op had taken place, the politicians had obtained what they had come for.

President Smith and his counselors were aware of all this. They were wise men, experienced in the ways of the world and of politicians. And so they treated them all alike, without favor or discrimination. They hoped, however, that the Latter-day Saints would be astute enough to separate common courtesy and diplomacy on their part from opportunism on the part of the politicians.

Leaving the front steps of the Administration Building, the Brethren could see a gaggle of noisy dissenters carrying provocative signs and dressed in nondescript clothing. Ignoring the group, the First Presidency and their guest retired to the council room for a historic meeting. Assembled there were all members of the Twelve (except Elder Howard W. Hunter, who was in Tonga) along with George Romney and David Kennedy, members of President Nixon's cabinet, and members of the First Presidency's staff. This was the first time in the history of the Church that the Council of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve had been briefed in private by a president of the United States. On entering the room, Mr. Nixon circled the council table to shake hands with each one present. These included Elder Ezra Taft Benson, a future president of the Church, with whom the chief executive had been closely associated in Washington, D.C., for eight years while he had served as vice-president and Elder Benson had served as a member of the cabinet of President Dwight D. Eisenhower. Mr. Nixon then took his seat at the head of the council table to the right of President Joseph Fielding Smith. To Mr. Nixon's right sat President Harold B. Lee, another future president of the Church. To President Smith's left sat his counselor, N. Eldon Tanner. And to President Tanner's left sat still another future president of the Church, Elder Spencer W. Kimball. After all were seated, members of the press were allowed to enter the council room for five minutes of picture-taking, following which the room was cleared except for those seated at the table.

For a half hour, the president of the United States gave the governing hierarchy of the Mormon Church an intimate, off-the-record briefing about the major national and international issues facing the nation. This was preceded by several brief comments when the president made complimentary remarks about George Romney and David Kennedy, saying that he had been criticized for giving undue recognition to such a small group as the Latter-day Saints (who then comprised only about 1 percent of the total population). He defended his selections on the ground that they were the ablest and most experienced men in their particular fields. He also lauded the Church and its members, mentioning especially the favorable impression made by the missionaries at the Mormon exhibit at Expo 70 in Tokyo. He said that according to his daughter Julie and her husband, David Eisenhower, the LDS missionaries were the finest American ambassadors in Japan.

The president then launched into an extemporaneous discussion of the major issues facing his administration. On the domestic side, he commented on the nagging problems of housing, pollution, and unemployment. And at the international level, he was most concerned about the Viet Nam War, the turmoil in the Middle East, and the treaty discussions then in progress for the control of nuclear weaponry. In concluding his remarks, Mr. Nixon, who was reared in a Quaker family, said that since entering the White House, he had made a study of the presidents of the United States that revealed that while they came from diverse religious backgrounds, they all had this in common: as they assumed their duties and felt the weight of the burdens resting upon them, they became more prayerful and more dependent upon divine guidance. In response, Mr. Nixon was told that the members of the Church sustained each president of the United States, in turn, regardless of political affiliation, and offered prayers for their support.

After this briefing, President Nixon, surrounded as always by Secret Service personnel who accompanied him everywhere, went immediately to the Salt Palace to see the traditional Pioneer Day Rodeo and to be seen again in public with Laurence Burton, the man whom he sought to usher into the United States Senate. It didn't work. Laurence Burton didn't make it, and Ted Moss was re-elected. The photo-op apparently made no difference, a fact most politicians seemed to know deep down. But this did not deter them from trying for it. And whenever they tried, they succeeded because the Church was as anxious to preserve good relations with all political parties as the parties were to get their candidates elected. So it was a harmless exercise, advantageous to the Church as it helped to create a friendly environment in which the Church could go its own way without undue interference from government. And if ever it became necessary to go to the government for help, as in cases involving foreign visas, it was always good to have friends in court, regardless of their political affiliation. So the unspoken maxim of President Smith and those who had preceded him was to be cordial to politicians without in any way endorsing their actions and policies.

Two issues not discussed by Mr. Nixon were of special concern to President Smith and his Brethren during this period—pornography and crime. Convinced that the increase in pornographic films and literature was a chief cause of a corresponding increase in sexual immorality in the Church, the Brethren had spoken out strongly against it from the pulpit and in editorials in the Deseret News, which was wholly owned by the Church. Because the Deseret News was advertising X-rated films, considered by the Brethren to be pornographic in nature, it was decided in August 1970 to ask the News to discontinue these ads. When the Salt Lake Tribune, which with the Deseret News jointly owned the NAC, the agency that handled the advertising for both papers, learned of this, it threatened to bring legal action. Nevertheless, the Deseret News, through its board of directors, discontinued running these ads. The Brethren also gave substantial monetary support to an organization called Morality in Media, whose purpose was to try to stem the tide of pornography throughout the nation, and otherwise used Church influence and resources toward this end.

In the summer of 1970, President Smith and his Brethren were also troubled by the rising tide of criminal activity in the United States and abroad. This was of special importance to the Church leaders because of threats of physical harm made by apostate groups and because of concern that the perceived wealth of the Church would make General Authorities and other Church representatives traveling abroad special targets for attempts at kidnapping or extortion. These concerns resulted in a significant increase in the number of full-time Church security personnel who gave special attention to the protection of the Prophet. Also, steps were taken to increase security mechanisms and facilities at the Church Administration Building and at the buildings on Temple Square.

In the months following the visit of President Nixon, President Smith was heavily involved in temple matters. In addition to presiding at ground-breaking ceremonies for the Ogden and Provo temples, he traveled to Mesa, Arizona, where he installed C. Bryant Whiting as the new temple president, and to Idaho Falls and St. George, where he installed Cecil E. Hart and Reed Whipple as the new presidents of those temples. Between these events, the Prophet published his twenty-fifth book, Seek Ye Earnestly; traveled to Hawaii, where he presided at ceremonies commemorating the fifteenth anniversary of the Church College of Hawaii; and presided at the 140th Semiannual Conference of the Church. In his keynote address, delivered at the Friday morning session, October 2, President Smith capsulized the essence of his apostolic teaching. "For more than sixty years," he said, "I have preached the gospel in the stakes and missions of the Church—pleading with the Saints to keep the commandments, inviting our Father's other children to accept the truth of salvation which has come to us by revelation in this present dispensation." The Prophet then reiterated the subordinate role he had played during all these years, while defining his concept of that role. "As agents of the Lord," he told the audience, "we are not called or authorized to teach the philosophies of the world or the speculative theories of our scientific age. Our mission is to preach the doctrines of salvation in plainness and simplicity as they are revealed and recorded in the scriptures." (Conference Report, October 1970, p. 5.) Having laid that foundation, President Smith then delivered a solid doctrinal sermon, emphasizing that salvation comes only through the atonement of Christ; explaining the role of Joseph Smith as the prophet of the restoration; tracing the rapid expansion of the work; defining the basic principles of faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost; inviting the Saints to become more actively involved in the work and the nonmembers to come into the fold; and, finally, admonishing all to keep the commandments and endure to the end. In conclusion, the Prophet bore solemn testimony of "the truth and divinity of this great latter-day work," declaring as a matter of knowledge, not belief, that "God lives and that Jesus Christ is his Son." As to the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he added, "I have a perfect knowledge that the Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820 and gave him commandments to usher in the dispensation of the fulness of times."(Ibid., p. 8.)

The day before delivering this keynote address, President Smith and his counselors received a visit from the vice-president of the United States, Spiro Agnew, who was in Utah to promote the senatorial candidacy of Laurence Burton. Significantly, the vice-president, who had gained widespread notoriety by calling reporters "nattering nabobs of negativism," blamed the press and the neglect of parents for the spirit of permissiveness that had crept into society.

That the candidacy of Mr. Burton was in serious trouble is indicated by the fact that later in the month President Richard M. Nixon returned to Utah and on October 31 delivered a campaign speech in his behalf in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. As already indicated, that effort failed too as Mr. Burton was swamped a few days later by the incumbent, Frank Ted Moss.

In successive weeks following the election, the Prophet was the main speaker at the funerals of two prominent Latter-day Saints, Elder Thorpe B. Isaacson and Sister Emma Ray McKay, the widow of President David O. McKay. Neither service was a sad affair. Elder Isaacson's death was a welcome release from the physical imprisonment caused by the massive stroke he had suffered a few years before. And Sister McKay, who had lived a long and productive life, was undoubtedly joyous to be reunited with her husband who had preceded her in death only ten months before.

Not long before the death of Sister McKay, the Church's ninety-four-year-old Prophet, in obvious good health and spirits, was walking with his brethren toward the temple through the underground tunnel from the Administration Building. Noting the briskness of his pace, President N. Eldon Tanner said to him, "You certainly move along in a spry manner, President." Without breaking stride, President Smith answered, "I should—I've had plenty of practice." On another walk to the temple about the same time, the Prophet reminisced about watching the temple being built when he was a boy. He and his friends used to watch the stonecutters at work on Temple Square. And during the summer, they would go to the quarry in the mouth of Little Cottonwood Canyon to watch as the huge, rough stones were loaded onto flat cars for transport to Temple Square. There amid clutter and clanging confusion, the final act was performed by the stonemasons, who, with hammer and chisel, fashioned the unwieldy granite blocks into shape before they were hoisted onto the walls of the temple to be carefully fitted into place. This tedious process of erecting the sacred building stone by stone could not have failed to make an impression on the mind of the sensitive boy, Joseph Fielding Smith, who thereby learned of the slow, incremental means by which extraordinary results are brought to pass.

President Smith had certainly seen this process at work in his own life. Each phase, beginning as a son and brother in his father's large polygamous family and extending through the years of physical toil, missionary service, marriage, fatherhood and work as a student, researcher, author, and apostle, had been fitted together to produce the man who had become the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Through the myriad experiences President Smith had enjoyed during more than ninety-four years of life, there was one that had completely escaped him. He had never had a serious illness, nor had he ever been in a hospital as a patient. That remarkable record ended on December 8, 1970. On that day, a Tuesday, President Smith joined his Brethren for their usual First Presidency meeting, which, as usual, convened promptly at 8:00 a.m. With them that morning were Elder Howard W. Hunter of the Twelve and Elder Theodore M. Burton, assistant to the Twelve. These visitors had been invited to make a presentation about proposed organizational changes affecting the Historical Department, the Genealogical Department, and the Presiding Bishop's office, something in which the Prophet was vitally interested. Suddenly during the presentation, President Smith became pale and nauseous, and, complaining of severe abdominal pains, left the council room with President Harold B. Lee. In his private lavatory, the Prophet was terribly ill, and because of this and the continued abdominal pains, President Lee was prompted to call an ambulance. With the sirens blaring loudly, President Smith was taken to the LDS Hospital, where he was checked into a private room. A series of tests revealed that the pain and nausea were caused by gallstones. After receiving treatment and spending two nights at the hospital, he was back at the office on Thursday the tenth. There he attended the usual meeting with the First Presidency and later with the Twelve in the temple. These occupied him continuously from 8:00 a.m. until 3:45 p.m. When someone expressed concern about the Prophet's going to the hospital, he downplayed it, saying, "Not many people die at age ninety-four."

During these lengthy meetings, it was reported that the Church had been successful in purchasing expensive property in Manhattan across the street from the Lincoln Center. There a combination church-residential-commercial building would be constructed, giving the Church an important presence in New York City. The meetings this day were unusually long because of lengthy discussion about the procedures followed in performing vicarious ordinances in the temples, another subject of special interest and concern to President Smith.

Two days later, all of the General Authorities and regional representatives assembled in the Salt Lake Temple Annex to receive special instruction from the First Presidency. There the Brethren were counseled about their ministries and their personal conduct. They were admonished to seek spiritual direction in speaking to the Saints—not to prepare speeches but to prepare to give speeches. They were also instructed to read the scriptures daily, to pray individually and with their families, and to hold family home evenings regularly. They were warned against false teachers and false prophets and were urged to cultivate the spirit of discernment. And, the brethren were counseled against trying to answer all questions put to them and, wherever possible, to encourage the questioners to seek answers from the scriptures or through the Holy Spirit. This meeting enabled the First Presidency to imbue the principal leaders of the Church with increased spirituality and dedication and to brief them about things they wanted them to emphasize.

A special initiative of the new First Presidency had its beginnings about this time when it was decided to hold area general conferences in different parts of the world. The purpose of these was to emphasize the international character of the Church, to encourage the Saints to remain in their native lands, to train and motivate local leaders, and to expose the members in outlying areas to the General Authorities. Once the general concept had been approved, the Brethren considered where the first such conference would be held. The issue was not difficult to decide; England was chosen because it was there the Church first commenced international proselyting. And Manchester, England, was selected as the host city because of key events in early Church history that had occurred there. There the Millennial Star was initially published, its first issue of May 1840 having on its front page Parley P. Pratt's poem "The Morning Breaks, The Shadows Flee." It was at Carpenters Hall in Manchester in the early 1840s that five special conferences were attended by members from the surrounding areas. And it was there that the nine members of the Twelve, led by Brigham Young, had held the only formal meeting of the Twelve that convened outside the United States. These decisions having been made, Elder Boyd K. Packer of the Twelve, who then had special responsibilities in the British Isles, was sent to Manchester in January 1971 to determine whether suitable physical facilities were available to house the conference.

Meanwhile, significant events were maturing at Church headquarters. In early February, the last piece of structural steel was placed on the new Church Office Building. And about the same time, a major controversy erupted over the plans to raze an old Church building, the tabernacle in Coalville, Utah, to make way for a new stake center. The controversy, which became loud and bitter, pitted the stake leaders, who wanted a new, functional center, against a vocal and determined minority who were anxious to preserve this example of pioneer architecture. President Smith and his Brethren were caught in the crossfire. Operating within established guidelines, the General Authorities gave wide latitude to local leaders in the construction of stake and ward buildings. There had been previous instances where old buildings had been razed to make way for new ones with no issue being raised. So the Brethren were amazed at the furor created at Coalville. They sought to mediate the dispute but failed. The local leaders were adamant in wanting a new building that would help them better serve the members, arguing that the tabernacle had become an expensive, useless museum piece. Their opponents were equally adamant, arguing persuasively that the tabernacle, as a physical symbol of pioneer aspirations, had much to teach the present and future generations. These opponents, knowing that local leaders had satisfied the building guidelines and were authorized to go ahead, obtained a temporary restraining order to prevent them from doing so. When they failed to have the restraining order made permanent, the local leaders immediately ordered the bulldozers to begin the demolition. They made a minor concession to the protesters by having portraits of early Church leaders cut from the ceiling for possible use in a future structure.

It was a no-win situation for everyone. Even the local leaders who won the tug-of-war lost much in the dissension the incident created among their members. And President Smith and his Brethren were troubled by criticism for failure to intervene and order that the tabernacle be preserved. They could have done this, and it was that knowledge which raised the ire and the criticism of those who opposed the demolition. But what the critics did not understand was that intervention by the General Authorities at that stage would have violated a policy of decentralization they had initiated. That policy was reflected again later in the year when the traditional June conference was discontinued in favor of smaller, local conferences and when the first general area conference was held in Manchester, England. The critics had not, therefore, become aware of the powerful thrust toward the internationalization of the Church and the loosening of the reins of control by the General Authorities at Church headquarters.

During the interval between the Coalville Tabernacle incident and the Manchester Area Conference, President Smith addressed the students of five universities or colleges, attended five stake conferences where he was the featured speaker, traveled to Southern California to speak to thirteen thousand young people, dedicated a ward chapel, presided and spoke several times at the April General Conference, traveled to Independence to dedicate a new visitors' center, presided and spoke at the annual mission presidents' seminar, presided and spoke at the MIA June conference, and was grand marshal at the traditional Days of '47 Parade. Amid these ceremonial and shepherding events, the Prophet continued to counsel regularly with his Brethren as they gave overall direction to the work.

A major project that occupied much time was a restructuring of several Church headquarters departments to meet the demands of a rapidly expanding international church. This resulted in the creation of two umbrella organizations, the Department of Internal Communications and the Department of Public Communications. The Brethren were aided in this undertaking by a group of prominent LDS business executives, chiefly Lee Bickmore, chairman of the board of Nabisco; James Conkling, a retired executive from the broadcast industry; and by a management consulting firm from the East. The Department of Internal Communications was structured to facilitate the production, translation, and distribution of Church instructional and other printed materials around the world, while Public Communications was designed to improve the Church's public image, smooth and facilitate relations with the public media, and enable the Brethren to speak and act affirmatively rather than defensively on public issues that affected the Church. Chosen to head these two new departments were J. Thomas Fyans, who later became a General Authority, and Wendell J. Ashton, who later became publisher of the Deseret News.

On a personal level, this was a difficult period for President Smith. The attack of gallstones that had hospitalized him earlier weakened him physically so that his energy level was significantly lowered. On May 18, he suffered another serious attack that was very painful for him and troubling for his Brethren and family. But he stubbornly refused to go to the hospital. Once in a lifetime was enough! He elected to tough it out at home with such medication as the doctors prescribed and he was willing to take. These attacks were apparently sapping his strength, for he began to ride to and from the Thursday temple meetings rather than to walk as he had done routinely over the years.

Soon after this attack, Jessie began to have difficulties with her own health. When summer came, she had to be hospitalized. President Smith spent many hours at her bedside, comforting and encouraging her. July 19, 1971, the Prophet's ninety-fifth birthday, found him at the hospital with Jessie rather than at Liberty Park, where for so many years he had celebrated with his family. Because Jessie was not yet sixty-nine years old and had been in good health, President Smith seemingly had never considered that her illness might be terminal. It therefore came as a great shock to him when she quietly passed away on Tuesday, August 3, 1971. Her funeral was held two days later in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. At age ninety-five, President Smith had laid his third wife to rest and was a widower once again.

At the time of Jessie's passing, plans were being finalized for the trip to Manchester, England, for the area conference. The depth of the Prophet's mourning is suggested by his emphatic statement shortly after the burial that he had no intention of going to England under the circumstances. However, later counsel and reflection convinced him that he had to go. The expectation of the British Saints that the Prophet would be at Manchester had been built to such a high pitch that he really had no alternative. So, in the midst of his anguish at having buried his friend and sweetheart, President Smith began preparing for his last trip abroad.

The Prophet's traveling companions would be his son Douglas, his secretary D. Arthur Haycock, and a cousin, Donald E. Smith, a medical doctor. On Thursday, August 26, 1971, the four of them arrived in Manchester, where they checked into the Picadilly Hotel. That evening, President Smith and his first counselor, President Harold B. Lee, who had traveled separately to England, decided to call together the other General Authorities in a prayer meeting to help them prepare for the conference, which was to begin the next day. A conference room at the hotel was obtained for this purpose. The General Authorities present on this historic occasion, in addition to President Smith and President Lee, were elders Spencer W. Kimball, Marion G. Romney, Richard L. Evans, Howard W. Hunter, Gordon B. Hinckley, Thomas S. Monson, and Boyd K. Packer of the Twelve; Henry D. Taylor and Marion D. Hanks, assistants to the Twelve; Paul H. Dunn and Loren C. Dunn of the First Council of the Seventy; and Victor L. Brown of the Presiding Bishopric. In addition to these General Authorities, W. Jay Eldredge, general president of the YMMIA; Russell M. Nelson, general superintendent of the Sunday School; Joe J. Christensen, associate commissioner of education; D. Arthur Haycock; and the author were present. Because two members of the First Presidency and seven members of the Twelve were in attendance, this constituted an official meeting of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, the first ever held outside the United States. At the request of the Prophet, President Lee conducted the meeting. It consisted of reports about the arrangements for the conference, a review of the agenda for the various meetings, and testimonies of the Brethren. The latter were highly spiritual, dwelling chiefly on the divinity and the restoration of the gospel, the beginnings of the Church in England, the ancestral ties of the Brethren to the British Isles, and the purpose and significance of the area conference.

The general meetings were held in the Bell-Vue Centre, a municipal park in Manchester. Kings Hall, an arena in the park, had been altered as much as possible to simulate the appearance of the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City. Special red chairs had been prepared for the General Authorities, the stand had been carpeted, and technicians had been sent over in advance to set up and check the sound system. Under the direction of regional representative Derek Cuthbert, ushers had been trained and all other physical arrangements had been made to ensure that the conference would proceed as smoothly as the general conferences in Salt Lake City.

President Smith delivered the keynote address at a session in Kings Hall on Friday, August 27, 1971. In it he emphasized that the Church is a worldwide organization, that it had grown to the extent that area general conferences were necessary, and that there was no better place to begin them than in England. He noted that all the presidents of the Church, except the Prophet Joseph Smith, had served as missionaries in the British Isles, and he commented on his own missionary service in England as a young man more than seventy years before. The Prophet also declared that the gospel is for all people, that it contains the answers to the world's pressing problems, and that, if followed, it would lead all people to exaltation. Other speakers at this session included Belle S. Spafford, general president of the Relief Society, and President Smith's niece, Florence S. Jacobsen, the president of the YWMIA. These sisters later participated in a special women's session where local auxiliary leaders were counseled and trained.

Approximately fifteen thousand Latter-day Saints attended this conference from all over Great Britain. It was the first time they had ever gained insight into the collective strength of the Church in their islands. This and the repeated statements from the pulpit at Kings Hall that they were an integral yet separate part of an international community of Saints seemed to imbue them with a new sense of identity and a determination to remain and build the Church in their own land. This was best illustrated by the concluding musical number of the conference, composed by a local member, entitled "This Is Our Place." In remarks preceding that number, President Smith had underscored this idea and capsulized the main message he and the other leaders had intended to convey during the conference. Said the Prophet, "We have attained the status and strength that are enabling us to fulfill the commission given by the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith, that we should carry the glad tidings of the restoration to every nation and to all people. And not only shall we preach the gospel in every nation before the second coming of the Son of Man, but we shall make converts and establish congregations of Saints among them. We are and shall be a world church. This is our destiny. It is part of the Lord's program."

As President Smith left the arena after the benediction at the last session, the audience rose as one and stood in silence until he was out of sight. Unlike most gatherings of the Saints, there was then no moving about or hand-shaking or visiting. The congregation merely stood as if transfixed and as if they were loathe to leave. Then, without announcement or accompaniment, they began to sing "We Thank Thee O God for a Prophet." When they had finished singing all three verses, they continued to stand, no one moving or speaking. After another interval of silence, and without any central direction, the congregation began to sing "God Be with You Till We Meet Again." When all the verses had been sung, the audience still remained in place, seemingly not wanting the meeting and the sweet spirit that had attended it to end. Following yet another period of silence, the audience broke into applause, showing their appreciation by clapping their hands long and loud. Only then did they begin to move about and to speak. There were few dry eyes among them.

President Smith remained in England for two days after the conference to take care of some administrative work at the London Temple. He was also persuaded to drive to Wales to satisfy the urgent requests of members there. Originally he did not want to go. He was still in mourning over Jessie's death. And now that the conference had ended, he wanted to return home. He was strongly urged to go to Wales, however, if for no other reason than that it could be honestly reported that he went there during his visit to Great Britain. He finally decided to go but gave instructions that he was to be informed immediately upon crossing the border. When they entered Wales, he instructed the driver to stop, stepped out of the car onto the ground, got back in, and told the driver to turn around and go back, explaining, "Now you can say I was in Wales."

President Smith's plane was delayed in leaving Heathrow. As he and his companions sat waiting in the airport, the others were talking shop to while away the time. Anxious to be on his way, the Prophet told them he was ready to leave any time they had finished visiting. Douglas explained that their flight hadn't been called yet and that if the Prophet wanted to leave for home then, the only alternative was to walk. President Smith said he did not think they were quite ready for that yet.

On arriving in Salt Lake City, the Prophet was surprised that instead of being taken to the Eagle Gate, he was driven to Bruce and Amelia's home. In his absence, some of his favorite things had been moved from the apartment to a private room in the McConkies' house so that he would be close to members of the family who could prepare his meals and help with other needs. In addition, the other children came regularly in rotation to take him for rides and to visit and eat in their homes. While it hardly compensated for the loss of his sweetheart and did not provide the freedom he had once enjoyed, it was the best possible arrangement under the circumstances. As far as his family was concerned, it gave the children and the grandchildren the opportunity to have the Prophet in their homes regularly to enjoy his company and counsel.

The combination of Jessie's death, the strenuous trip to Manchester, and the upset in his living arrangements had a wearing effect on the Prophet's health. On Thursday, September 16, 1971, President Smith fainted during the First Presidency meeting, suddenly slumping over in his chair. He was taken to his office, where he soon revived. Over the protests of the Brethren, he insisted on going to the temple meeting. Afterward, he seemed perfectly normal.

As part of the October General Conference, a special meeting of General Authorities, regional representatives, and their wives was held in the Assembly Room of the Salt Lake Temple. The First Presidency, dressed in their white suits, gave timely counsel, urging those present to put on the whole armor of God and to live exemplary lives worthy of emulation by the members of the Church. Selected ones were then called on to bear their testimonies. It was a time of spiritual refreshment that prepared the hearts and minds of all for the conference sessions that would commence the next morning.

In his keynote address, President Smith alluded to the recent area conference in Manchester, saying that the Church had "come of age" in Great Britain and that the Saints there were "prepared and ready to administer the gospel to those of their nation." Stressing again the international character of the Church, the Prophet added: "And as it is among them, so it is or will be in other nations. The gospel is for all people, and the Lord expects those who receive it and its truths to offer them to their own nations and tongues." He then invited all to "come unto Christ and be perfected in Him," bore testimony of the Savior's divinity, and added his oft-repeated prayer that he would "remain faithful and true to the end." Finally, the Prophet, in a veiled, touching reference to Jessie's passing, said, "And as I join my testimony with that of Job, may I also unite with him in thanksgiving, for the cry, uttered out of the anguish and sorrow of his soul, ' . . . The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord! "' (Conference Report, October 1971, pp. 6-7.)

While President Smith was quite vigorous during the conference, he later showed signs of diminishing strength. On Thursday, October 21, he became ill during the First Presidency's meeting and had to be helped from the council room. He complained of abdominal pains and seemed to be suffering from shortness of breath. He did not feel well enough to go to the temple afterward for the weekly council meeting. However, he was back at his desk the following Tuesday. Ironically, on that day his good friend Richard L. Evans, thirty years his junior, lay critically ill in the hospital. Elder Evans had become ill the previous Friday. He later showed signs of having suffered a stroke. Then he was hospitalized and lapsed into unconsciousness. Despite the fervent prayers of his family and friends and the administrations of his Brethren, he never regained consciousness. He passed away in the early morning hours of November 1, only nine days after he was stricken. Ninety-five-year-old Joseph Fielding Smith presided and spoke at the funeral, which was held in the Tabernacle on Thursday, November 4. His remarks and those of the other speakers betrayed a sense of disbelief at what had happened so suddenly. Since Richard L. Evans was only sixty-five years old and was one of the senior members of the Twelve, many had speculated that he would one day become president of the Church. It was not to be.

Elder Evans's death created a great void. He had been the Church's most visible ambassador to the nonmember world. His weekly sermonettes while hosting the Tabernacle Choir broadcasts had given him a public exposure not enjoyed by any other General Authority. This was greatly enhanced by his election as the president of Rotary International, which gave him an acquaintance with business and professional leaders around the world. And behind the scenes at Church headquarters, Elder Evans's quiet and thoughtful demeanor, his incisive insights, and his ability to express complicated thoughts in clear, concise language had enabled him to exert a powerful influence in shaping Church policies. Indeed, at the time of his death he was playing a key role in restructuring various headquarters organizations into the umbrella departments of Internal and Public Communications. Because of this and other important initiatives under way, it was decided there should be no delay in filling the vacancy in the Twelve caused by Elder Evans's death. So, on Thursday, December 2, 1971, the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, while assembled in the upper room of the temple for their weekly meeting, unanimously approved Marvin J. Ashton for that purpose. He was immediately invited to the temple, where he was called, given the apostolic charge, and ordained and set apart. Elder Ashton's rich background as an assistant to the Twelve, a youth leader and civic booster, a successful business executive, and a former Utah State senator added important skills and qualities to President Smith's inner leadership circle.

Shortly before Elder Ashton's call to the Twelve, President Smith and his counselors took another step to increase the sense of unity and commitment among the General Authorities and at the same time to instruct and motivate local leaders. On Friday, November 12, 1971, the General Authorities traveled by chartered bus to St. George, Utah. In the evening, they were hosted at a banquet in one of the ward chapels by local priesthood leaders. Early the next morning, they assembled in the upper room of the St. George Temple, where Bishop Gordon Affleck gave instructions about the procedure to be followed in administering and passing the sacrament. When all was in readiness, the local leaders from the stakes in the temple district, numbering almost a thousand, were admitted to the temple. Following the congregational singing, prayers, and participation in the sacrament, the First Presidency and selected members of the Twelve gave instructions to the local brethren about matters of current interest and concern. These included gambling, racing, liquor by the drink, prostitution, apostates, family solidarity, counseling, Church disciplinary procedures, and worthiness interviews, especially those for temple recommends. President Smith was the concluding speaker, discussing the historical background of the St. George Temple, the first one built by the Latter-day Saints following the exodus, and the purpose and importance of the temple ordinances.

Aside from its training and motivational aspects, this gathering had special personal significance for President Smith. As already noted, he had been brought to St. George by his parents as a nine-month-old baby for the dedication of the temple in April 1877 when Brigham Young presided. Now, ninety-five years later, he returned, wearing the prophetic mantle as predicted by the inspired patriarch.

Back in Salt Lake City a month later, President Smith began to feel his age. On December 8, he fell, injuring his shoulder; and a week later, he fell twice more, fracturing three of his ribs and a hip. These last incidents required for a while that he be moved about in a wheelchair; and at home and in the office, he had to use a wheeled, stand-up push cart to keep his balance. He tolerated these aids only as long as absolutely necessary. In the midst of these adversities, his resiliency and sense of humor continued to show through. During the week when he first fell, President Smith conferred the sealing power on several brethren to be exercised in the Ogden Temple. One of them, whose wife was present, reminded the Prophet that he had performed their temple marriage fifty years before. Cupping his hand and whispering loudly in an aside to the man's wife, he said, "Can you ever forgive me?"

January of 1972, which opened President Smith's last year of mortality, found the Prophet and his Brethren involved in major organizational changes. The personnel to direct the newly created Department of Internal Communications were finally put in place with J. Thomas Fyans as the managing director, Doyle Green as editor of Church magazines, Daniel Ludlow as director of instructional materials, James Paramore as director of administrative services, and John Carr as director of translations and distribution. There were also major changes in the Historical Department. With the release of Elder Howard W. Hunter, the traditional duties of the Church historian were divided among three people. Elder Alvin R. Dyer was appointed as managing director of the Historical Department. Under him were historian Leonard J. Arrington and archivist Earl Olsen.

On January 18, the new temple in Ogden was dedicated. President Smith spoke and offered the dedicatory prayer at the opening session Tuesday morning. Because of the injuries he had suffered in December, the Prophet became quite weak as he stood at the pulpit and had to cut his speech short. As a result, others read the dedicatory prayer at the succeeding five sessions. Three weeks later, on Wednesday, February 9, 1972, the new Provo Temple was dedicated. Only two dedicatory sessions were held there with overflow seating in the Marriott Center, the George Albert Smith Fieldhouse, the Joseph Smith Auditorium, the Wilkinson Center, and the De Jong Social Center. President Smith gave the keynote address at both sessions but did not feel strong enough to read the dedicatory prayer at either one of them.

During this period, President Smith and the Brethren devoted many hours to discussing the creation of a new position called mission representatives of the Twelve and the First Council of Seventy. The concept was that these officials would function in mission districts in the same way regional representatives functioned in stakes, and that they would have joint accountability to the Twelve and the First Council of Seventy. This organizational change was approved at a meeting of all General Authorities on June 2, 1972, and authorization was given to call twenty-nine mission representatives of the Twelve and the Seventy. Subsequent organizational changes resulted in the elimination of this office.

The Presiding Bishopric was reorganized at the April General Conference. Presiding Bishop John H. Vandenburg and his counselors, Robert L. Simpson and Victor L. Brown, who had served together since 1961, were released. Called to replace them were Victor L. Brown as presiding bishop and H. Burke Peterson and Vaughn J. Featherstone as counselors. The calls of these counselors again demonstrated the revelatory process by which such vacancies are filled. Long before the calls were extended to them, each had learned, by a revelatory prompting or a vivid dream, of his call to the bishopric.

At the same conference, John H. Vandenburg and Robert L. Simpson were called as assistants to the Twelve. Elder Vandenburg was then appointed as managing director of the Physical Facilities Department while Elder Simpson was appointed to serve as managing director of the Social Services Department, filling the vacancy created when Elder Marvin J. Ashton was called to the Twelve.

During this period, President Smith and his Brethren were gravely concerned about the physical condition of President Spencer W. Kimball, the acting president of the Twelve. Job-like, President Kimball was then suffering from serious heart problems, adding to the extraordinary series of illnesses with which he had been afflicted over the years. Elder Kimball's doctors had concluded that there was some chance he might not survive surgery, although they believed his chances of survival and a productive life thereafter were good. In making the decision whether to submit to surgery, Elder and Sister Kimball and members of the First Presidency, joined by the lead surgeon, Dr. Russell M. Nelson, later a member of the Twelve, counseled together. When the decision was made to go forward with the surgery, both President Kimball and Dr. Nelson received special blessings from the Brethren. The surgery was performed on Wednesday, April 12. Contrary to the usual practice, the temple meeting was held on that day instead of Thursday because of the departure of President Tanner the next day on an assignment. During the meeting, President Lee was called from the council room to take a telephone call and, returning, said with emotion, "The Lord has heard and answered our prayers." He reported that the surgery had been successful and that the prognosis was that "Spencer" would survive and be able to continue with his ministry.

It was also during this period that President Smith and his Brethren began to lay plans for the second area general conference, scheduled to be held in Mexico City in August. A committee consisting of members of the Twelve and other General Authorities, assisted by local leaders, had been appointed to study the alternatives and make recommendations. A key element in the planning, of course, was the assumption that President Smith would attend and play the featured role. There was nothing then to imply that he would not participate. Only his date with death on July 2 prevented him from doing so.

Meanwhile, there were several important events that would take place, along with the usual flow of activities, before that day. There was the annual meeting of the Council on the Disposition of the Tithes, which was held on Thursday afternoon, June 22, following the weekly council meeting in the temple. At that time, it was announced that the Church had its "year's supply" of surplus liquid assets so that it could function in the usual way for a year, even though there might be no income from tithes and offerings or other sources.

During the following week, the new mission presidents were instructed at the seminar prior to their departure for their fields of labor around the world. The final event of the seminar was a banquet and testimony meeting held Friday night, June 30. The international character of the Church, a thing President Smith had repeatedly emphasized during his administration, was underscored by some of the testimonies borne by the new mission presidents. George Aposian Jr., for instance, told of the conversion of his Armenian grandparents and of how in migrating to the United States they had become separated from their three older children. Brother Parra, who had to speak through an interpreter, related faith-promoting experiences he had had while serving as a young missionary in his native country of Mexico. And Brother Ploeger, a German national, told of the remarkable circumstances surrounding his release from a communist prisoner-of-war camp. The brief remarks President Smith made to cap this special evening were the last he would make in his prophetic capacity.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
