Francis M. Gibbons, Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992)

Chapter Twenty-five

Death and Burial

President Joseph Fielding Smith spent a quiet, re- Plaxing weekend with the McConkies and was look- Ping forward to another Independence Day cele- Pbration. On Sunday afternoon, Amelia drove him to his own ward, the Eighteenth, for sacrament meeting. As always, the members gathered around to shake his hand and greet him as he entered and left the chapel. He was pleased to respond to the request of a young mother to touch her baby. On leaving, he joked with a young man who had taken his arm to help him down the two steps to the sidewalk, wondering aloud whether he could "jump" them. Later, son Reynolds came to take his father for a ride. They drove north to Bountiful to visit the Prophet's eldest daughter, Josephine Reinhardt, who had been a widow for many years. There plans were laid for a family gathering to be held at Josephine's home the following evening. After enjoying a visit with his daughter, who served him refreshments in her garden, the Prophet was driven back to the McConkies' home, where he shared a light supper with the family. Later, as he sat relaxing in a comfortable chair, which had been brought from the Eagle Gate, he chatted companionably with Amelia, who was seated nearby writing a letter. She left the room momentarily and on returning found him slumped forward in his chair, apparently unconscious. She summoned Bruce from a nearby room, and he promptly administered oxygen to the Prophet from a cylinder kept in the home for emergencies. It failed to revive him. Joseph Fielding Smith was dead seventeen days before his ninety-sixth birthday. He had reached "a good old age," had become "a mighty man in Israel," and had lived "to preside among the people," exactly as the patriarch had foretold.

Amelia's first call was to her brother Joseph, the eldest son, who, upon the Prophet's death, became the one to whom the family looked for leadership. Joseph phoned Reynolds, the next eldest living brother, and, asking his wife, Zella, to call the other children, left immediately for the McConkie home with his son, Lane, a physician. It was a solemn but not necessarily sad scene when the body of the aged Prophet was gently lifted from the chair to a nearby couch. The expectation that at such an advanced age their father might go at any time had steeled the children to the imminence of his death. His life had been full and meaningful, without regrets or recriminations. So, they talked quietly and reverently without any outward show of emotion, comforted by the strength and integrity of their father's life.

From their earliest remembrance, the Smith children knew that their father belonged not only to them but to the entire Church as well. That knowledge was powerfully reinforced when he became the Prophet, the one to whom members from around the world looked for leadership and direction. So, when they had conversed and counseled briefly as a family, they knew that their next move was to involve the Church in whatever arrangements were to be made for their father's funeral and burial. It was then that Joseph telephoned President Harold B. Lee to inform him of the Prophet's death. Within a half hour, President Lee and President Tanner were at the McConkie home to express their condolences. By that time, other members of the family had arrived. On entering the room where the Prophet lay, President Lee, who was then, in fact, the head of the Church, walked quietly to the couch, and, kneeling, took one of the Prophet's hands in his. He remained in that position for some time, not speaking, in prayer or meditation. He then arose to express his condolences to the family, his admiration for their father, and his admonition to them that they honor President Smith by living worthily.

Before arriving at the McConkie home, President Lee had triggered the publicity about the Prophet's death by calling a member of the First Presidency's staff, who, in turn, alerted the General Authorities and the Church press officer. Because of President Smith's age, appropriate summaries of his life had been prepared in advance, except for the circumstances immediately surrounding his passing. These were immediately made available to the news media so that soon the word that the Mormon Prophet was dead had flashed around the world.

Later, President Lee appointed elders Ezra Taft Benson, Mark E. Petersen, and Delbert L. Stapley as a committee to work with the family in arranging for the funeral and burial. It was decided that the services would be held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle the following Thursday. The body lay in state in the foyer of the Church Administration Building all day Wednesday and Thursday prior to the funeral. Thousands passed by the open casket to pay their last respects to the great man. These included many nonmembers. The Salt Lake Tribune, which had attacked President Smith and his father so bitterly sixty years before, reflected on the vast change in attitude nonmembers had toward him. In noting his death, the Tribune editorialized: "Joseph Fielding Smith, a man stern in devotion to his creed, yet tender in regard for essential needs of people everywhere, gave wise counsel to his associates, loving care to his family and exalted leadership to his Church responsibilities. He will be missed, but remembered with special esteem."

The speakers at the funeral extolled other aspects of President Smith's character and ministry. They included presidents Lee and Tanner and Elder Bruce R. McConkie. The thread that ran throughout all of the talks was that the deceased Prophet's life and works provided the best and most fitting eulogy to be offered at his passing.

President Smith was lovingly laid to rest in the Salt Lake City Cemetery, high on the avenues overlooking the valley. Nearby were the graves of members of his family, including his three wives, his son Lewis, and his parents. One can imagine the joy with which they welcomed this son, husband, and father who had not only lived so as to realize the prophetic blessing pronounced upon him but had also lived up to his own life's credo, to be true and faithful to the end.

1992 Deseret Book Co.
