Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, When a Loved One Dies ( 1988)

FAITH

One of the confusing feelings many people have when someone they love dies is fear. People in our country, as a rule, don't like to talk or think about death. Even though we see a lot of violence in movies and on T.V., death in real life is very scary to most of us. Part of the reason for that fear is that death, for most people, is a great "unknown." People are often afraid of things which they don't understand.

While you can't personally "visit" death for a little while, then come back and talk about it, you can learn a lot about death from the scriptures. Believing in something you cannot see firsthand for yourself is called faith, and faith is the opposite of fear.

Whenever we talk about death, we must also talk about life, because death is a part of life. We must even talk about life before we were born because that, too, is part of the great eternal plan. You did not magically "pop" into existence out of nowhere when you were born and you will not pop out of existence into nowhere when you die. The real story is a beautiful one. Faith in that plan can chase away your fears.

Before you were born, you lived with your Heavenly Parents. All of us were there together and it was a beautiful and happy time. I am sure that we had many experiences and learned many things in that early heavenly home.

But soon the time came when we had experienced and learned all that we could as spirit children. We needed something more. We each needed a physical body. Have you ever sung the song, "I Am a Child of God"? Have you really thought about what that means? Here on the earth, children look like their parents. Our Heavenly Father has a body. If we want to be like Him someday, we have to have a body, too.

Heavenly Father called a great council in heaven and explained His plan to us. He told us that we would have the chance to get a body and also to have experiences and learn things which we could only learn in a physical body. He told us that He would organize a world for us and that each of us, in our turn, would be born in that world. We were so excited that the scriptures say we shouted for joy! (Job 38:7.)

You accepted that plan and were born to a father and mother here on earth. All of us—everyone who has ever lived or who will ever live—accepted the plan. When you were born, the spirit became an important part of your physical body. (Genesis 2:7; D&C 88:15.) You are now living the physical earth part of your life. You are still learning and experiencing those things you need to learn and experience while you are here.

The person you love who has died has finished the earthly part of his life. He may have had a long life with a lot of experiences or a very short life with just a few. No one on earth knows exactly how long someone's learning time will be. When that time is over, the person dies and his spirit leaves his physical body. President David O. McKay said that we don't need to be afraid of death, for it is just as natural as birth.

Sometimes when I'm trying to understand a difficult idea, it helps me to see a picture in my mind of something similar but more simple. One demonstration I have seen to explain birth and death might also help you. Get a glove and slip your hand into it. Now wiggle your fingers. The glove is like your physical body and the hand is like your spirit. Together they move and work like one unit, just the way your spirit and body move and work together while you are alive. Now take the glove off and lay it in front of you. Can the glove move or work by itself? Of course it can't because your hand was the thing that gave it life. When a person dies, his spirit leaves his body very much like your hand left the glove. Without the spirit to give it life, the physical body cannot move nor work. It is no longer alive. But does that mean the spirit is also dead? Absolutely not! While the glove cannot wiggle without the hand, the hand can certainly wiggle without the glove. The spirit of the person you loved—the part of his soul that truly made him alive—continues to live. You can't see it, but it still exists, separated from the body, but not dead.

You may wonder what a person's spirit looks like since you can't see it. President Harold B. Lee said that if we could see the spirit, it would look like the person looked in his full-grown shape. The spirit of the person you loved, if you could see it, would look just like that person's physical body. President Heber C. Kimball said that the spirit does not change "one single particle of itself" when it leaves the body.

Because you can't see the spirit and be with the person you loved in the same way you were, you might worry about him and wonder where he is and if he is all right. The scriptures tell us that when a person dies, his spirit goes to the spirit world. Jesus called at least part of this spirit world "paradise." (Luke 23:43.) Jesus' spirit visited the spirit world during the three days his body was in the tomb and He preached the gospel to the spirits who had died without hearing it. (1 Peter 3:19; D&C 76:73.) Brigham Young said that many of the spirits of those who have the gospel will be missionaries in the spirit world and Joseph Smith said that those who didn't hear the gospel on earth would hear it there. Many of our modern prophets have taught us that the spirits in the spirit world are still working and learning, but in a way that is different from what they experienced when they were alive on earth. That picture of the person you loved in the spirit world, busy and happy with other spirits around him, is certainly different from the silly cartoon idea of him all alone on a cloud with wings and a halo, playing a harp. Knowing the real picture can help you feel more comfortable and less scared.

You might be thinking, "Okay, so he's all right. What about me? How can I be happy without him? Will I ever see him again?" The answer to that last question is, yes, you will see him again, but not in this life and not in the same way you are used to seeing him.

There may be times in this life when you will feel as if he were very near. Although you cannot see or hear him, you can almost sense his presence. You may have dreams about him that seem very real, particularly in the beginning. Such times can be comforting to you if you can accept them for what they are and not expect the person you loved to return in the old, familiar way. President Joseph F. Smith said that worthy spirits may, on occasion, bring a message of love, comfort, and instruction to those whom they loved while alive. The person you loved may be near you once in a while, but only as an unseen spirit.

"But," you may ask, "will he stay a spirit forever?" The answer to that is no. The scriptures tell us that we needed a physical body to become more like our Heavenly Father. (Moses 2:26.) Surely He wouldn't provide a body only to take it away again forever!

If you still have that glove we were talking about earlier, put your hand into it again. Wiggle your fingers again. That is similar to what will happen during the resurrection, which means literally "to take up again." Jesus was the first to be resurrected, to take his body up again. You probably remember the Easter story of how He was crucified, how His body lay in the tomb for three days, and how He rose from the dead, reuniting His body with His spirit on the morning of the third day. Every year at Easter time we celebrate Jesus' resurrection and sing for joy.

We can feel really happy at times like that. Because Jesus was resurrected and rose from the dead, everyone who has ever lived and died will be resurrected too. That was a gift Jesus gave to the whole world. Everyone, including the person you loved, has to die, but because of Jesus everyone will someday be resurrected. (1 Corinthians 15:32.) Throughout history people have found happiness and joy in the promise of the resurrection. Job said that although he knew he would die and his body would lie in the earth for a long time, he also knew that someday he would see God with that body back again. (Job 19:25, 26.)

You might be thinking, "That's fine, but the resurrection is a long way off. Do I have to wait until the resurrection to feel happy again?" You're right—the resurrection is a long way off—the morning of the first resurrection won't come until almost everyone has had a chance to have an earthly experience. But you don't have to wait until then to feel happy again. It might seem that way to you now, but I promise you, that sadness won't last forever. The more you think and feel, and the more you can share your thoughts and feelings with people who care about you, the better you will feel. You'll be doing your grieving, and bit by bit the happy feelings will return. Enjoy those happy feelings when they come, and little by little, they will come more often and stay longer.

Remember, you still have a lot to learn and experience—a lot of life to live! Your faith in the plan and your faith in yourself can help you live your life in a growing, wonderful way. It's okay that you want to feel alive and happy again. I'm sure that is what the person you loved wants for you, too.

TERRI

Waking up was always hard, but for the next few months after August 28, 1982, it was much harder.

I was twelve years old when my dad died, a week before I started the 7th grade in junior high. I had been excited about junior high; I was finally growing up. But starting school after hearing the news was not so exciting. I was in a daze. I didn't pay attention in class at all, and to this day, I can't remember what I thought about for those three weeks that I sat in class and blended in with the wall decorations. I was about that responsive. One of my teachers even called home and asked my mother if I was mentally disabled in some way. But after those three weeks of being in my own world, I came back to life. But for the people who had to be around me I'm not sure it was such a good idea. I was bitter and angry and defensive. You couldn't look at me cross-eyed without me attacking you with my sorrow disguised as anger. I didn't want to be loved or to love anyone. I felt like life had dumped on me. I asked God what I had done to deserve this. I was mad at my father for going off and dying on me.

Then I felt guilty. I started searching for things I had done wrong to deserve my father's death, and I found something. A week before he died, we had gotten into an argument and I told him I hated him. It was the only time I had never said I was sorry. Of course, it was understood by both of us that I didn't mean it and we were friends again, but I never actually came out and apologized. I cried because I felt so guilty.

But after a while, I began to get tired of crying and so subconsciously I began to pretend it wasn't real. It was all a dream or I was in a coma and any day, I would wake up to find my mother and my father standing over me saying it was all a bad dream. That was what I was going to tell myself for the next year and a half. Deep down, I knew I was only pretending, but at the surface I could almost convince myself it was true, enough, at least, to give me pseudo-happiness to help me through the days.

During the next year and a half, it was like my feelings were on hold. I was constantly angry, but I couldn't ever pinpoint the reason. I became almost rebellious to my family and I tried to stay away as much as possible. After all, they were grieving for a death that I refused to acknowledge was real in my heart. I would go to friends' houses every day after school, sometimes without my mother knowing where I was. Sometimes I'd stay out until 11:30 on week nights, and on weekends, I usually stayed the night with a friend. My mom felt like she was losing control over me and tried to pull a lot of restrictions, but that only made me fight back even harder. Finally, one day, when I was in eighth grade, I took my mom's car to get away from the constant fighting of my brothers, and I got caught. So three months before the end of the school year, my mom switched me to a junior high school near where she worked. I got tonsillitis and ended up in the hospital for an operation, so I only attended the new school for a few days, but the change was enough to blow my game of pretending out of whack. With such a major change in my repetitious life, I had to face that my father was really dead and that I was not dream- ing.

We moved to Utah as soon as summer came and I went into a depressed state in which I stayed for eight months. I didn't like to go out with my friends, and I would have sudden crying spurts for no apparent reason. At least, the reason wasn't apparent to me. Finally, I got to the point where I was so depressed, I was suicidal, so when my mom asked me if I would like to go to a counselor, I jumped at the chance. By now I wanted to know what was wrong with me as much as Mom did.

I went to the counselor for about six weeks (once a week) and soon reached inside to find my anger again. My depression was caused by the fact that when we moved it hit me that all this was real. No more pretending. I began to feel happier again and I thought I had gone through the whole grieving process. Then, we moved again, back to our old house. It brought a lot of old feelings back, which is where I am now. I know I have a lot more grieving to do and it has been four years. For one thing, I'm often grouchy with my mom. I really love her, more than my own life almost, but I can't seem to tell her so. It's like I am afraid to love her too much. I love my dad so much, and he died. It seems like everything I love, I lose.

It seems like a long time to grieve, but I guess that's what happens when you put your life on hold and don't let yourself grieve. I have accomplished a lot of things in this time and I have done a lot of maturing. I still have a long way to go, but I know now that I'll survive.

by Terri Buntin

Spring 1986

age 16
