Kathleen Rawlings Buntin, When a Loved One Dies ( 1988)

EMOTIONS

Try to imagine a world completely without feelings. Close your eyes and picture yourself floating in lukewarm water. It's not hot and it's not cold. You can feel nothing touching your body. There is no sound and no smell. Everything is grey—the sky, the water, everything. There are no colors anywhere, no music, nothing to taste . . . Pretty awful, isn't it?

It's really hard to imagine a world without feelings. Feelings are part of being alive. Your senses—seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching—are very important to you. They signal you when something is wrong, like when the stove is too hot to touch, and they help you enjoy things that are nice, like the taste of ice cream or a colorful rainbow. You could learn to get by if you lost one or maybe two of your senses, but you could not survive if you lost all five.

There are other kinds of feelings, too. We call these feelings emotions. Emotions are the kind of feelings you have when you say "I feel happy" or when you say, "Someone hurt my feelings." Emotions are also important feelings to you and you couldn't get along very well without them. Like your five senses, they help you enjoy the good things in life, like feeling happy or excited or loved. And, like your senses, emotions can signal you when something is wrong inside.

Let's use a comparison again. What would happen if you cut yourself very badly and that cut didn't hurt? You might bleed to death before you realized something was wrong. If a hot stove didn't burn you, you might leave your hand on the burner until it was all burned up. Fortunately you can feel pain to your body. If you accidentally touch something hot, your brain says, "Ouch! That hurt!" and you pull your hand away before you have more than a small burn. You also know to bandage a cut. You can hear a car honk at you before you ride your bike out of the driveway. You can see the deep hole before you step in it. You can smell the leaky gas and taste the spoiled food before those things can hurt you. You've learned to recognize when your senses warn you that your body is in danger and you react to get yourself out of that danger, almost without thinking about it.

Your emotional feelings can also signal you when you are in danger. They let you know that some important need is not being met. Unfortunately, you may not have learned to recognize your emotional feelings as well as you recognize your physical senses. You don't always react to get yourself out of emotional danger. When you don't recognize emotional danger and you don't act, you can get to feeling pretty awful and not really know why. Some people think, "Oh, pooh, so you got your feelings hurt. That's no big deal!" just as if feelings didn't matter. But you know that feelings do matter and hurt feelings can be a big deal. They can be just as painful—maybe even more painful—than a hurt to your physical body, especially the hurt feelings you get when someone you love has just died.

Let's talk about some of the feelings you might have had when a person you love died. People who lose someone through death seem to go through certain stages. Maybe you're still going through some of these stages and feeling some of these emotions.

The first thing you probably felt was surprise or shock. You can feel shock with your physical body. You might feel dizzy or have a headache or a stomachache. You might cry a lot and not be able to stop, or you might want to cry and not be able to start. Some people want to sleep all the time while other people can't sleep at all or may have bad dreams. You might not feel like eating very much and you might even think you're going to throw up. You may just feel numb inside like you're not real anymore.

Everyone's body reacts differently, so what you feel may be different from what other members of your family are feeling. One child might act up and be very loud and disruptive; another may pout; another may cry. But all these reactions come from shock. All those hurt feelings are churning around inside and it takes a while to sort them out and to start finding some ways to express them. It's kind of like when you go to the dentist and he gives you a shot in your mouth to numb your tooth so you won't feel the pain when he fixes it. Shock is like a "shot" to your feelings. It numbs you inside until you can start to deal with all those hurt feelings a little bit at a time. The important thing to know about shock is that it is normal. If you are confused or scared by what's happening, just remind yourself that you are okay, and that it will soon pass.

One of the feelings you may feel as the shock wears off is sadness—the worst sadness you've ever felt. You may want to cry all the time and wonder why it just won't stop hurting. Sadness can cause you to feel very lonely, too. You might wonder if you will ever feel happy again. I can promise you that you can be happy again. The sadness doesn't last forever.

Some young people feel scared when a person they love dies. They can be afraid that they will die, too. They might be afraid to go to the doctor's or to ride in a car, or even to go outside. Other young people are frightened that someone else will die and they may want to stay home close to another person they love all the time. They may even be afraid to love that other person for fear that that will somehow magically make that person die, too.

If you're thinking any of these scary thoughts, or if you're having lots of bad dreams, it's important that you talk to a grown-up you love and trust. You probably will not die and neither will your other loved ones, but it can be really scary to even imagine it. A loving, trusted grown-up can help you sort out what's imaginary from what's real. Understanding what is really happening can help scary feelings go away.

Anger is a very uncomfortable and confusing feeling a lot of people have when someone they love dies. It's confusing because you don't expect it and what's really hard is that other people don't expect you to feel angry either. Everyone knows you feel sad when someone dies, but not too many people know you also can feel very mad. In fact, lots of people show their sadness by acting up in a very angry way. It's important to know that it is normal and you are not a bad person.

Anger is uncomfortable because many young people never learn anything they can do with angry feelings that won't get them into trouble. There are things you can do with your angry feelings and a trusted, loving grown-up can help you learn them. A good guideline is that whatever you choose to do when you feel angry shouldn't hurt you or anyone else. Working through your angry feelings can actually help you grow as a person and make you feel better.

Another uncomfortable feeling you may have is guilt. Guilty feelings usually come when we've done something wrong and our conscience tells us we need to repent, but guilty feelings can also come when we just think we've done something wrong. When a person dies, the people who loved that person sometimes feel like it was their fault and that makes them feel guilty. You might feel guilty for things you said and did to that person when he was alive. You may think that you can't repent now that the person you love is dead. Or you may even feel guilty for some of the things you are feeling now since the death. You may think that if you just prayed more or went to church more, you would not feel so sad.

If you're having guilty feelings, it's important to talk to a grown-up you love and trust. That person can help you sort out those feelings. Most of the guilty feelings will go away as you talk about them and you learn that it isn't your fault that a person you love died. Remem- ber, it's easy, when you are young, to start feeling almost magical about things and it's important for you to know that when a very sad thing happens, you didn't cause it and you can't stop it.

If you did say or do something that you are feeling guilty about, you can still repent just the way you would repent for anything else. A grown-up can help you. Finally, you don't need to feel guilty about feeling sad or scared or angry, either. We can know and love Jesus and still feel all of those emotions. The important thing is for you to be honest about all of those feelings and use them to help you grow.

Some people have a hard time being honest about their feelings. That usually happens because they have never been taught to recognize or to be comfortable with their feelings and they don't know what to do with those feelings. They may have even been taught that some feelings are bad and that they should not have those kinds of feelings. They may also avoid honest feelings because honest feelings can hurt a lot and they don't want to hurt.

When people are not honest with their feelings, they go through what is called denial. They are denying something that is true by pretending, to themselves and to other people, that it is not true. It's kind of like telling yourself a lie, and like all lies, it can cause a lot of trouble. Some people pretend they don't feel sad (or scared or angry or guilty) and they pretend they are feeling something else instead. It's like they are wearing a mask with a pretend feeling covering the real feeling. Some young people, especially boys, wear an angry mask to cover up a real feeling of being scared. Other young people, especially girls, will wear a sad mask to cover up a real feeling of being angry.

Some young people even deny that the death is true. They pretend that the person they loved is on a trip or just asleep. They may even pretend that they are asleep and having a bad dream. When they wake up, or when the trip or the bad dream is over, that person will come back to them.

Feelings that aren't talked out or worked out in an honest way have a habit of being acted out in some very unpleasant ways. Even worse, feelings that don't come out at all can make you physically sick. Imagine yourself blowing up a big red balloon. Fill it up with all of your most uncomfortable feelings. Now imagine yourself trying to hide that balloon in a tub full of water. You push it down under the water and hold it there. It works for a while, but pretty soon, you start to get tired. Your arms ache, your back hurts. If you relax for even a second, the balloon starts to pop up, so you keep pushing and pushing, even when it hurts.

That's what happens when you try to hide your feelings. It takes a lot of energy to keep feelings hidden and pretty soon you can get so tired that it hurts even more to hide them than it would to share them.

Feelings that stay hidden can come out as headaches, stomachaches, body aches, asthma, ulcers, overeating, not eating, trouble sleeping, nightmares, and many other very unpleasant ways. Doesn't it make more sense to let all of those uncomfortable feelings out of the pretend balloon? Better yet, learn some good ways to handle the feelings when they happen so they never go into the pretend balloon in the first place.

Talking about feelings is one of the best ways I know to keep them "out of the balloon." You can talk to parents, grandparents, other relatives, grown-up friends, teachers, doctors, nurses, school counselors, your home teachers, and your bishop. You can talk to friends, brothers or sisters, or even to your pets once in a while, although, while you are young, it's important to have at least one good grown-up you can trust with your special deep feelings.

Writing in your journal is a good way to talk out your feelings to yourself. Even if no one else ever reads what you have written, your journal is an important "friend" to have because writing forces you to think about beginnings and middles and ends, and it stops all of those uncomfortable thoughts from spinning around in unhappy circles. Your journal can help you learn a lot about yourself, too, and you will enjoy reading it later and seeing how much you are growing up.

Other writing activities that can help are letters to friends and relatives. If you're feeling guilty about something, you can write a letter to the person you loved who is dead, then share that letter with a trusted grown-up. You can also write down all your angry feelings, share them, then tear them up in tiny pieces and throw them away. You can write stories and poems about your feelings, about the person you loved, about your life then or your life now. You can write a memory book of all the good things you remember about the person you loved. Then if you ever feel sad, you can read a memory and remember a happy time.

Art is another good way to express a feeling. You can draw pictures with crayons or paints or chalk or a pencil. You can finger paint or cut pictures from an old magazine and make a collage by pasting the pictures onto a sheet of plain paper. You can collect photos and put them into an album or onto a paper. Whatever you do, you will feel honest feelings while you work to your heart's content. Think about, "What does scared look like? What color is anger? What shape is sad?" Draw a memory. It's all up to you.

Clay is an art form that is especially good for angry feelings. Take clay or salt dough, or bread dough, or mud in the sand box and pound, squish, roll, and shape all those churned-up mad feelings away. Digging in the garden is fun, too. Working puzzles, making models, or sorting through a collection can help you sort through some confused feelings as well.

Reading books, like this one, can also help. Books help us to understand why things are the way they are and they also help us get in touch with some of our own feelings by reading about other people's feelings. Try stories or poems that are uplifting and help you to feel as well as think. The scriptures are wonderful for this purpose because they are full of good lessons and honest feelings. Acting out a scripture story is a great help. Try writing a play about your feelings. Act it out with someone you love and trust.

Music has always been a way people have expressed their feelings. There is sad music, happy music, scary music, even angry music. You can listen to good music, sing songs, play your instrument, even make up your own songs, if you want to. If you have a particularly troublesome feeling, try listening to some music that sounds like that feeling to you and do a picture with paints or crayons while you're listening. Sharing that experience with a grown-up can make it even nicer.

Moving your body can be a good way to handle uncomfortable feelings. Put on some music and dance how you are feeling. Jump a rope. Run a race. Swim or jog or ride your bike. Take a hike. Go skating, punch a punching bag. Play tag. Use some energy and move your body.

The more you work with your feelings, the easier it is for you to be honest with your feelings. You will find that you can tell someone when you're angry, you can talk about the things that scare you, you can ask for a hug when you feel sad. Soon you will notice you are feeling happy. You'll be glad to feel alive again. Most importantly, you will know that you are growing up, that special inside-of-you growing up that makes you feel so good about just being you.

SHAWN

"A personal experience is an interesting topic; it causes one to think and remember. The thoughts coming to my mind aren't pleasant ones, they're cold hard facts and that's what personal experiences are made of.

"The death of a loved one isn't a very popular subject; in fact, no death is. We're a very death-denying society. People say, 'Give it time, it will eventually heal itself.' That's not true. Time doesn't heal anything except physical wounds. Emotional wounds take more than Bactine and Band-Aids to heal. It takes work, but from that work, I suppose, comes growth.

"I remember my mother coming down to my room that Sunday morning, waking me with the words, 'Shawn, wake up. Your father has been killed in a car accident.'

"All of my emotions froze. I couldn't even cry. My whole body seemed numb to everything around me.

"I blindly followed her up the stairs to find two police officers sitting at the kitchen table. 'I'm sorry,' is all I can remember them saying.

"The funeral is also a very faded memory. I remember walking into the viewing room and seeing my father's body lying in the casket. The cracked skull, broken nose and gash on his right cheek have made permanent impressions in my mind.

"I also remember Shane, my eight-year-old little brother, standing in front of the casket, trying to hold back the tears. I walked up behind him, put my hand on his shoulder and said, 'It's okay to cry, Shane. It's okay.' He then laid his head on my father's lifeless body and just sobbed.

"I don't remember much after that, but even now, when I go to the cemetery and see his name engraved on that piece of marble, it doesn't seem like he could really be dead."

I wrote that paper for one of my classes in school, a year after my father died. Though a whole year had already passed, my feelings were still very sensitive.

Learning to cope with the pain and emptiness you feel may take a while, so don't rush yourself. Take time to sort out your feelings. Try to understand them.

It took a whole year for me to begin living again. I felt almost as if I were moving under water at first. I watched people around me and it made me angry to think of their happiness. Here my father had died, he was gone and was never coming back and they had the nerve to be happy! It seemed so unfair.

I guess it doesn't seem very logical to think of anger as part of your grieving; but, since when has grieving become logical? I felt a lot of different things during that part of my life, each of which helped me finally reach a resolve. So, I suppose, each emotion served a purpose.

You may find yourself wanting to "run and hide." I know that I, as well as others in my family, felt that way quite often. I think that's the way a lot of people feel when they're dealing with emotions that are new to them. I also feel it's a good way to work things through, as long as you're "running to understand" or "running to feel and understand." Otherwise, running away is anything but helpful.

It's kind of like if you've ever had a sliver in your hand and rather than taking it out right then, you leave it because you don't want to go through the pain of removing it. Then, after a few days have passed, it's become infected and is very tender and you still need to remove it. The only problem is, it's more painful now than it would have been right at first.

Grief is the same way. It will become more painful the longer you procrastinate, so work on it now and be happy later.

There are a lot of different ways you can work on your grief. I used to take time to sort through my feelings while I bowled a series or two. Or I'd go for a long drive, or listen to some music, or if all else failed, I'd go get a pop! Friends were also very helpful to me. They were there for me and were able to give me love and support when others in my family were busy struggling with their own grief. Don't get me wrong, my family and I stuck together and helped one another through our grief, but sometimes it's hard to pull someone out of a hole that you're standing in yourself. So those outside sources of comfort were very important to me.

Having a best friend, girlfriend or boyfriend, to turn to for comfort is one of those good outside sources. Melissa, a girl I met shortly after my father's death, was my strongest outside source. I was able to share my feelings with her and a lot of my emotional energy was directed towards caring for her rather than wallowing in my own grief.

My journal was also a very important part of my emotional well-being. I'd write about my frustration, my fears, things that made me feel good and things that caused depression to set in, but whatever I wrote was helpful because it caused me to face those feelings and transfer them from raw emotion to written pages. Then they were always there for me to look back on, and by doing so, I could see the growth from the past to the present, which helped remind me that I was doing more than just spinning my wheels. I was actually moving in a forward direction.

by Shawn Buntin

Spring 1987

age 20

Ohio Columbus Mission
