No less a personage than our Lord has called our attention to angels. When Jesus' disciples asked him to "declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field," he responded: "He that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man; the field is the world . . . and the reapers are the angels" (Matthew 13:36-39). The Son of Man was and is real. He exists. The world was and is real. It has place and substance. As the Lord said, angels are real too. They are beings. They exist.

Jesus taught much about angels. He tells us what brings them joy. "Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth" (Luke 15:10). In requiring us to become as little children in our faith, he reminds us that "in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father. . . ." (

Matthew 18:10). And in the last days he says they shall have to do with our very salvation. For, he says, he "shall send his angels . . . and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds. . . ." (Matthew 24:31).

Clearly the Lord believes in and has to do with angels. Just as clearly, judging from his holy writ, he wants us to do the same.

THE BEGINNING OF ANGELS

Let us consider the scriptures and what they have to say about angels.

First, in logical sequence, who created the angels? The apostle Paul tells us they were created by God.

For by him were all things created, that are in heaven and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by, and for him:

And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. (Colossians 1:16-17.)

Thus we discern that it is a scriptural doctrine that God created the angels.

Is any light shed therein as to the means of creation? Yes. When the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, he brought Job's attention to before the world was. He asked: "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?" (Job 38:4). Having there established a point in time prior to the creation of the earth, the Lord spoke of the sons of God: "When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy" (Job 38:7). There were beings, referred to as "sons of God," before the creation of the earth.

In the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians is captured the spirit of this truth as the Apostle records, ". . . I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven . . . is named. . . ." (Ephesians 3:14-15). There was a family in heaven, and it existed before the earth was made.

Both Old and New Testament citations substantiate this premise. In the Old Testament the prophet Jeremiah records the circumstances of his call to the ministry. In simple terms he tells how God called him and "put my words in thy mouth." (Jeremiah 1:9.) God told Jeremiah that he knew him in a pre-earth existence and further that he ordained Jeremiah to be a prophet before he was born on the earth. As Jeremiah records it:

Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations. (Jeremiah 1:4-5.)

The New Testament disciples of Jesus were familiar with the scriptural concept of pre-earth sonship to God. A careful reading of an incident in our Lord's earthy ministry leaves no other valid interpretation.

And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.

And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?

Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents. . . . (John 9:1-3.)

The subject man was born blind. How could he have sinned except in a pre-earth existence? These disciples understood that the spirit within this blind man had an existence before it was tabernacled in the flesh. They knew that such spirit had opportunity to sin in such an existence, indicating that it was an accountable being at this stage of its life. The Lord assented to the assumption implicit in the query and answered that the man's blindness from birth was not caused by his actions before he was born.

The chief Apostle, Peter, makes reference to this concept and adds emphasis to the idea that our characteristics at birth are in compensation for our actions in a pre-earth life estate, saying that some persons are "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father" (1 Peter 1:2).

Alma says that the principle that applied to Jeremiah and the elect has general applicability to all those who are called to hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. In a discourse on the "high priesthood being after the order of his son, which order was from the foundation of the world" (Alma 13:7), he says that persons were ordained to priestly callings before they were born.

And this is the manner after which they were ordained—being called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works. (Alma 13:3.)

Ancient scripture, made new to us by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, teaches that there were organized spirit personages before the physical creation of the earth. "For I, the Lord God, created all things . . . spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. . . . for in heaven created I them. . . . all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word" (Moses 3:5,7).

In like manner we learn considerable detail from a great vision originally recorded by Abraham. Of "our Father which art in heaven" (Matthew 6:9), the "whole family in heaven" (Ephesians 3:15), and "the sons of God" (Job 38:7), Abraham records the following:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever. (Abraham 3:22-26.)

A modern Apostle helps us capture the meaning of Abraham's vision.

Abraham used the name intelligences to apply to the spirit children of the Eternal Father. The intelligence or spirit element became intelligences after the spirits were born as individual entities. (Abra. 3:22-24.) Use of this name designates both the primal element from which the spirit offspring were created and also their inherited capacity to grow in grace, knowledge, power, and intelligence itself. . . . (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine [1966], 387.)

In the literal sense, the expression spirit birth has reference to the birth of the spirit in pre-existence. Spirits are actually born as the offspring of a Heavenly Father, a glorified and exalted Man. (Ibid., 750.)

Brigham Young explained it this way: "Things were first created spiritually; the Father actually begat the spirits, and they were brought forth and lived with Him." (Journal of Discourses, 4:218.)

Men and angels are the offspring of God. They were born to him in a pre-earth existence. God, angels, and men are of the same race. (Ibid., p. 217.) The angels are children of the Father in heaven. "Because angels are of the same race as man and God, it is with perfect logic that in the pure language spoken by Adam, they were designated as Anglo-man." (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 37.)

As the essay continues, we shall view these other children in their several stages of progression and retrogression.

In talking about resurrected persons, "children of the resurrection," Jesus equates the angels and the children of God. The faithful scribe, Luke, records: "For they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God" (Luke 20:36).

FORM OF ANGELS

The spirit form and appearance are similar to the temporal form or appearance. This is true of each particular form of life. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained this principle by saying: "That which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God created" (D&C 77:2). Thus in pre-earth life God's creations appeared somewhat as they appear in the flesh.

The brother of Jared was accorded the singular privilege of seeing the Lord two millennia prior to his earthly ministry. In introducing himself, the Lord said, "Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ" (Ether 3:14). Then the Lord told his beholder, "Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image" (Ether 3:15). Then the Lord told him what spirits look like before they are clothed in flesh. Their fleshy temples are after the similitude of the spirit. "Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh" (Ether 3:16).

As they have appeared throughout the ages, angels are in form like man. The most universally accepted accounts of such appearances are biblical.

When Abraham entertained three angels on the plains of Mamre, it is recorded, "He lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him" (Genesis 18:2). Of the two angels (Genesis 19:1) who visited Lot's home in Sodom, the local residents inquired, "Where are the men which came in to thee this night?" (Genesis 19:5).

Daniel described Gabriel as he came to him as being in the form of man, "Behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a man" (Daniel 8:15).

All four Gospel accounts of the women at the sepulchre of the risen Lord describe "the angel of the Lord descended from heaven" (Matthew 28:2) as being in the form of a man. "They saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment" (Mark 16:5). In the Gospel of John the women were described as seeing two angels (see John 20:12). Luke records the same instance: "Two men stood by them in shining garments" (Luke 24:4). Although in form like men, there was a glory that attended this angel: "His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow" (Matthew 28:3).

The most detailed description of an angel ever recorded was written by Joseph Smith. It is a description of the appearance of the angel Moroni. Here is the Prophet's witness:

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom.

Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people. . . .

After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance. (Joseph Smith-History 1:30-33, 43.)

This vision was repeated three times during that night, and Joseph Smith himself wrote the first-hand account thereof.

NATURE OF ANGELS

From those who have had to do with angels we can learn some things as to the nature of angels. For instance, the inspired psalmist wrote: "What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou has made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour" (Psalm 8:4-5). From this we may conclude that the natures of men and angels are somewhat similar. Holy writ gives us some specifics.

Some angels are holy. This is an attribute of their nature. We are indebted to the Lord for this bit of knowledge about angels. He said: "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory" (Matthew 25:31). And again: "Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels" (Mark 8:38).

As children of the Eternal Father, angels inherit immortality. They lived before this earth life, and they will continue to live, as personal identities, after it. The fact that angels are immortal was made clear by the Master. In explaining the Resurrection, he said: "Neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection" (Luke 20:36).

An angel rolled back the stone at the sepulchre of Jesus (see Matthew 28:2). Angels stand as witnesses to the fundamental truth of the gospel. They are perfect teachers of the plan of salvation. " . . . he doth visit us by his angels, that the plan of salvation might be made known unto us" (Alma 24:14).

The gospel is preached by those who have the "Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into" (1 Peter 1:12). Indeed, it is written that "angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Nephi 32:3).

We thus see that angels possess great knowledge. And, as with man and God, knowledge is an attribute of their nature. Some of the knowledge comes from eye witness and some from witness of the Spirit. In this, they are like holy men of God.

As with men, angels do not have a perfect knowledge of all things. They are not as God, being perfect in the attributes of their nature. The Lord himself demonstrates a limitation as to an angel's knowledge. Speaking of his second coming, the Lord says: "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only" (Matthew 24:35-36). Angels do not know all things.

All beings who live the commandments are entitled to the spiritual gift of joy. It is written of men that "the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy" (Mosiah 4:3).

The angels rejoice in righteous works. They have joy when one of God's children accepts the gospel. "I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth" (Luke 15:10).

Exaltation is to obtain a fulness of joy, and a fulness of joy is found only where the spirit and body are permanently reunited in exalted form (see D&C 93:33). We shall see that some angels have a fulness of joy and some do not. Men and angels have a potential of ultimate joy.

Faithful Job recorded: "Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with folly" (Job 4:18). Peter tells us of "angels that sinned" and were "cast . . . down to hell" (2 Peter 2:4). It has been heretofore suggested that it is the nature of some angels to be holy (see Matthew 25:31, Mark 8:38). The foregoing biblical citations indicate that it is the nature of some angels to be bad. We shall hereafter consider each in more detail under the subtitle fallen angels.

All angels are subject to Christ and his power. Peter authoritatively declares this: " . . . Jesus Christ . . . who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him" (1 Peter 3:21-22).

During his earthly ministry our Lord demonstrated commanding authority over evil spirits: "For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit. . . . And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine. . . . Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine" (Mark 5:8, 12-13). All creatures are subject unto the Lord.

Angels, except where righteous holy men are designated as angels, do not live on the earth nor on a planet like earth. Rather, they reside in the presence of God.

The angels do not reside on a planet like this earth;

But they reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire, where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord. (D&C 130:6-7.)

Angels are indeed favored beings. They may have revealed to them most things—past, present, and future. To be continually in the presence of the Lord is a superlative blessing. We should believe in and reverence them.

SOME ANGELS TO BE EXALTED, SOME NOT

As with all of our Father's children, the law of compensation applies to the angels. With reference to all of us, and all other beings created by God, we are to be tested and proved to see if we will do all things whatsoever the Lord our God shall command us (see Abraham 3:25). Those of us and those angels "who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate." And finally, all, including angels, "who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads forever and ever" (Abraham 3:26).

It is written of the righteous angels and Saints: "And then shall the angels be crowned with the glory of his might, and the Saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritance and be made equal with him" (D&C 88:107). This means that worthy Saints and angels shall receive exaltation. They shall be like their Father. They shall be gods. "Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power . . ." (D&C 132:20). Thus is accomplished the very work and glory of the Eternal Father—to have his children be like him (see Moses 1:39). The early Apostles taught this doctrine. " . . . Christ Jesus: Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God" (Philippians 2:5-6). "Now are we the sons of God. . . . When he shall appear, we shall be like him" (1 John 3:2).

However, there will be some angels and some Saints and some others who will not abide in the fulness of the gospel law. They shall, after their resurrection, continue as angels of God forever and ever. "For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever" (D&C 132:17). Such groups shall be "ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory" (D&C 132:16).
