The angels who visit this earth are persons who have been assigned to this earth. That is, spirit children of the Eternal Father who are assigned to other earths and spheres will not minister to the inhabitants here. The Prophet Joseph Smith instructed us in this, saying, "There are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it" (D&C 130:5). All are the children of God in various stages of progressing to become like him. The ones we know have to do with this earth.

From perusal of holy writ, one can discern several types and kinds of persons, in various stages of progression, who the Lord has used as angels in varying circumstances.

PREEXISTENT SPIRITS

We have heretofore examined scriptural evidence showing that men and angels existed as conscious identities before man was first placed on earth. We shall refer to this premortal existence as preexistence, and to those who live there as spirits. All this is made known in Abraham's great vision (see Abraham 3). John the Revelator speaks of the spirit children of the Father at this stage of our existence as angels (see Revelation 12:7-9). Abraham, Moses, Isaiah, and John detail some of our activities at this point in time.

Our having been born to and nurtured by the Eternal Father, it was determined that an earth would be made whereon we might dwell (see Abraham 3:24). Life here was to be a probationary estate designed to prove us (see Abraham 3:25). All of this was according to the Father's plan for the salvation of his children (see Moses 4:2). Satan, one of the preeminent among the angelic hosts there, sought to change the Father's plan. He proposed "that one soul shall not be lost" (Moses 4:1). He, not the Father, was to get the credit, "And surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor" (ibid.).

The Father's plan was advocated among the angels by "my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning" (Moses 4:2). His was a plan allowing free choice, whereas Satan "sought to destroy the agency of man" (Moses 4:3). Satan rebelled and aspired to the throne of God.

There was war in heaven among the preexistent spirits. "Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels" (Revelation 12:7). And God "caused that he should be cast down; and he became Satan . . . the devil" (Moses 4:3-4). Thus, it was written that Satan "was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him" (Abraham 3:28). These angels are said to be cast out. In the words of Peter, "God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell" (2 Peter 2:4).

Active progression and retrogression took place in our first estate. There was division among the angels. There were good angels and there were bad angels. More will be said of the fallen angels subsequently.

The earthly errand of one of these preexistent angels is clearly outlined for us. Bear in mind that when the errand took place, Adam was the first man upon the earth. No activities in the nature of death or translation had taken place. An angel appeared to Adam and taught him a fundamental concept of the gospel. The angel was a preexistent spirit. There was none other than a preexistent spirit available for such an errand at that time.

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me.

And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. (Moses 5:6-8.)

One type and kind of person who has served the Lord as an angel is a spirit child of the Eternal Father known as a preexistent spirit.

TRANSLATED BEINGS

In the early days of the history of the world many righteous men were translated. That is, during the first two millennia of the earth's history, many faithful members of the Church were changed from their earthly sphere of existence to a terrestrial order. Such a change is called translation. (see Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [TPJS] sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [1976], 170-71.) In effect, such righteous Saints were taken into the heavenly realms without tasting death. More precisely, they passed through death and "were with Christ in his resurrection, and . . . shall be in the presence of the Lamb" (D&C 133:55). This amounted to an instantaneous death and resurrection at that time.

Persons who were translated after the resurrection of Jesus will pass through death at the second coming of Christ when they "shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye" from mortality to immortality (D&C 43:32). Pending the Second Coming, translated persons minister according to God's purposes.

Enoch and his people were translated. The city of Enoch was a populous city. The translation of these people took place shortly after Adam's death (See Moses 7:18-21, 31, 63, 69; D&C 38:4; 45:11-14; 84:99-100; Genesis 5:22-24; Hebrews 11:5).

The Inspired Version of Genesis tells us of subsequent translations. Of some faithful holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood after the great flood it is recorded:

And men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven.

And now, Melchizedek was a priest of this order; therefore he obtained peace in Salem, and was called the Prince of peace.

And his people wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, separating it from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter days, or the end of the world. (Inspired Version, Genesis 14:32-34.)

Moses was translated. The Old Testament account indicates he was buried by the hand of the Lord (see Deuteronomy 34:5-7). However, this figure of speech is interpreted for us in the Book of Mormon wherein is said, "the scriptures saith the Lord took Moses unto himself" (Alma 45:19).

Alma the younger was translated. Of him it is said that he "was taken up by the Spirit . . . and we suppose that he [God] has also received Alma in the spirit, unto himself" (Ibid.).

Elijah was translated. His ascent into heaven is told with a flourish. "There appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven" (2 Kings 2:11).

There is a reason that we have record of many translations in the earliest of times and very few translations after our Lord's earthly ministry. It was not until the meridian of time that the Lord opened the door to the preaching of the gospel to the spirits in prison (see 1 Peter 3:18-20; Moses 7:36-40). Since that time the righteous, in due course, could die and be assigned a labor in the spirit world. But what of before? There was no labor there for the righteous dead. Thus it was that many of the ancient righteous Saints were translated and given other ministries to perform pending their eventual exaltation.

The Prophet Joseph Smith says that some of the ministries to which translated beings were assigned were to be angels of God. They are "held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets." (TPJS, 170.) A biblical characterization of an angelic purpose and visitation is given us in the New Testament in the case of two translated beings, Moses and Elijah, who appeared to Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration. "And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him. Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias" (Matthew 17:3-4). This is an account of angelic administration. Modern prophets have told us why Moses and Elijah came to the chief apostle. (See TPJS, 158; Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:107-111.)

Moses and Elijah were translated so that they could come with bodies of flesh and bones to confer keys upon Peter, James, and John on the mount of transfiguration, an event destined to occur prior to the beginning of the resurrection. (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 805.)

This is an illustration of translated beings used as angels to perform God's purposes.

A few special persons who have lived in the Christian era have been translated. The most well-known among these was John. John may have been present when Jesus said, "There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom" (Matthew 16:28). Whether present when that sentence was uttered or not, John was translated.

Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper. . . .

Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.

Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? (John 21:20, 22-23.)

As Joseph Smith pondered this passage of scripture, he inquired of the Lord whether John, the beloved disciple, tarried in the flesh or had died. He was given the following revelation.

And the Lord said unto me: John, my beloved, what desirest thou? For if you shall ask what you will, it shall be granted unto you.

And I said unto him: Lord, give unto me power over death, that I may live and bring souls unto thee.

And the Lord said unto me: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, because thou desirest this thou shalt tarry until I come in my glory, and shalt prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people.

And for this cause the Lord said unto Peter: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? For he desired of me that he might bring souls unto me, but thou desiredst that thou mightest speedily come unto me in my kingdom.

I say unto thee, Peter, this was a good desire; but my beloved has desired that he might do more, or a greater work yet among men than what he has before done.

Yea, he has undertaken a greater work; therefore I will make him as flaming fire and a ministering angel; he shall minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth.

And I will make thee to minister for him and for thy brother James; and unto you three I will give this power and the keys of this ministry until I come.

Verily I say unto you, ye shall both have according to your desires, for ye both joy in that which ye have desired. (D&C 7.)

Attention is drawn to the phrase "I will make him . . . a ministering angel." In partial fulfillment of this statement, this same John, in concert with Peter and James, was a ministering angel to Joseph Smith "in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring [himself] as possessing the keys of the kingdom" (D&C 128:20). This is a further illustration of a translated being used as an angel.

On the American continent, at the time of Christ's appearance to the Nephites, three of the then chosen twelve were also given power over death so that they could continue their ministry until the second coming (see 3 Nephi 28). It is from the account of the translation of these three Nephites that we gain most of our knowledge of the present ministry of translated persons among men. The account of their selection is as follows:

And it came to pass when Jesus had said these words, he spake unto his disciples, one by one, saying unto them: What is it that ye desire of me, after that I am gone to the Father?

And they all spake, save it were three, saying: We desire that after we have lived unto the age of man, that our ministry, wherein thou hast called us, may have an end, that we may speedily come unto thee in thy kingdom.

And he said unto them: Blessed are ye because ye desired this thing of me; therefore, after that ye are seventy and two years old ye shall come unto me in my kingdom; and with me ye shall find rest.

And when he had spoken unto them, he turned himself unto the three, and said unto them: What will ye that I should do unto you, when I am gone unto the Father?

And they sorrowed in their hearts, for they durst not speak unto him the thing which they desired.

And he said unto them: Behold, I know your thoughts, and ye have desired the thing which John, my beloved, who was with me in my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of me.

Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven.

And ye shall never endure the pains of death; but when I shall come in my glory ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality; and then shall ye be blessed in the kingdom of my Father.

And again, ye shall not have pain while ye shall dwell in the flesh, neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world; and all this will I do because of the thing which ye have desired of me, for ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the world shall stand.

And for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one. (3 Nephi 28:1-10.)

From the foregoing account, it is apparent that translated beings after the resurrection of Jesus "never taste of death"; "live to behold all the doings of the Father unto . . . when I come in my glory"; "when I shall come . . . shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality"; "shall not have pain . . . neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world"; "shall have a fulness of joy . . . in the kingdom of my Father." As the prophet Mormon spoke of these happenings, he said that these three were holy men "sanctified in the flesh" (3 Nephi 28:39).

Mormon interlineates in his recording of the Three Nephites and says: "And now I, Mormon, make an end of speaking concerning these things. . . . But behold, I have seen them, and they have ministered unto me. . . . And they are as the angels of God" (3 Nephi 28:24, 26, 30). Here, then, is the prime scriptural rendition of the use of translated beings as angels of God.

In addition, we are told that these particular angels will minister to others. They will minister to both Jew and Gentile and to scattered and lost Israel.

And behold they will be among the Gentiles, and the Gentiles shall know them not.

They will also be among the Jews, and the Jews shall know them not.

And it shall come to pass, when the Lord seeth fit in his wisdom that they shall minister unto all the scattered tribes of Israel, and unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, and shall bring out of them unto Jesus many souls, that their desire may be fulfilled, and also because of the convincing power of God which is in them. (3 Nephi 28:27-29.)

In the New Testament, Jude speaks of angels—preexistent angels—and angels ministering to men on earth (See Jude 1:6, 9). He then quotes a prophecy of Enoch, who, as we have observed, "was taken up into heaven" (Moses 7:21), that is, was translated. The Prophet Joseph Smith said of the translated Enoch: "He is a ministering angel, to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation, and appeared unto Jude" (TPJS, 170). Here, then, is another scriptural account of a translated being, ministering as an angel.

As one contemplates these mysteries, the apostle Paul's closing chapter to the Hebrew Saints comes to mind. He counsels them to "be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares" (Hebrews 13:2). The Lord may have had such translated persons in mind when he said in our day: "All are under sin, except those which I have reserved unto myself, holy men that ye know not of" (D&C 49:8).

SPIRITS OF JUST MEN MADE PERFECT

Most persons have died and are awaiting the day of their resurrection. Many among them will be resurrected on the morning of the first resurrection with celestial bodies of great glory. Modern scripture refers to these as "just men made perfect" (D&C 76:69). These are the spirits of men who have worked out their salvation but are awaiting the day of the Resurrection. The revelation says that these just men made perfect are part of the "innumerable company of angels" (D&C 76:67) in a heavenly place.

These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever.

These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people.

These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection.

These are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just.

These are they who are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all.

These are they who have come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn.

These are they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all.

These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood. (D&C 76:62-69.)

For the purposes of this discussion, attention is called to the phraseology that just men made perfect are angels. The spirits of certain persons who have left their bodies in death and who reside in the spirit world are angels. The spirit of Jesus ministered in the spirit world for three days before it was reunited with the body in the resurrection (see 1 Peter 3:18-21; 4:6; D&C 76:73-74). "And also they who are the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh" (D&C 76:73). Peter tells of this visitation:

For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit:

By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison;

Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water. . . .

For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. (1 Peter 3:18-20; 4:6.)

In his vision of the redemption of the dead, President Joseph F. Smith saw that during his ministry to the spirits in prison, "the Lord went not in person among the wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth," but that he went "to declare . . . liberty to the captives" who had been faithful, to the vast assemblage of the righteous, for they "had looked upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage" (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 472-75). It is to these faithful that the terminology "just men made perfect" applies.

The apostle Paul uses the same phraseology. He writes of the "innumerable company of angels" who are come to the "heavenly Jerusalem" as "the spirits of just men made perfect" (Hebrews 12:22-23). The New Testament thus equates just men made perfect to angels.

Paul writes that these angels reside in "the city of the living God" (Hebrews 12:22), or, as we would say, they live in heaven. The Prophet Joseph Smith says that "There are two kinds of beings in heaven, namely: Angels, who are resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones—. . . Secondly: the spirits of just men made perfect, they who are not resurrected, but inherit the same glory" (D&C 129:1, 3).

God uses the spirits of just men made perfect as angels in accomplishing his purposes. Men of spiritual maturity and sensitivity record many ministrations of such angels. President Wilford Woodruff recorded many such angelic visitations to him. "Joseph Smith visited me a great deal after his death, and taught me many important principles" (The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 288).

Careful consideration of some of the prominent biblical angelic visitations leads one to the conclusion that the visitants were spirits of just men made perfect. For example, the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh verses of the first chapter of Luke commence what is perhaps the most well-known of all angelic visits: "The angel Gabriel was sent from God . . . to a virgin . . . and the virgin's name was Mary." Here, holy writ bears record of the activities of an angel by name. We are indebted to the Prophet Joseph Smith for the insight that Gabriel is Noah (TPJS, 157). With this added knowledge, and knowing that no one was resurrected prior to Jesus, it follows that Gabriel was the spirit of a just man made perfect at that point in time. The same could be said of Gabriel's ministrations to Daniel (see Daniel 8:16; 9:21) and his appearance to Zacharias (see Luke 1:5-19).

Joseph Smith had such familiarity with angels that he tells us how to recognize the various kinds of angels. Of an angelic visitant he says:

If he be the spirit of a just man made perfect he will come in his glory; for that is the only way he can appear—

Ask him to shake hands with you, but he will not move, because it is contrary to the order of heaven for a just man to deceive; but he will still deliver his message. (D&C 129:6-7.)

The spirits of just men made perfect are used as angels in God's purposes.

RESURRECTED PERSONAGES

In fulfillment of prophecy—"And many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of their dead; and many Saints shall appear unto many" (Helaman 14:25)—after the resurrection of Jesus many of the righteous dead came forth from the grave.

And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent;

And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the Saints which slept arose,

And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many. (Matthew 27:51-53.)

As it was prophesied, so it came to pass. Many righteous persons were resurrected after Jesus' resurrection, and they ministered as angels to many.

Resurrected persons have "bodies of flesh and bones" (D&C 129:1). The Gospel according to Luke makes this perfectly clear:

Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.

But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.

And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. (Luke 24:36-39; see also D&C 129:2.)

The resurrection is the creation of an immortal soul. It consists of the uniting of the body and spirit in immortality (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:258-301). A resurrected being is one for whom body and spirit are inseparably connected. It is a state of incorruption (see 1 Corinthians 15; Alma 11:37-46; 12:12-18).

Resurrected persons serving as angels are tangible. Modern scripture specifically designates "angels, who are resurrected personages" as "having bodies of flesh and bones" (D&C 129:1).

This type of angel has been instrumental in the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation. It was of such angels that John recorded: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (Revelation 14:6). John saw in vision the fulness of the gospel being restored in these last days by angels.

John the Baptist was such an angel. He restored the Aaronic Priesthood to the earth as a part of the restoration of all things (see D&C 13).

Peter and James were also resurrected personages serving as angelic ministrants when they restored the Melchizedek Priesthood to the earth (see D&C 27:12-13; 128:20).

Moroni was such an angelic ministrant when he appeared to Joseph Smith and brought to the world the Book of Mormon (Joseph Smith-History 1:30-32; D&C 128:20).

Michael was such an angelic visitant when he declared his "dispensation . . . rights . . . keys . . . honors . . . glory, and . . . priesthood" (D&C 128:21) in his part of the restoration.

Gabriel, at the stage of his ministry wherein he played a part in bringing all things together in one dispensation, was a resurrected angel (ibid.). When he appeared to Mary (Luke 1:26-38), it was to tell her that she was to be the mother of the Son of God. Inasmuch as this same Son of God was the first fruits of the resurrection, Gabriel, at that time, was the spirit of a just man made perfect.

Raphael was a resurrected personage when he played the role of an angel in the restoration of all things (see D&C 128:21).

Moses, in his indispensable role in committing "the keys of the gathering of Israel . . . and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north" (D&C 110:11) in this dispensation, was a resurrected personage. It has been heretofore observed that when he appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration in the meridian of time, he was a translated being.

Elijah, in restoring the keys that would "turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers," appeared as a resurrected angel (D&C 110:13-16). As with Moses, his prior angelic administration on the Mount of Transfiguration had been as a translated being.

"Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:12). The ancient prophet was a resurrected being at this time.

For their role in the restoration of all things, Moses and Elijah, who in the first instance had been translated, "were with Christ in his resurrection" (D&C 133:55).

These are not all of the resurrected angels who had part in the restoration of the fulness of the gospel. The restoring angel, as envisioned by John, was a composite angel. That is, he represented the aforesaid angels and others. For it is written that "divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time" would declare "their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood" (D&C 128:21). And so it is that the prophecy made by John has come to pass. Angels have restored the everlasting gospel.

RIGHTEOUS MORTAL MEN

The scriptures refer to certain mortal men who act as messengers or agents of God as angels. This is proper usage of the term inasmuch as angels are associated as messengers from God. Righteous holy men are thus sometimes referred to as angels.

The King James Version of the Old Testament gives an account of two angels who came to rescue Lot from Sodom. The wicked inhabitants of Sodom referred to the angels as men and sought to improperly use them (see Genesis 19). In the nineteenth chapter of Genesis in the Inspired Version, Joseph Smith indicates that these "angels of God" "were holy men."

The New Testament uses the term angel to designate certain church leaders. Thus, it is written: "Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write" (Revelation 2:1). There are seven such uses of the term angel in the New Testament.

Once again the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the Inspired Version, sheds light on these biblical renditions of the term angel. In each instance his rendering of the passage is "the servant of the church" in lieu of "the angel of the church" (Inspired Version, Revelation 2:1; 3:1, 7, 14).

There is some evidence in the scriptures that the term angel may mean both heavenly personages and earthly persons. Of Jesus it is said in the last days: "And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds" (Matthew 24:31). To the Saints in our day the Lord says, "Verily, I say unto you that ye are chosen out of the world to declare my gospel with the sound of rejoicing, as with the voice of a trump. . . . And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice" (D&C 29:4, 7). Righteous Saints, engaged in missionary endeavors, are numbered with the angels the New Testament says shall gather together the elect. Heavenly angels are no doubt also engaged in this cause.

Righteous and holy mortal men may properly be designated as angels.

THE LORD AS THE ANGEL

The Lord is not an angel in the usual sense. However, Christ is the messenger of salvation and the messenger of the covenant (see Malachi 3:1). He is the one who carries out the will of the Father (see Moses 4:2). Therefore, the Lord may play the part of an angel. Although not usual, it is proper to call him an angel. Some biblical citations refer to the Lord as an angel. In point of fact, the Lord is called The Angel in a blessing given by Jacob. "God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil" (Genesis 48:15-16).

The King James Version of Exodus says of Moses' experience on Horeb, the mountain of God, "And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed . . . God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said . . . I am the God of thy father" (Exodus 3:2, 4, 6). This is a standard biblical reference to the Lord as an angel.

Joseph Smith says this should have been rendered "the presence of the Lord appeared unto him, in a flame of fire in the midst of a bush" (Inspired Version, Exodus 3:2). Be this as it may, the standard translation calls God an angel, and attention should be called to this in an essay on the types and kinds of angels. One way that the term angel is used in the holy scriptures is to denote the Lord God himself.
