The purposes and functions of the angels are legion. They encompass substantially the whole of the purposes and functions of God. The most cogent and succinct restatement of God's purposes is given in his own words: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

Angels are a medium of revelation from God to man. They act on his errands. "For behold, the Lord God hath sent forth the angel crying through the midst of heaven, saying: Prepare ye the way of the Lord" (D&C 133:17). Holy writ is literally filled with accounts of angelic visitants doing God's bidding. Herewith are listed some of their doings.

DIVINE MESSENGERS

God's messengers are called angels. These are persons whom he sends (often from his personal presence in the eternal worlds) to deliver his messages. The most universally known angelic messenger is Gabriel. The account of his errands to Zacharias and Mary is recorded in the Gospel of Luke:

And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense.

And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.

But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.

And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth.

For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb.

And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.

And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.

And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad tidings.

And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.

And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long in the temple.

And when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he beckoned [continued making signs] unto them, and remained speechless.

And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.

And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying,

Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.

And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,

To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.

And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.

And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God.

And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus.

He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David:

And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?

And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.

For with God nothing shall be impossible [no word from God shall be void of power].

And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her. (Luke 1:11-38.)

A prominent Old Testament illustration is found in 2 Kings: "And the angel of the Lord said unto Elijah, Go down with him: be not afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with him unto the king" (2 Kings 1:15).

A less well-known illustration, but quotable to demonstrate the general use of such beings at various times and places, was recorded by the Old Testament prophet, Zechariah: "Then said I, O my Lord, what are these? And the angel that talked with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these be" (Zechariah 1:9).

And to one among the Saints in the former-day Church, "The angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert" (Acts 8:26).

Some of the words of God imparted to men by such servants are of such significance in his plan of salvation that they are listed here separately.

TO TEACH

In the very beginning, God established a pattern of his teaching men by way of angels. It started with the first man, Adam.

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me.

And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. (Moses 5:6-8.)

Thus the basic relationship between the Son of God and man was announced and taught by an angel. This system of teaching has been repeated over and over again.

The Book of Mormon furnishes the best examples of the use of angels as teachers. King Benjamin commences one of his great sermons by saying, "And the things which I shall tell you are made known to me by an angel from God." The angel said unto the king, "I am come to declare unto you the glad tidings of great joy" (Mosiah 3:2-3). Then is recorded one of the most significant sermons ever given, including this key: "Salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:18).

Alma tells us that "angels are declaring it unto many at this time in our land; and this is for the purpose of preparing the hearts of the children of men to receive his word" (Alma 13:24). He further records: "Many did declare unto the people that they had seen angels and had conversed with them; and thus they had told them things of God, and of his righteousness" (Alma 19:34). Alma says plainly, "Therefore, in his mercy he doth visit us by his angels, that the plan of salvation might be made known unto us as well as unto future generations" (Alma 24:14).

TO CALL MEN TO REPENTANCE

The Lord's gospel is termed "the gospel of repentance" (D&C 13). This is how important the principle of repentance is. It is not surprising, then, that Nephi tells us, "He hath sent his angels to declare the tidings of the conditions of repentance, which bringeth unto the power of the Redeemer, unto the salvation of their souls" (Helaman 5:11).

Mormon says that the calling of men to repentance is part of the ministry of angels.

Neither have angels ceased to minister unto the children of men.

For behold, they are subject unto him, to minister according to the word of his command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness.

And the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father. . . . (Moroni 7:29-31.)

TO TESTIFY OF THE FATHER AND THE SON

One of the fundamental purposes and functions of the angels is to bear testimony of the Father and the Son. "And Enoch beheld angels descending out of heaven, bearing testimony of the Father and Son" (Moses 7:27).

Once again, it is Mormon who is quoted as specifying testimony bearing as one of the functions of the ministry of angels: "Neither have angels ceased to minister unto the children of men. . . . And the office of their ministry is . . . that they may bear testimony of him" (Moroni 7:29, 31).

TO GUIDE MEN

One of the purposes of angels is to guide men in their performance of God's work. To Abraham, "the Lord God of heaven" said that "he shall send his angel before thee" (Genesis 24:7) to guide him in his activities.

As Moses performed God's will in liberating captive Israel, he was promised: "Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared" (Exodus 23:20). And so it was. "And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed . . ." (Exodus 14:19).

It was an "angel of the Lord" who guided Philip through the desert (Acts 8:26).

TO GIVE MEN PRIESTHOOD AND KEYS

In New Testament terminology, certain men are "ordained by angels" (Galatians 3:19). That is, certain priestly keys and authorities are given to men by angels from God.

Significantly, at the commencement of the dispensation of the fulness of times, it was the Angel Moroni who told the Prophet Joseph Smith, using the words of the Lord, "I will reveal unto you the Priesthood" by way of angelic administrations (see Joseph Smith-History 1:38). The specific angelic ministrant here referred to is "Elijah the prophet" (Ephesians 1:10; D&C 2:1-3; 27:13). True to his word, this angel did take part in the restoration of priesthood keys of this dispensation (see D&C 110:13-16). True to the concept he enunciated, the Lord sent John the Baptist, by then a resurrected personage, to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, on 15 May 1829, to "confer the Priesthood of Aaron" (D&C 13). Subsequently, in time, he sent "Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 128:20). The Melchizedek Priesthood was thus restored to the earth by the angelic presence of Peter, James, and John. The Lord himself is "a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec" (Hebrews 7:17), and he it was who had chosen and called Peter, James, and John and "ordained" (John 15:16) them to offices in this priesthood.

There were many other angels who attended Joseph Smith in gathering "together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth" (D&C 27:13; see also Ephesians 1:10). He records the remarkable occurrences of 3 April 1836, in the temple at Kirtland, Ohio:

Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. (D&C 110:11-16.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith records other visitations in glorious terms: " . . . Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets—the book to be revealed . . . And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:20-21).

Think of it! In our day the priesthood of God, with all its keys and authorities, all of its rights, majesty, and glory, has been restored by angelic administrations. And all of this according to the pattern afore set by God himself!

These are some of the most significant of all angelic functions. They are the fulfillment of many major prophecies. In some of the words and the reasoning of the apostle Paul: the gospel is "the power of God unto salvation" (Romans 1:16); God has chosen and called certain brethren and given them "the power of God: to minister and "by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe" (1 Corinthians 1:21); "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (Hebrews 5:4). Aaron was called through revelation to the living prophet to "minister unto [God] in the priest's office" (Exodus 28:1) and was ordained and set apart as was Joshua. "And the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the Son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him" (Numbers 27:18).

The ability to ordain and set apart legal administrators in the gospel and its ordinances by the laying on of hands was restored to the earth by the angels as described above. It is thus not an overstatement to say that our very salvation is now available because of these angelic administrations. The keys of the kingdom of heaven, with the power to bind on earth and in heaven given by Jesus to Peter (see Matthew 16:13-19), were returned to the earth by the bearer. Our salvation is contingent upon the administration of angels.

TO GATHER THE ELECT

Matthew records that in the day of the coming of the Son of Man "in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory . . . he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds" (Matthew 24:30-31). Thus we conclude that one of the functions of the angels will be to gather the elect.

We have heretofore noted that as part of the Restoration, Moses, the prophet and law-giver of ancient Israel, the one chosen of God to lead his people out of Egyptian bondage, came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and committed to them "the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north" (D&C 110:11). Those keys are now vested in the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

After the Lord Jesus had set up his kingdom in the meridian of time; after he had spent forty days with his disciples as a resurrected personage, teaching them all "things pertaining to the kingdom of God" that they should know at that time; and when he was ready to ascend to his Father, the disciples asked him, "Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" They already had his church, but they were looking forward to the day when Israel as a people and as a nation would be gathered together and given again a high status among the nations of the earth (see Acts 1:3-6).

Jesus answered that this glorious eventuality was not for their day, that they were to do their assigned labors, and it was not for them "to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power" (Acts 1:7). Then he ascended into heaven, leaving to a future and distant day the establishment of the kingdom among the lost and scattered sheep of Israel—leaving the fulfillment of that divine promise to a day when the gospel would be restored by angelic ministrations—leaving it to a day when the decree would go forth that the restored gospel should be preached "to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (Revelation 14:6).

That time is now. With the authoritive "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM," Joseph Smith and six other elders were told in September 1830, "Verily, I say unto you that ye are chosen out of the world to declare my gospel with the sound of rejoicing, as with the voice of a trump. . . . And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice" (D&C 29:1, 4, 7). Bear in mind that one proper use of the term angels is to denote righteous mortal men on the Lord's errand. Those who are properly "chosen out of the world to declare my gospel" and "bring to pass the gathering of mine elect" are angels.

The gathering of the elect is a great missionary undertaking. It is a matter of inviting scattered Israel to return to the Lord their God; to worship once again the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob; to come unto the Lord and forsake their false creeds. It is a call to worship that God who made them. These are "the servants of God" going forth and "saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come; And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters" (D&C 133:38-39).

TO MINISTER TO MEN

One of the most usual and, comfortingly, primary functions of angels is to minister to men in the flesh. To the psalmist it was given to understand this: "For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands" (Psalm 91:11-12). The apostle Paul was given to understand this and spoke plainly about ministering spirits: "And of the angels he saith, Angels are ministering spirits" (Inspired Version, Hebrews 1:7; see also Hebrews 1:14).

To the devout, God-fearing centurion, Cornelius, God sent an angel who said, "Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God" (Acts 10:4). Having thus comforted Cornelius, the angel sent him to Peter, who could both tell him what was necessary for him to do to be saved and authoritatively administer the ordinances necessary (see Acts 10:1-10). From this experience we discern a secondary lesson. The angel did not administer the ordinances of salvation when there was an authorized mortal who could do it. He sent Cornelius to Peter, who could tell him what he "oughtest to do."

Of Nephi who was ministering during Christ's visitation on the American continent it is written, "So great was his faith on the Lord Jesus Christ that angels did minister unto him daily" (3 Nephi 7:18). This should serve as a prototype for us. Such was not an altogether unusual occurrence among the faithful. Many "saw the heavens open; and angels came down out of heaven and ministered unto them" (Helaman 5:48). "And angels did appear unto men, wise men, and did declare unto them glad tidings of great joy" (Helaman 16:14).

And as they looked to behold they cast their eyes towards heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them. (3 Nephi 17:24.)

The beloved John was promised by the Lord that he could have the righteous desire of his heart and "tarry till I come" (John 21:22). Modern revelation enhances our knowledge of this most interesting incident in our Lord's ministry and says of John: "I will make him as flaming fire and a ministering angel; he shall minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth" (D&C 7:6).

When the priesthood of Aaron was restored to the earth, in our day, we were told that it "holds the keys of the ministering of angels" (D&C 13). Clearly this function of the angels is and ought to be enjoyed by the Saints.

TO MINISTER TO DISEMBODIED SPIRITS

Jurisdiction of the angels is not confined to men in the flesh. Quite obviously the acquiring of evidence of their activities out of our sphere is difficult. However, Luke records the words of Jesus relative to a certain rich man and Lazarus and what happened to them after their earthly deaths. The telling sheds light on a function of angels not otherwise catalogued. The Lord is quoted as saying that when one of the men died, his spirit was taken by the angels to the bosom of Abraham. It appears then that one function of angels is to assist in God's purposes after man's earthly probation. The pertinent verses read: "And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; And in hell he lift up his eyes . . ." (Luke 16:22-23). From this we may conclude that angels work with disembodied spirits.

This is in harmony with the scriptural concept that there are no dead unto God; all are alive unto him. The living and the dead are simply in various stages of progression. There is no such thing as death as far as God is concerned (see Matthew 22:32). God's purposes continue after this life.

TO MINISTER TO RESURRECTED PERSONAGES

As angelic functions continue into the spirit world, so they continue after the resurrection and judgment. Those who are assigned to the terrestrial glory will be ministered to by persons of the celestial glory. "And also the telestial receive it of the administering of angels who are appointed to minister for them, or who are appointed to be ministering spirits for them" (D&C 76:88).

For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever. (D&C 132:17.)

These, "when they are out of the world . . . are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory" (D&C 132:16). These angels are in a saved condition. That is, they are saved from death and hell and are resurrected with bodies of celestial glory. However, they do not have the fulness of those "who keep their second estate" and thus "have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever" (Abraham 3:26). They minister to their brethren who have received "my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto [them]" (D&C 84:38). Although angels are directed to do God's purposes, there is a difference between being an angel and a god. Of those who have all that the Father has, it is said: "Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them." Such beings have "exaltation and continuation of the lives" (D&C 132:20, 22). Those who continue as angels do not (see D&C 132:16).

TO WORSHIP GOD

Worship consists of paying divine honors to a deity. The Father and the Son are the objects of all true worship. "All men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him" (John 5:23). "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve" (Matthew 4:10; see also Exodus 34:14; Mosiah 18:25; D&C 20:17-19). These divine fiats apply equally to men and to angels.

In point of fact, the Lord specifically requires worship by his angels. "And again, when he bringeth in the firstbegotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him" (Hebrews 1:6).

Angels are included in the requirement: "Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the heights. Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts" (Psalm 148:1-2).

One of the proper functions of angels, as with the rest of us, is to worship God. When John was given a vision of the future heavens, he saw and "heard the voice of many angels round about the throne . . . Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb . . . And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever" (Revelation 5:11-13).

TO PROTECT MEN

There are many instances in which angels have saved men from perilous circumstances. Faithful people have repeatedly been guarded and watched over. Whole groups have been preserved, such as when the angel of the Lord's presence saved Israel (see Isaiah 7-9; D&C 133:53).

The Lord whispered to David, "The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them" (Psalm 34:7). In the psalm of Moses, it is said, "There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone" (Psalm 91:10-11).

Perhaps the best-known instance of an angel being dispatched by God to guard a righteous man is the case of Daniel. Daniel had been cast into a den of lions. The king fasted and prayed throughout the night for Daniel and in the morning said, "O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?" Daniel replied, "My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me" (Daniel 6:20-22).

On a similar mission an angel stopped Nephi's brothers from beating him (see 1 Nephi 3:29-31). In truth, the Lord does "encamp about" the righteous (see Zechariah 9:8). One of the functions of angels is to protect and guard us.

This well-known function of angels has given rise to a false assumption on the part of some scripture-reading people. The unwarranted assumption is that all men—or if not that, at least those who are righteous—have guardian angels. The fact that angels have intervened to preserve someone in a particular perilous circumstance does not establish the fact that people generally have guardian angels, any more than the fact that angels have otherwise ministered to selected persons would prove that angels have so ministered to men generally.

Every person born into the world is accorded protecting care by God. Such preserving care is provided by the Light of Christ (see D&C 84:44-118; Moroni 7:12-19). God-fearing people are often guarded against evil in compliance with its promptings. In addition to the Light of Christ, baptized persons have the gift of the Holy Ghost. By virtue of this endowment we may receive enlightenment and thereby be guarded and shielded (see D&C 8:2-4).

There is no scriptural justification for the tradition that a particular angel is assigned to one throughout one's life as a guardian angel. Such a procedure would appear to run counter to the known manner in which a benevolent Lord watches over his mortal children. The term guardian angel is a figure of speech that usually has reference to God's protecting care or an angel dispatched in God's purposes such as was the case with Daniel.

TO REAP

Angels are now reaping the earth. On the second day of January 1831, the Lord announced: "The angels are waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned; and, behold, the enemy is combined" (D&C 38:12; see also D&C 86:5). All of this is in accordance with the teachings given by Jesus during his earthly ministry. Interpreting the parable of the tares, the Lord said:

He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man;

The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one;

The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.

As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world.

The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity:

And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. (Matthew 13:37-42.)

One of the presidents of the Church has told us that this day has come. "God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 230).

One of the functions of the angels is to be reapers.

TO DESTROY

Closely akin to reaping is the function of destroying. To some angels is given power to hurt the earth: "And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth" (Revelation 7:2).

One means of preparing men for the truth is to humble them through affliction. Human nature has not changed much since the confrontation between Moses and Pharaoh when the Lord said, "How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me" (Exodus 10:3). The terrible consequences of this confrontation are chronicled in the book of Exodus (see Exodus 7-12).

Since that awful time millions of people annually practice the rite of the Passover. "For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn . . . I will execute judgment: I am the Lord" (Exodus 12:12). The one with power to save has power to destroy. "There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy" (James 4:12). The scriptures have since referred to this incident as a time the destroying angel passed by the children of Israel, and in our day, contingent upon our keeping God's commandments, we are told: "And I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them" (D&C 89:21).

Luke, in the Acts of the Apostles, records an incident of a destroying angel. "And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost" (Acts 12:23).

Some of the errands to which some angels will be and have been assigned are missions of destruction.

ALL NEEDFUL WORKS IN GOD'S PURPOSES

So diverse are the assignments of the angels that it does not serve a useful purpose here to further categorize the purposes and functions incident to angelic administrators. Suffice it to say that all needful works relative to God's purposes may be delegated to his created children, the angels. Some of their recorded activities that would not logically fall into the categories aformentioned would be:

In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.

And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.

His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow:

And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.

And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.

He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.

And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you. (Matthew 28:1-7.)

But the angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought them forth, and said,

Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life. (Acts 5:19-20.)

And as they lifted up their hands upon me, that they might offer me up and take away my life, behold, I lifted up my voice unto the Lord my God, and the Lord hearkened and heard, and he filled me with the vision of the Almighty, and the angel of his presence stood by me, and immediately unloosed my bands. (Abraham 1:15.)

The voice of Michael . . . detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light! (D&C 128:20.)

It seems to me that this is a sufficient listing to indicate a general pattern of using angels as a medium between God and man. We shall hereafter consider the truthfulness of Mormon's teachings, that "neither have angels ceased to minister unto the children of men" (Moroni 7:29).

MINISTRATIONS AFTER RESURRECTION COMPLETED

After the resurrection is completed, when the spirits and bodies of all personages connected with earth have been inseparably connected, there will still be ministration of angels. Certain resurrected personages will have assignments to minister to other resurrected personages who were their former fellow mortals. For instance, resurrected persons in the terrestrial kingdom will serve as ministering spirits to other resurrected persons in the telestial kingdom (D&C 76:88; Hebrews 1:14). Certain resurrected persons in the celestial kingdom will serve as "ministering servants" to other resurrected persons in a more exalted sphere of the celestial kingdom (see D&C 132:16-17).

The ministration of angels is an eternal reality.
