Very little has been revealed about the organization that exists among angelic beings. However, both modern and ancient scriptures indicate that an organization does exist. Some of the angels are designated by name. Some are not. The New Testament and the Doctrine and Covenants tell us by name who is the chief one of the angels (see 1 Thessalonians 4:16; Jude 9; D&C 29:26; 88:112; 107:54; 128:21). This is designation by rank. We thus know that there is a celestial hierarchy.

John the Revelator declares that some angels are stronger than others and that some angels are greater than others. He records, "And I saw a strong angel . . ." (Revelation 5:2). The implication of this terminology is clear. There are differing orders of angels. Angels have various assignments and various capabilities to accomplish the assigned tasks. Some of the tasks are more significant than others and require more power and authority in their performance. Some angels are granted more power and have more authority than others.

A modern Apostle puts it simply: "As with men, so with angels. Some are greater than others. There is rank and precedence, and there are varying degrees of power and might among God's ministers" (Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:471).

Although holy writ does not detail the complex structure, complete with lines of authority that would seem to exist, we are given much useful knowledge about some angels, their place in the system of things, and their job descriptions. We will now distill this knowledge from the scriptures.

MICHAEL

Michael is designated as an archangel. An archangel is a chief angel. Michael is the only angel so designated in the scriptures. This appellation is repeatedly used both in modern scripture and in the New Testament. In terms of rank he is thus the most prominent of all angels. He is the ranking angel. There is no angel of higher status. He is the first angel in the celestial hierarchy.

In our pre-earth life, "Michael was the most intelligent, powerful, and mighty spirit son of God, who was designated to come to this earth, excepting only the Firstborn, under whose direction and pursuant to whose counsel he worked" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 491).

Michael's part in the creation of this earth was second only to that of Christ (Ibid.; see also Abraham 3:22-24).

When Satan rebelled against the Father in our pre-earth life, and there was war in heaven, it was Michael who led the hosts of the faithful in casting Satan out (see Revelation 12:7-9). I, for one, praise his name for my association with him there.

When the time came for the earth to be peopled, the spirit Michael was assigned to become the first mortal man, and he became known as Adam. He is thus referred to in the book of Daniel as the Ancient of Days. We are indebted to the inspiration of the Prophet Joseph for this invaluable information about Michael, Adam, the Ancient of Days: "Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael. . . ." (TPJS, 157.) As the first man, he fulfilled his foreordained destiny as the first (under Christ) in priesthood hierarchy. The Prophet Joseph continued, "He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men" (ibid.; italics added). "It is through him that Christ is revealed, that all revelation comes, that the Lord's affairs on earth are directed during the pre-millennial era" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 491; see also TPJS, 157-59, 167-69).

Three years before he died, Adam called together his family in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. "And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel" (D&C 107:54). Michael was given "the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One" (D&C 78:16). That is, he holds the keys of salvation for all men associated with this earth, under Jesus only.

The angel Michael has been much in evidence over his stewardship. He contended with the devil over the body of Moses (see Jude 9). He ministered comfort to the prophet Daniel (see Daniel 10:13, 21). He appeared to Joseph Smith to detect "the devil when he appeared as an angel of light" (see D&C 128:20). He appeared to Joseph Smith to confer keys and authorities (see D&C 128:21). He was with Christ in the resurrection (see D&C 133:54-55; Matthew 27:52-53).

Michael will yet play an important role in the matters of this earth. He will convene another council at Adam-ondi-Ahman just prior to the dreadful day of the Lord. At that time all persons who have served under his direction will give an accounting of their ministry and stewardships. Jesus Christ will come and receive from father Adam (Michael) and all others a final accounting (see D&C 116; Daniel 7:9-14, 21-22, 26-27). Michael will partake of the sacrament with Christ and others (see D&C 27:11). He shall fight the battle of the Saints "at the time of the end" (see Daniel 11:40; 12:1). He shall sound his trump and the dead shall come forth from their graves.

But, behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth—yea, even all. (D&C 29:26.)

He will lead the armies of heaven against the hosts of hell in the final great battle when Lucifer is cast out eternally.

And so on, until the seventh angel shall sound his trump; and he shall stand forth upon the land and upon the sea, and swear in the name of him who sitteth upon the throne, that there shall be time no longer; and Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years.

And then he shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together his armies.

And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven.

And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies.

And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the Saints any more at all.

For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb.

This is the glory of God, and the sanctified; and they shall not any more see death. (D&C 88:110-16.)

Michael the archangel—Father Adam—was one of the most noble characters who ever lived. We have mentioned his angelic functions only. In the flesh he was baptized (Moses 6:64-66), married for eternity, for there was no death at that time (Moses 3:21-25), had the fulness of the gospel (Moses 5:57-59), and endured to the end in righteousness for 930 years. All that he did was "under the counsel and direction of the Holy One" (D&C 78:16). He will finally reign over his righteous posterity in the patriarchal order for all eternity. He will be an angel no longer, not even the chief angel. He will be a god (see Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:90-106; D&C 132).

GABRIEL

Second in the priesthood hierarchy among the angels is Gabriel. The Prophet Joseph Smith says simply: "Gabriel . . . stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood" (TPJS, 157). That is, in rank and precedent, Gabriel stands next to Michael the archangel.

Incident to his preeminent position in priestly authority we know that Gabriel was among the spirit children of God shown to Abraham in a vision of pre-earth life, and described as one of "the noble and great ones" who "wast chosen before . . . [he] wast born," and of whom the Lord said, "I will make my rulers" (Abraham 3:22-23). He was given the Melchizedek Priesthood there (see Alma 13:3-7).

It is assumed that he was among those to whom God said, "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell" (Abraham 3:24). Joseph Fielding Smith, one of the finest Latter-day Saint students of the scriptures, commented: "It is true that Adam helped form the earth. He labored with our Savior Jesus Christ. I have a strong view or conviction that there were others who assisted them. Perhaps Noah . . . and those who were appointed to be rulers before the earth was formed" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:74-75). It is believed that Gabriel helped form the earth, although the scriptures do not name him by name in this work.

When Gabriel was assigned to come to this earth, as his probationary estate, and take upon himself a mortal tabernacle, he was called Noah. For this insight into the eternal scheme of things we are once again indebted to the Prophet Joseph Smith, who wrote, "Noah, . . . is Gabriel" (TPJS, 157).

While in the flesh, Noah "was called of God" to be a presiding "high priest" and was the father of all living in this day, and to him was given the "dominion." He held priesthood "keys first on earth, and then in heaven" (ibid.).

Gabriel (Noah) proved himself well while in the flesh. "But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God" (Genesis 6:8-9). One could hardly have a better report on a more successful probationary estate. He had the fulness of the gospel (see Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:160), meaning all that pertains to exaltation in the celestial kingdom, and endured to the end of his long life in righteousness.

To the Bible-reading world, Gabriel is the most prominent of all of the angels. This stems from his incomparable, well-known errands to Zacharias: "And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad tidings" (Luke 1:19); and subsequently to Mary: "And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary" (Luke 1:26-27). He thus became the precursor of John the Baptist and, finally, the harbinger of the ultimate good news, the advent of God in the flesh. Well might his fame spread abroad!

Long before this especial business was entrusted to him, we have biblical evidence that Gabriel was a ministering angel to Daniel. He records: "Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision . . . touched me" (Daniel 9:21). Gabriel had been called upon to help Daniel once before (see Daniel 8:16).

During his earth life Gabriel (Noah) "received a dispensation of warning when the whole world had fallen into apostasy" (see Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:161). Noah was the head of a gospel dispensation. To fulfill his position in the restoration of all things Gabriel came in modern times and conferred the keys of his dispensation upon Joseph Smith: " . . . the voice of Gabriel . . . declaring . . . [his] dispensation, . . . rights, . . . keys, . . . honors, . . . majesty and glory, and the power of . . . priesthood. . . ." (D&C 128:21).

Probably because of his prominence in announcing the birth of our Lord, there is a sectarian tradition that Gabriel will blow his horn to herald the Resurrection. There is no scriptural justification for this tradition. In point of fact, as we have heretofore seen, it will be Michael the archangel who shall sound the trump at that great day (see D&C 88:106-116).

The position of Gabriel is secure. His inheritance will be with those who are perfect and walk with God.

RAPHAEL

The Bible contains no reference to the angel Raphael. The Prophet Joseph Smith did not record his rank or precedence among celestial beings. However, it is clear that this angel had a mortal existence and held keys of priesthood power during his earthly ministry. All this is made known to us because Raphael appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith in modern times and conferred the keys of his dispensation. He was thus a principal participant in the great restoration of all things. His part is recorded in modern scripture.

And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places . . . the voice . . . of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope! (D&C 128:21.)

In the foregoing citation it is said of Raphael that he declared his dispensation. This is in accord with the pattern set in the restoration of the dispensation of the fulness of times. All former and prior dispensations are to be gathered into one. All keys and powers of former dispensations are gathered into this last great, culminating dispensation (see Ephesians 1:10; D&C 27:13). Careful perusal of the scriptures indicates, in almost each instance, the name and personage of the angelic visitant who restored the keys of the basic biblical dispensations (see D&C 110). I say, almost all, because a ministrant from one of the major biblical dispensations is not listed by name or dispensation.

Because the Doctrine and Covenants states that Raphael declared his dispensation, and because the declaring of one biblical dispensation is not otherwise recorded in holy writ, I venture to speculate that Raphael is a ministrant from a missing dispensation—the dispensation of Enoch. A modern author joins me in this educated guess:

As to Raphael's mortal identity, we can only speculate. We do know the personages, however, who restored the keys exercised in the various great dispensations mentioned in the Bible, with the exception of the dispensation of Enoch. An inference thus arises that Raphael may be Enoch or some other great prophet from his dispensation. (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 168.)

If Raphael were Enoch, he enjoyed a most remarkable mortal ministry. "And it came to pass that Enoch journeyed in the land, among the people; and as he journeyed, the Spirit of God descended out of heaven, and abode upon him" (Moses 6:26).

And so great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, . . . and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course . . .

And the Lord called his people Zion. . . .

And Enoch and all his people walked with God, and he dwelt in the midst of Zion; and it came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, Zion is Fled. (Moses 7:13, 18, 69.)

Since then many persons "were caught up by the powers of heaven into Zion" (Moses 7:27). Zion has become the term to denote the pure in heart (see D&C 97:21). The apostle Paul uses the term "mount Sion" to refer to the abode of exalted beings, and says there are "an innumerable company of angels" there (Hebrews 12:22). The city of Enoch is the standard when translation is discussed. Would Raphael's keys include the power whereby men may be translated?

John the Revelator wrote: "And I saw seven angels which stood before God" (Revelation 8:2). Canonized scriptures do not further identify these angels. The apocryphal writings do purport to identify one of them. The apocryphal book of Tobit contains this statement: "I am Raphael, one of the seven holy angels, . . . which go in and out before the glory of the Holy One" (Tobit 12:15). I pass no judgment as to the correctness or validity of the cited apocryphal work. However, it is of note that modern scripture corroborates the name and existence of the prominent angel, Raphael.

MOSES

The resurrected Moses was one of the prominent angelic ministrants to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "that in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth" (Ephesians 1:10). That this verse from Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians applies to the Prophet was confirmed by the Lord himself. In a revelation to Joseph Smith in 1830, the Lord said:

I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth. (D&C 27:13.)

And how could all former dispensations be gathered into one grand dispensation of the fulness of times without the incomparable Moses? Certainly Moses has to be numbered among God's spirit children who are "the noble and great ones" (Abraham 3:22).

Surely Moses was one of those who in their premortal existence was numbered among those of whom God said, "These I will make my rulers" (Abraham 3:23). And it is certain that Moses was one of those invited to participate when the Lord declared, "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth" (Abraham 3:24).

As with other prominent angels, Moses spent a mortal probation here. He was the mediator of the old covenant, even as Jesus Christ was of the new (see Acts 3:22-24). It was said to Moses, "thou art in the similitude of mine only Begotten" (Moses 1:6). In prophetic power, spiritual insight, and leadership qualifications, Moses hardly has a peer. Indeed, his life and ministry is a prototype of the mortal life and ministry of our Lord himself.

As a translated angel, the lawgiver appeared to Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration.

And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. (Matthew 17:1-4.)

On that occasion Moses gave keys and authority to Peter, James, and John (see Alma 45:18-19; TPJS, 158; Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:109-112).

Moses was changed from a translated being to a resurrected personage (see D&C 133:54-56).

As a resurrected angel, he ministered to men in the flesh and thus carried out his part in the great restitution of all things (see Acts 3:19). On the 3rd day of April, 1836, he appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple and committed to them the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. (D&C 110:11.)

These were the special powers and endowments that rested with Moses in the kingdom during his mortal life. Moses was the leader of a dispensation (D&C 84:17-28).

By virtue of the restoration of these keys, men are now authorized to use the priesthood for the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes. The time has finally arrived that Jesus' apostles asked him about when they said, "Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" (Acts 1:6).

Now all things can be gathered together in Christ.

PETER, JAMES, AND JOHN

Peter, James, and John constituted the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ as it existed in their day. To a counselor in the First Presidency among the Latter-day Saints, the Lord said: "I have given [to Joseph Smith] the keys of the kingdom, which belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood" (D&C 81:2). Though there is no New Testament account of the organization of the First Presidency as a separate quorum among the former-day Saints, apparently these three, as the leading Apostles, functioned in this position while serving also in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

The New Testament is explicit and detailed in rendering the account of our Lord himself giving the keys of the kingdom to Peter.

When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?

And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am?

And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou are the Christ, the Son of the living God.

And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Matthew 16:13-19.)

Even Christ had been called to the Holy Priesthood. "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec," Paul explains of Jesus (Hebrews 7:17). In this, as in all things, Christ was our perfect example and prototype (see TPJS, 318). He told us that men could neither choose nor ordain themselves. Man does not take this "heavenly calling" (Hebrews 3:1) upon himself; he must be "called of God" to be "an high priest after the order of Melchisedec" (Hebrews 5:10). "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you," Jesus told those he had called to the holy priesthood (John 15:16). Peter wrote of the "holy" and "royal priesthood" with which he had been empowered (1 Peter 2:5, 9).

In June 1829, on the banks of the Susquehanna River, Peter, James, and John appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. They were functioning as angelic ministrants. Peter and James were resurrected persons; John was a translated personage (see John 21:20-23). This was a necessary part of the bringing together of all things in the dispensation of the fulness of times. The scriptural record of their visitation reads:

And also with Peter, and James, and John, whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry and of the same things which I revealed unto them;

Unto whom I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth;

And also with all those whom my Father hath given me out of the world. (D&C 27:12-14.)

In an epistle from Joseph Smith the Prophet to the Latter-day Saints in Nauvoo, Illinois, reference is again made to this wondrous occasion: "The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!" (D&C 128:20).

These angels restored to the earth the following: the Melchizedek Priesthood; the keys of the kingdom of God, including the commission to preach the gospel in all the world; and the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Peter, James, and John had been ministered to by angels during their mortal ministry. Two angels, in this instance translated beings, appeared to them, in the presence of a transfigured Jesus, and with evidence of the presence of the Eternal Father, and gave keys to them. "The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave the keys to Peter, James and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him" (TPJS, 158). The New Testament tells of this experience with angels as follows:

And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. (Matthew 17:1-5.)

In their visitation to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, these angels were doing what they had seen done before. They passed on keys and powers and authorities that, in turn, had been given to them by Jesus and by other angelic ministrants. The course of God is one eternal round.

MORONI

John the Revelator was given a comprehensive vision that sheds forth a blaze of light. His is a voice that tells of the restoration of eternal truth. Other major prophets saw the same things but were under a restriction not to write them because they were to be written by John (see 1 Nephi 14:25-27). An important part of John's vision has to do with this discussion:

And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. (Revelation 14:6-7.)

John saw the last days when the everlasting gospel would be revealed by angelic messengers.

The coming of Moroni was in partial fulfillment of John's vision of another angel flying in the midst of heaven to commit the everlasting gospel to man. On the third day of November, 1831, the Lord said to his Saints:

And now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth.

And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. (D&C 133:36-37.)

Moroni was the selected angel for this errand because he was the one "to whom I have committed the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim" (D&C 27:5). The Lord uses the same terminology here as he did to Ezekiel when he referred to the history of some of the descendants of Joseph as "the stick of Ephraim" (Ezekiel 37:16). It was Moroni who was sent "to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting gospel" (D&C 27:5). Clearly, Moroni was the one to whom John referred.

We have heretofore quoted at length from Joseph Smith's account of the happening on 21 September 1823, when the Angel Moroni appeared to him and gave him instructions (see Joseph Smith-History 1:27-49). This is the most detailed writing in existence of an angelic visitation. In a subsequent revelation the Prophet Joseph Smith refers to that wondrous night. "And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfillment of the prophets—the book to be revealed" (D&C 128:20).

As with other angelic ministrants, Moroni spent a probationary estate here. He lived on the American continent until about a.d. 421. He was the son of Mormon and helped his father in the task of making an abridgment of the records of their people (see Moroni 1:1; 7:1; Mormon 8:1). He was the final custodian in his day of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was to be translated (see Mormon 8). He prophesied that they would come "out of the earth" (Mormon 8:26) as had Isaiah before him (see Isaiah 29:4). Interestingly, in the final chapter in the Book of Mormon, Moroni exhorts us to "deny not the gifts of God" and lists as one of such gifts "the beholding of angels and ministering spirits" (Moroni 10:8, 14).

In reading his final exhortation one feels that he knew of his future angelic mission. He talks of his soon going "to rest in the paradise of God," but only until "my spirit and body shall again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through the air" (Moroni 10:34). Shades of "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven"! (Revelation 14:6).

ELIJAH

For sheer drama and interest, the ministry of Elijah the prophet hardly has an equal. He sealed the heavens so that it did not rain; was fed by ravens; tested the widow woman almost beyond mortal strength, then extended her barrel of meal and cruse of oil, and then raised her son from death; destroyed the priests of Baal in one of history's most dramatic confrontations between good and evil; called down fire from heaven; fasted for forty days and forty nights; was ministered to by angels; heard and understood the "still small voice" of God; and was translated and taken into heaven without tasting death (see 1 Kings 17-19; 2 Kings 1-2). One might say he lived his life to the fullest.

He was also the subject of the last prophecy in the Old Testament:

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord:

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. (Malachi 4:5-6.)

He ministered in New Testament times as a translated being. As previously noted, Matthew writes of his angelic function:

And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

And behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. (Matthew 17:1-4.)

The purpose and function of these angels in attending the called leaders of the Church on earth was to give them keys and powers. Quoting Joseph Smith, President Joseph Fielding Smith said: "The Savior, Moses, and Elias [Elijah, in other words], gave the keys to Peter, James and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him" (TPJS, 158). He goes on to suggest that Moses and Elijah were preserved from death by translation to perform this very mission, in the flesh, and prior to the resurrection.

The Angel Moroni told Joseph Smith that Elijah would be sent to reveal to him certain priesthood powers (see Joseph Smith-History 1:38-39). Incident to the work in which he had heretofore participated, and in fulfillment of prophecy by Malachi and Moroni, Elijah did come to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple on 3 April 1836. His coming is recorded in modern scripture.

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. (D&C 110:13-16.)

Elijah thus participated, as a major principal, in the bringing together into one all things in the dispensation of the fulness of times. His was such a fundamental contribution that Joseph Smith discoursed on it upon several occasions. Elijah gave the keys of full salvation for the living and the dead. He "was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood" in ancient Israel, the Prophet said. His latter-day mission was to "restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. . . . Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness" (TPJS, 172).

Now for Elijah. The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven. . . .

What is this . . . work of Elijah? . . . [It is] to seal the children to the fathers, and the fathers to the children. . . .

. . . this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven . . . the power of Elijah [is] to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. (Ibid., 337-38.)

In short, the coming of Elijah in this dispensation makes salvation available for the dead as well as the living. Such is the sealing power of Elijah!

ELIAS OF ABRAHAM'S DAY

Elias is both a name and a title. There are many Eliases. According to the plan and program of the Lord, the dispensation of the fulness of times is "the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:21). This restoration is to be effected by Elias. The promise is: "Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things" (Matthew 17:11). We have already demonstrated that many angelic ministrants have been sent to confer keys and commit their dispensations to men on earth. We have examined the contributions to this end of Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Moses, Peter, James, John, Moroni, and Elijah. No one messenger carried the whole burden of the restoration. Each has come with specific endowments. It seems clear that Elias is a composite personage. "The expression [Elias] must be understood to be a name and a title for those whose mission it was to commit keys and powers to men in this final dispensation" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 221; see also Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:170-74). Various scriptural citations to Elias properly refer to different persons (see Inspired Version, John 1:21-28; D&C 27:6-7; 77:9, 14).

The Elias of Abraham's day came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on 3 April 1836 in the Kirtland Temple and played a role in the restoration of all things. We have no information as to his mortal life or ministry. We do not know if his name was Elias in the flesh. We do not know whether it was Abraham himself. We do know that an angelic visitor, representing the dispensation of Abraham, came. "After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:12).

What did this Elias give to the earth again? The gospel of Abraham. And what is the gospel of Abraham? What is that portion of the good news of salvation particularly associated with Abraham? It is a divine promise that his seed should continue "as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them" (D&C 132:30; see also Genesis 17; Abraham 2:1-12). This promise is to apply out of this world as well as in this world. The gospel especially associated with Abraham was the gospel of celestial marriage and the gospel of plural marriage. It is the commission to provide a lineage for the elect portion of the pre-earth spirits of the Eternal Father. It is a gospel to provide a mansion in heaven for those who lived the celestial law here. This is what was restored. As a result of this portion of the restoration, the righteous among future generations were assured of the continuation of seeds forever, even as it was with Abraham of old (see D&C 132).

JOHN THE BAPTIST

Gabriel foretold that John the Baptist would go before the Lord "in the spirit and power of Elias" (Luke 1:17). John was an Elias. When pressed by the unbelieving Jews, John said, "I am not that Elias who was to restore all things" (Inspired Version, John 1:22). His mission was to prepare the way before, to baptize, and to acclaim the divine Sonship of Christ (see John 1). These were singular honors. Thus, the Lord's statement: "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist" (Luke 7:28).

John was the last legal administrator, holding keys and authority under the Mosaic dispensation (see TPJS, 275-76). Within the Mosaic dispensation were the "key[s] of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel; which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins" (D&C 84:26-27).

Because John was the last person on the earth to hold these powers and authorities, he was the uniquely qualified person to be sent to restore them as part of the dispensation of the fulness of times. As a resurrected being, he was dispatched to play his important role.

On the fifteenth day of May, 1829, he returned to the earth as an angel to confer the Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (see Joseph Smith-History 1:68-70). He announced himself as John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament. The angelic visitant averred that he was acting under the direction of Peter, James, and John, the ancient apostles, who held the keys of the higher priesthood.

The prayer of ordination is recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 13:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.

It is significant to note the promise that the priesthood thus restored would remain on the earth until "the sons of Levi . . . may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness"; that is, until Christ comes in his glory (see Malachi 3:3). So it is with all of the restoration of all things.

In a separate revelation, Joseph Smith was reminded that the Lord had sent John, who was "filled with the spirit of Elias; which John I have sent unto you . . . to ordain you unto the first priesthood which you have received, that you might be called and ordained even as Aaron" (D&C 27:7-8). Paul, in explaining the gospel to his Hebrew brethren, declares in similar terms, "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (Hebrews 5:4). The restoration of all things had to include the restoration of the Aaronic or lesser priesthood in the prophesied and scripturally prescribed manner.

This same angel, John, promised them there would yet be a fuller restoration and that in due time the priesthood of Melchizedek would also be conferred upon them (see History of the Church 1:39-41). We have heretofore seen that this prophecy was fulfilled to the letter.

Line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was wholly established upon the earth once again. And all of this by angelic visitations.

JOHN THE BELOVED

We have given account of the former-day First Presidency consisting of Peter, James, and John. In their historic role of restorers of the Melchizedek Priesthood and the keys of the kingdom and the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times, they acted as a quorum.

Aside from this angelic role, one of them, John, ministers even now as an angel of God upon the earth. This remarkable New Testament incident is recorded by him to whom it happened.

Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?

Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?

Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.

Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true. (John 21:20-24.)

"There be some standing here," Jesus said about the time Peter gave his famous testimony of our Lord's divine Sonship, "which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom" (Matthew 16:28). John is the only one of such of whom we have any knowledge. On that occasion Peter had just had a glimpse of his own future martyrdom and desired to know what awaited John. The answer was curious. He is to tarry in the flesh until Christ comes in his glory at the end of the world (see D&C 7:3, John 21:22-23).

Joseph Smith, as did other untold righteous men, wondered about this most unusual promise. He inquired of God as to whether John, the beloved disciple, tarried in the flesh or had died. He was given this answer:

And the Lord said unto me: John, my beloved, what desirest thou? For if you shall ask what you will, it shall be granted unto you.

And I said unto him: Lord, give unto me power over death, that I may live and bring souls unto thee.

And the Lord said unto me: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, because thou desirest this thou shalt tarry until I come in my glory, and shalt prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people.

And for this cause the Lord said unto Peter: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? For he desired of me that he might bring souls unto me, but thou desirest that thou mightest speedily come unto me in my kingdom.

I say unto thee, Peter, this was a good desire; but my beloved has desired that he might do more, or a greater work yet among men than what he has before done.

Yea, he has undertaken a greater work; therefore, I will make him as flaming fire and a ministering angel; he shall minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth.

And I will make thee to minister for him and for thy brother James; and unto you three I will give this power and the keys of this ministry until I come.

Verily I say unto you, ye shall both have according to your desires, for ye both joy in that which ye have desired. (D&C 7.)

John, a ministering angel, yet lives as a translated being, to serve certain persons who shall be heirs of salvation.

THE THREE NEPHITES

Three of the Nephite disciples had the same desires in their hearts as did John the Beloved during Jesus' earthly ministry. They too received the righteous desires of their hearts as the risen Lord said to them:

Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven. (3 Nephi 28:7.)

"And they are as the angels of God," the Book of Mormon states (3 Nephi 28:30). Since the day of their "transfiguration," they "shall not have pain while [they] shall dwell in the flesh, neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world. . . . They did go forth upon the face of the land, and did minister unto all the people . . . and did preach the gospel of Christ . . . among the Gentiles . . . also . . . among the Jews." They were not known nor recognized as translated beings (see 3 Nephi 28:9-28). Their ministry in the Americas continued for approximately three hundred years, when they were finally withdrawn because of the wickedness of the people (see 4 Nephi; Mormon 1:13-16).

Unknown to the world they continue their ministry at this very time. There are angels on the earth. Some people have, as Paul says, "entertained angels unawares" (Hebrews 13:2).

These three disciples, as also presumably John, shall "never taste of death"; but when Christ comes they "shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye" and then shall "be blessed in the kingdom of my Father" (3 Nephi 28:7-8).

CHERUB, CHERUBIM

God's messengers, those individuals whom he sends to perform all things relative to his work, are called angels. Angels are chosen from among his offspring and are themselves in various stages of progression in their respective spheres.

Some such beings were assigned by God to guard the tree of life when Adam and Eve were cast out of the garden of Eden. "So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life" (Genesis 3:24; see also Moses 4:31). This kept them from partaking of the tree of life and prevented them from living forever in their sins.

This is a classical example of persons being assigned an errand in the purposes of God. In this instance the persons must have come from the presence of God, inasmuch as there were only two of his children then on the earth, Adam and Eve. Therefore, a cherub is an angel.

According to Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, the plural for cherub is cherubs or cherubim. The foregoing Genesis citation from the King James Version of the Bible erroneously uses cherubims as the plural form. The footnoted Pearl of Great Price reference uses the proper cherubim, as does the Book of Mormon (Alma 12:21; 42:2-3) and the Inspired Version of the Bible (Exodus 25:20-22). This is brought to the reader's attention to demonstrate that three separate works of scripture refer to angels known as cherubs or cherubim.

From the assignments so denoted in the scriptures, and from the fact that images of them were directed to be apart from the mercy seat of the ark in the Holy of Holies (see Exodus 25:18-20; 37:7-9), it appears that a cherub is an angel of some particular order or rank to whom specific duties and work are assigned. However, none of the standard works sets forth either the identity or job description of these heavenly beings. Because Moses spoke with God in the Holy of Holies (Numbers 7:89), it is said that the images of cherubs there symbolize the presence of Jehovah in the midst of his people. "Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock; thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth" (Psalm 80:1).

Ezekiel had a vision in which he saw creatures: "And every one had four faces: the first face was the face of a cherub, and the second face . . . the face of a man, . . . third . . . a lion, . . . fourth . . . an eagle" (Ezekiel 10:14). He called them cherubims and said that each had "four wings" (Ezekiel 10:21). Thus, the images in Solomon's Temple are cherubs with wings (see 1 Kings 6:23-25). What Ezekiel saw was symbolical. His rendering of this vision is similar to John's vision wherein he saw beasts. The Prophet Joseph Smith was asked to interpret John's vision on beasts. "What are we to understand by . . . wings, which the beasts had? . . . Their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc." (D&C 77:4). Such imagery is figurative. The same old Jewish imagery, or figure of speech, is used and its meaning made clear when it was said of the Lord, "And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the wings of the wind" (2 Samuel 22:11). The same metaphorical use of "wings of the wind" is found in Psalms (see Psalm 18:10). As the wind has wings, so do cherubs have figurative wings.

The Prophet Joseph Smith put to rest the misapprehension abroad in the land that angels have wings when he authoritatively said, "An angel of God never has wings" (TPJS, 162).

SERAPH, SERAPHIM

Seraphim are angels who reside in the presence of God. It is clear that they include the unembodied spirits of our premortal existence, for our Lord "looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made" (D&C 38:1). Also, emerging out of Isaiah's colorful old Jewish idiom in describing his vision of seraphim, we find phraseology reminiscent of the great vision of premortal life: "Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? . . . Here am I; send me" (Isaiah 6:8; see also Abraham 3:27).

One of the functions of the seraphim is to give honor, glory, and adoration to God. "Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts" (Psalm 148:2). While petitioning on behalf of the Saints, the Prophet Joseph Smith prayed that "we may mingle our voices with those bright, shining seraphs around thy throne, with acclamations of praise, singing Hosanna to God and the Lamb!" (D&C 109:79). To me this infers that the name seraphs may apply to angels other than premortal spirit children of the Eternal Father. Certainly there will be perfected and resurrected angels giving glory and adoration and worshiping God at his throne.

Isaiah saw the Lord in vision "sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above it stood the seraphims. . . . And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory" (Isaiah 6:1-3). Once again, in old Judaic terminology, "each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly" (Isaiah 6:2). Apparently because of this vision, ancient Judaism looked upon seraphs as angels of the highest rank who were believed to guard God's throne with ardor.

The fact that these angels were shown to him as having six wings was to symbolize their power to move and to act. This is a situation that other major prophets have also visualized. John saw beasts for symbolic reasons. When asked for an explanation of the wings John saw on the beasts, Joseph Smith answered, "Their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc." (D&C 77:4).

Seraphs are intelligent, moral beings before the throne of God. They are angels. The Prophet Joseph Smith tells us plainly, "An angel of God never has wings" (TPJS, 162). Seraphim do not have literal wings. They do declare the holiness of God and that "the whole earth is full of his glory" (Isaiah 6:3).

DIVERSE ANGELS

In grand, sweeping phrases the Prophet Joseph Smith writes an epistle to the Latter-day Saints, detailing the restoration of the fulness of times. He was such a superlative prophet. To him the veil was so thin. After naming the major angels we have heretofore considered, who had ministered to him, the Prophet recalled that he had heard the voice[s] of divers angels, . . . all declaring their . . . rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory . . . ; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little" (D&C 128:21). The Prophet of the Restoration recorded what needed to be recorded. The world is not prepared to understand, let alone accept, the wealth of spiritual experiences that were his. But we are put on notice that there were less prominent angels than the ones listed by name and specific purposes. They also minister to men.

It is as though we are being told that words can't truly convey the majesty of what really happened. An outline is sketched for us—the mere skin of an idea. It says: Don't use strict construction in reading the visions of the prophets; ponder them in your heart; let the Spirit guide you.

And so men have speculated. The old Hebrew concept of the celestial hierarchy is said to consist of seven archangels. Two of these, Michael and Gabriel, are mentioned in the Bible and in the Doctrine and Covenants (see Jude 9; D&C 128:21). The name of a third, Raphael, is found in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 128:21) and the apocryphal book of Tobit (Tobit 3:17). The names of four others—Uriel, Raguel, Sariel, and Jerahmeel are found in a noncanonical, apocalyptic book, the Book of Enoch (Enoch 21). Apocryphal sources give the names of the last three as: Izidiel, Hanael, and Kepharel.

For the purposes of this writing we have thus far concerned ourselves only with scripturally documented discussions of angels. After all, from this accepted and credible source we have record of "many angels round about the throne . . . and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands" (Revelation 5:11).
