The theory of good and evil is of fundamental importance in all moral life. It is the essence of ethics, economics, politics, jurisprudence, and rational and moral theology and religion. What concept is concerned more with human behavior? The basic terms of theology and religion—righteousness and sin, salvation and damnation—are, like virtue and vice, happiness and misery, conceptions of good and evil in the conditions of man. Those who give credence to holy writ consider the goodness or evil of man in terms of his relation to God.

God is good. Good is of God and consists in obedience to his laws and conformity to his mind and will. "Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God . . . [and] that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God" (Moroni 7:12-13).

The scriptural concept of good consists in the knowledge of God: his personage, his attributes, his characteristics, and his perfections (see Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith) and the putting on by man of His divine nature.

Philosophers and theologians historically have concerned themselves with what is traditionally called "the problem of evil." How are we to understand the existence of evil in a world created by a God who is omnipotent and perfectly good? To understand the nature and source of evil, together with its place in the eternal scheme of things, it is necessary to understand God's plan of salvation for all of his creatures, which is made known to us in the holy scriptures.

Evil is the opposite of good. It consists in disobeying the laws of God and contravening his will.

As far as men on this earth are concerned, evil had its beginning in a pre-earth existence. The Eternal Father begat children. That is, he clothed uncreated spirit element or intelligence with spirit bodies. We thus became conscious identities. There were eternal laws that existed for the good of said children. The children were endowed with agency, the ability to choose. Disobedience to those laws was in its nature evil. The possibility of committing evil was a necessary correlative to the possibility of keeping the laws. Lucifer and one-third of the spirits of heaven chose evil rather than good. They exercised their agency and did not act righteously. Finally, they came out in open rebellion against God. They were cast out onto the earth and were denied mortal bodies (see Moses 4:1-4; Abraham 3:24-28; D&C 29:36-40; Revelation 12:7-13). We will particularize, with appropriate annotations, each of these steps.

Having been cast out of the presence of God, Lucifer, the devil, and his followers, demons, continued their rebellion against God. It is their self-appointed mission to entice men to violate the laws of God and thereby commit evil. Thus, as far as this mortal life is concerned, Lucifer is the author and creator of evil, for evil is of the devil. "That which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually" (Moroni 7:12).

God does not tempt man to do evil. "Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man" (James 1:13). Man has his agency. He has the ability to choose. "But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed" (James 1:14).

The presence of evil in this world is a reality without which the plan of salvation could not operate. "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" (2 Nephi 2:11). Without good as the opposite of bad, without righteousness as the opposite of evil, this world could not be the probationary estate to prove God's creatures in the flesh. The existence of evil—not the partaking of evil—is essential to the attainment of salvation.

The concept of good is inextricably connected to the God of the scriptures. So also, the concept of evil is a tangle from which it is impossible to unravel the devil of the scriptures. The biblical concept of good and evil requires the acceptance of the biblical concept of a personal God and a personal devil.

Knowledge of good and evil is the best fruit of the tree of knowledge. "Let each one of us leave every other kind of knowledge," Socrates says at the end of the Republic, "and seek and follow one thing only," that is, "to learn and discern between good and evil."

THE DEVIL

The devil is a spirit son of God who was born in the morning of premortal life. He too was an "angel of God . . . he was Lucifer, a son of the morning" and was called Perdition (see D&C 76:26). As with all of Father's children, he was endowed with agency, the power of free choice (see D&C 29:36-37; 93:30). Satan is his Hebrew name (see McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 677).

He chose the evil part from before the world was, and thus it is written of him that he was a liar from the beginning (see Moses 4:3-4). He placed himself in eternal opposition to the divine will. He was "an angel of God" (D&C 76:25) who "became a devil, having sought that which was evil before God" (2 Nephi 2:17).

The Eternal Father had his plan of salvation presented to his spirit children (see Moses 4:2). The general elements of the plan were: that an earth would be made (see Abraham 3:24); that the spirit children would be given tangible bodies and, if faithful in all things, progress to a like status with their Father (see Abraham 3:25-27); and that to effectuate this operation there must needs be a Redeemer (see Abraham 3:27-28; Moses 4:1). When the need for a Redeemer was explained, Satan volunteered to come to earth in this role as the Son of God. "Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son." Even in that premortal existence he was in opposition to God's plan. He sought for an amendment. He didn't like the terms upon which salvation was contingent. He wanted to change God's plan. "I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor" (Moses 4:1). His proposed amendment was fundamental. He would deny agency to men. He would guarantee that none would be lost.

"And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first" (Abraham 3:27). The Son of Man was selected, and Lucifer and his amendment were rejected.

Satan made open war against God.

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down;

And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:3-4.)

Because Lucifer rebelled and sought the throne of God, there was war in heaven among the spirit children of God. As we have heretofore noted, such persons are properly designated as angels. John calls them angels in his great revelation.

And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. (Revelation 12:7-9; see also Isaiah 14:12-20.)

"A third part of the hosts of heaven" joined the rebellion. "And they were thrust down, and thus came the devil and his angels" (D&C 29:36-37; see also Revelation 12:4-9; Abraham 3:27-28). Those cast out are denied bodies forever. They are sons of perdition; and, with Lucifer, their foster father, they are in eternal opposition to everything that is right or good.

The devil's purpose is to tempt and entice men to leave the path of truth and walk in darkness. His goal is to get man to worship him: "Behold Satan hath come among the children of men, and tempteth them to worship him; and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God" (Moses 6:49). He is the enemy of God and the divine order. Jesus said of him, "The enemy that sowed them is the devil" (Matthew 13:39).

One cannot read the Bible without accepting the fact of the devil. He was the tempter of Adam and Eve (see Genesis 3:1-6; 2 Corinthians 11:3). He was the tempter of man. He is a murderer and liar (see Revelation 20:10). Peter presents him as "your adversary the devil" walking about "seeking whom he may devour" (1 Peter 5:8). He struggled mightily to tempt Jesus in a historic earthly confrontation (see Matthew 4:1-11).

Satan has had such success among men in the flesh that he is considered the god of this world. Paul said, "Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works" (2 Corinthians 11:14-15).

At Christ's coming Satan will be bound for one thousand years. He will "deceive the nations no more," but thereafter will "be loosed a little season" (Revelation 20:3). Eventually he "shall not have power over the Saints any more at all" (D&C 88:114).

In eternity, "they who are filthy shall be filthy still; wherefore, they who are filthy are the devil and his angels; and they shall go away into everlasting fire, prepared for them; and their torment is as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever and has no end" (2 Nephi 9:16).

DEMONS, DEVILS, AND EVIL SPIRITS

Demons, devils, and evil spirits are the beings who followed Lucifer in his war of rebellion in the premortal world. They comprise one-third of those spirit children of the Father who were to come to this earth as a mortal probation (see D&C 29:36-41; Revelation 12:3-9). In New Testament terminology they are "the angels which kept not their first estate" (Jude 1:6), or, as Peter puts it, "God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell" (2 Peter 2:4). They are fallen angels and are angels of the devil (see D&C 29:36-38; 2 Nephi 9:9).

In being cast down to earth, they were forever denied physical bodies. Apparently this denial has caused them to seek habitation in the bodies of other persons. Jesus taught the disciples that in his name—that is, by and through "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God" (D&C 107:3)—they could cast out devils. Indeed, he said, "And these signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they cast out devils" (Mark 16:17). In this, as in all things, he set the example.

And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,

Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.

And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him.

And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.

And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him.

And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round about Galilee.

And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.

But Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell him of her.

And he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.

And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils.

And all the city was gathered together at the door.

And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him. (Mark 1:23-34.)

In the foregoing incidents in the ministry of the Lord, Mark is careful to note that some persons were healed from sickness and disease and others were "possessed with devils." No doubt there are many incidents where unsophisticated diagnosis of possession was wrongfully made in lieu of mental illness or other disease. However, Mark makes it clear that Jesus "cast out many devils." This was in addition to healing the sick. Matthew records a time when Jesus cured a "lunatick," but remember, the young man was "sore vexed."

And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man, kneeling down to him, and saying,

Lord, have mercy on my son: for he is lunatick, and sore vexed: for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water.

And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.

Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.

And Jesus rebuked the devil; and he departed out of him: and the child was cured from that very hour.

Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out? And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you.

Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting. (Matthew 17:14-21.)

This New Testament rendering indicates the unusual amount of faith required to cast out devils. It requires greater faith than most healings. In the cited instance the disciples should have buttressed their faith and prepared themselves by fasting and prayer. One reason for the difficulty of this priestal administration in the name of the Lord is because this is a confrontation between man and the devils. Having been denied a body, there is evidence that they would prefer animal bodies rather than no body at all. Three of the Gospels recite an occasion in which the devils possessing persons requested to be put into swine rather than simply be cast out.

And when he was come to the other side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.

And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine feeding.

So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.

And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters. (Matthew 8:28-32; see also Mark 5:13; Luke 8:33.)

Demons are devils. "We are surrounded by demons," the wicked Nephites said, "yea, we are encircled about by angels of him who hath sought to destroy our souls" (Helaman 13:37).

It is written that the devil is the prince of the demons (see Mark 3:22). Evil spirits are devils. They are they of whom it is written, "Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him" (Revelation 12:9). Their mission is to make war with the Saints and to destroy the souls of all men.

There are many evil spirits. They enjoy great success. They have been the source of evil philosophical, political, and religious concepts and actions. We are instructed to shun them.

But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devils. (D&C 46:7.)

EXORCISTS

One of the signs that was to follow them who believed the true gospel was, as stated by the Lord, "In my name shall they cast out devils" (Mark 16:17). We have noted several New Testament accounts of the casting out of devils from possessed persons. This has ever been one of the advantages of having the power of God delegated to man; man can act in his name.

In imitation of the true order whereby devils are cast out of people, certain persons called exorcists attempt to cast out devils. Certain priests in the Roman Catholic or Episcopalian churches, for instance, are designated as exorcists. This is attempted by special prescribed prayers, incantations, and adjurations. It is not surprising that there would be such false rituals, inasmuch as the true priesthood ordinance of casting out devils is so documented in the New Testament.

There is a scriptural account of these exorcists. They had seen the Apostle Paul utilize the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood of which he spoke (see Hebrews 3:1; 5:1-10; 7:1-21) in casting out devils in the Lord's name.

And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul:

So that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.

Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.

And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so.

And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye?

And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded. (Acts 19:11-16.)

This colorful account indicates that the Apostles, after Christ's ministry, were acting in his name to do what the Lord had directed. Also, it seems to me that we here have a symbolic picture of what is in store for false exorcists.

Exorcists are fraudulent substitutes for legal administrators who are authorized and empowered to act in the name of the Lord.

SPIRITUALISM

Witches, sorcerers, soothsayers, wizards, and spiritualists are persons who attempt, and sometimes apparently attain, communion with departed spirits. The notion that mortals can hold intercourse with spirits of the dead is called spiritualism. It is a false religion.

If it is true that some spiritualists actually make contact with spirits, we should be concerned as to what spirits are available for such practice. The first spirits obviously available are the spirits who were cast out of heaven onto the earth for rebellion. As we have heretofore documented, these spirits are devils and demons. Spirits of persons who have died who would concern themselves with these spiritual jags would be spirits of depraved persons who, because of their wickedness in the flesh, find themselves in the dominion of the devil. "Righteous spirits would have nothing but contempt and pity for the attempts of mediums to make contact with them" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 759).

When God had departed from Saul and Saul could get no answers to his prayers, he compounded his sins by going to the witch of Endor. The King James Version of the Bible indicates that the deceased prophet Samuel talked to Saul. Under inspiration from God the Prophet Joseph Smith corrects this account in the Inspired Version of the Bible. The witch had "a familiar spirit," that is, apparently could commune with evil spirits. However, she did not bring up Samuel, nor did Saul converse with Samuel. The witch said that she saw Samuel and said, "These are the words of Samuel to Saul." This is a technique used by mediums today, who purportedly contact the spirits and report the messages. If they contact a devil, they contact a person of considerable knowledge with some insight into the future. The righteous Samuel was not cavorting with witches in the corrected account (see Inspired Version, 1 Samuel 28).

Isaiah gave instructions relative to going to spiritualists and the falsity of spiritualism. He indicated that the prophets lead to God, not others.

Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion.

And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead? (Isaiah 8:18-19.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith rendered the salient sentence: " . . . should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to hear from the dead?" (Inspired Version, Isaiah 8:19).

The Lord sought to keep his ancient covenant people from the evils of spiritualism. The law stated:

When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations.

There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch,

Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.

For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee. (Deuteronomy 18:9-12.)

Such activity was considered such a serious wrongdoing in ancient Israel that it carried the death penalty. "A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death" (Leviticus 20:27; see also Exodus 22:18). At best, it is foolishness to trifle with powers about which we know little. It is also a scripturally condemned practice.

DISCERNING OF SPIRITS

Some angels are on God's errand; some are from the realm of Satan himself. "Believe not every spirit," John counseled, "but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world" (1 John 4:1). The problem that most men have is to discern the spirits so that they may know what is of God and what is not.

Try the spirits. But how? By what test can it be known whether they are of God or the devil? If a messenger appears from the unseen world, how can one know if it is a good spirit or an evil spirit? When there are trances, tongues, visions, or apparent miracles, are they from above or below? When a doctrine is proclaimed or a religion preached, how shall we know whether it is true or false?

To some extent everyone is given a gift of the spirit of discernment. This ability is conferred upon people generally by operations of the Light of Christ (see Moroni 7:12-18). In addition to this universal gift, faithful Saints receive special discerning power through revelation from the Holy Ghost (see D&C 63:41).

The Apostle Paul gives instruction concerning spiritual gifts. He specifically lists the "discerning of spirits" as a gift of the Spirit (see 1 Corinthians 12:10). Modern revelation says, "to some is given, by the Spirit of God . . . the discerning of spirits" (D&C 46:17, 23). The only sure way to distinguish between good and evil (Moroni 7:12-18), between righteousness and wickedness (D&C 101:95; Malachi 3:18; 3 Nephi 24:18), or between evil spirits and those spirits that manifest the things of God is by the promptings of the Holy Ghost. There is no perfect operation of the power of discernment without revelation from God. That is why the righteous are given the gift of the Holy Ghost (see Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 61).

We might well look to the Prophet Joseph Smith as an example without peer in the matter of manifestations and angels. "We may look for angels and receive their ministrations," he said, "but we are to try the spirits and prove them, for it is often the case that men make a mistake in regard to these things. . . . When you see a vision, pray for the interpretation; if you get not this, shut it up; there must be certainty in this matter. . . . Lying spirits are going forth in the earth. There will be great manifestations of spirits, both false and true" (TPJS, 161). He gives us the key to the whole matter: "The devil may appear as an angel of light. Ask God to reveal it . . . if it be of . . . God, He will . . . make it manifest" (ibid., 162). The following is abstracted from one of the Prophet's lengthy statements on the subject.

"Try the spirits," but what by? . . .

One great evil is, that men are ignorant of the nature of spirits; their power, laws, government, intelligence, etc., and imagine that when there is anything like power, revelation, or vision manifested, that it must be of God. . . . Is there any intelligence communicated? Are the curtains of heaven withdrawn, or the purposes of God developed? . . .

Every one of these professes to be competent to try his neighbor's spirit, but no one can try his own, and what is the reason? Because they have not a key to unlock, no rule wherewith to measure, and no criterion whereby they can test it. . . . We answer that no man can do this without the Priesthood, and having a knowledge of the laws by which spirits are governed; for as no man knows the spirit of the devil, and his power and influence, but by possessing intelligence which is more than human, and having unfolded through the medium of the Priesthood the mysterious operations of his devices; . . .

A man must have the discerning of spirits before he can drag into daylight this hellish influence and unfold it unto the world in all its soul-destroying, diabolical, and horrid colors; for nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God. Thousands have felt the influence of its terrible power and baneful effects. Long pilgrimages have been undertaken, penances endured, and pain, misery and ruin have followed in their train; nations have been convulsed, kingdoms overthrown, provinces laid waste, and blood, carnage and desolation are habiliments in which it has been clothed.

As we have noticed before, the great difficulty lies in the ignorance of the nature of spirits, of the laws by which they are governed, and the signs by which they may be known; if it requires the Spirit of God to know the things of God; and the spirit of the devil can only be unmasked through that medium, then it follows as a natural consequence that unless some person or persons have a communication, or revelation from God, unfolding to them the operation of the spirit, they must eternally remain ignorant of these principles; for I contend that if one man cannot understand these things but by the Spirit of God, ten thousand men cannot; it is alike out of the reach of the wisdom of the learned, the tongue of the eloquent, the power of the mighty. And we shall at last have to come to this conclusion, whatever we may think of revelation, that without it we can neither know nor understand anything of God, or the devil; and however unwilling the world may be to acknowledge this principle, it is evident from the multifarious creeds and notions concerning this matter that they understand nothing of this principle, and it is equally as plain that without a divine communication they must remain in ignorance. (TPJS, 203-206.)

This dissertation is so like Joseph Smith. He has had the experience. He doesn't argue. He speaks as one having authority. He puts the truth simply. "And we shall at last have to come to this conclusion, whatever we may think of revelation, that without it we can neither know nor understand anything of God, or the devil."

There are two spirits abroad in the earth. One is of God; the other is of the devil. The spirit that is of God leads to light, truth, freedom, and every good thing. The spirit that is of Lucifer leads to darkness, error, bondage, and every evil thing. They are at enmity one with another, with conflict between them. The "power" of one is the "spirit" "that now worketh in the children of disobedience" (Ephesians 2:2). The other is "revealed" by the Spirit of God. And no man knoweth "the things of God" but by "the Spirit of God" (1 Corinthians 2:11).

ANGEL OF THE BOTTOMLESS PIT

John uses the expression "the angel of the bottomless pit" (Revelation 9:11) to describe Satan. He refers particularly to Satan's status as king of hell, for Satan is the ruling authority over those cast into the pit that is hell.

The bottomless pit is the depths of hell. It is not a literal pit without a bottom; such would be a contradiction in terms. It is an attempt in imperfect language to convey the idea of the intensity of the sufferings of those who go to hell (see Revelation 9:1-2; 11:7; 17:8; 20:1-3).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF GOD

The Father and the Son are the objects of all true worship. "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve" (Matthew 4:10; Luke 4:8; see also Exodus 34:14; D&C 20:17-19; Mosiah 18:25). No one can worship the Father without worshiping the Son. "All men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him" (John 5:23). Worship consists in paying divine honors to Diety.

"Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness" (Psalm 29:2). There is no true worship without "the beauty of holiness," that is, personal righteousness. Obedience is the true measure of true worship. "But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men" (Matthew 15:9).

Part of worship is the showing of obeisance. "All things bow in humble reverence" before the Father (D&C 76:93; see also Genesis 24:52; Numbers 22:31).

It is written that Christ has power over the devil's angels (see Mark 5:8; Matthew 8:29). They know Jesus (Acts 19:15). They tremble before the Lord's mighty power: "Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble" (James 2:19). The devils, being evil, are incapable of true worship. However, they are under the necessity of acknowledging God and giving obeisance to him. They are subject to him and well know it. They whined as he cast them out, "What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?" (Matthew 8:29).
