Evidence proves that there are angels. In point of fact, there is no evidence to the contrary. The best evidence of the skeptic is that it can be proved that the vast majority of people have not had personal experience with angels; however, the fact that most people have not seen angels is not a valid argument that angels don't exist. It is rather like attempting to prove a case by presenting a myriad of witnesses who are totally unfamiliar with the facts of the case, having neither seen nor participated in the situation personally. Many creditable witnesses have seen and heard and have been ministered to by angels. Any serious, believing perusal of the scriptures establishes beyond any reasonable doubt the existence of angels.

We have heretofore examined who angels are, their types and kinds, their functions and purposes, the several most prominent angels, and fallen angels. Angels are. They exist and have functions and purposes. Unless one simply rejects the testimony of Jesus, the prophets and apostles, ancient and modern, and without other evidence simply assumes the contrary position, one must accept the fact that there are angels.

The legitimate question, it seems to me, is not whether there are angels; but, assuming that angels do exist, what has this to do with us? So there are angels? So what? Let us consider this important question.

I was once leading a tour of visitors on Temple Square in Salt Lake City, Utah. I took the visitors, in their minds' eyes, back to the arid desert basin that was the Salt Lake Valley prior to the arrival of the Mormon pioneers. Hardly a tree was there. The ground was baked so hard that the first two plows put to the sod were broken. A stream had to be dammed and the land irrigated before the ground could be broken up for planting. But the faith of the pioneers and the benevolence of a kind Providence eventually made the desert blossom. My listeners were encompassed about with a cloud of witnesses. They were standing in the midst of a society that evidenced the refining influence of the true gospel of Christ. I remember quoting the Savior's test of those professing to be bearers of the truth, "Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them" (Matthew 7:20). There were far too many good fruits here for falsehoods.

An honest worldly query was made: "We like what we see. You have met the Master's test. The kingdom of God seems to be here. Why make it incredible by predicating it on angels? Why must such a rational and beautiful approach to religion and life be based on the administration of angels?"

Maybe it was my legal training that prompted an answer in the form of a question: "Could you really accept a religion as the true way of God without God's personal messengers in it?"

SOUND REASONS

"Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord" (Isaiah 1:18). "Bring forth your strong reasons" (Isaiah 41:21), the scriptures enjoin. Peter, the chief of the original Apostles, counsels, "Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you" (1 Peter 3:1). We are encouraged to have reason and logical structure for our doctrines and beliefs. Clearly this lends stability to our faith. Let us reason.

It is admitted that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a remarkably efficient organization. The institutional Church has been likened to the most effective of earthly armies. In its organizational chart the lines of authority are clear. They flow from the president of the Church, through appropriate priesthood leadership, directly to the head of every family. The various helps and governments (see 1 Corinthians 12:28) are an earthly approximation of God's perfect order of things. Basically the Church organization has been the same in all ages. The same organization that existed in the primitive church prevails now (see Article of Faith 6). Whenever the Church has been truly established on the earth, apostolic power has been manifest. In such periods there have always been prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers (see Ephesians 4:11-14).

The genius of the organization is not found in its flow charts and lines of communication and the like. It is found in the revelation from the heavens, whence the organization comes. Through modern revelation, it ideally suits the contemporary needs of the people amid changing circumstances. If we are to find the true religion, we must find the religion that was instituted of God for the benefit of man.

How would a religion be instituted of God? By revelation from him. As used in the gospel, "revelation signifies the making known of divine truth by communication from the heavens" (James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, 296). Revelation comes from God to men in various appointed ways, according to the will of the Almighty. One way that he has ordained is that angels are sent from his presence to do his will. This cannot be contradicted by logic. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints enjoys an unassailable position. It is a revealed religion. God has seen fit to reveal the way to perfection, including the necessary helps and governments for the benefit of man, by way of angelic administrations.

In this matter of sound reasoning, we stand alone. The Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches look to tradition for much of their footing. History's judgment of them is harsh. It is historically clear that the prophesied great falling away has taken place (see 2 Thessalonians 2:1-12). The Protestants, inspired as their revolution was, are not in a sound logical position. If the mother church were apostate, as they claimed, whence do they get their authority? They could reform, yes. But how does one become a legal administrator when the one from whom one is rebelling has lost authority? It was the Lord himself who foretold the perplexities, the calamities, and the apostate wickedness of the days in which we live (see Matthew 24; Mark 13; Luke 21).

By virtue of the ministrations of God's messengers, the position of "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30) is secure. We should not shy away from this position of strength. We should take comfort in it. Among the religions of the world today, we stand at the head in our claimed foundation.

Jesus commended Peter for his testimony, saying, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven, . . . and upon this rock I will build my church" (Matthew 16:17-18). Commenting on this statement, the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "What rock? Revelation" (TPJS, 274).

Consider the reasoning and validity of this argument. Jesus himself was "called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec" (Hebrews 5:10). "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (Hebrews 5:4). That is, by prophecy (see Exodus 28:1) and the laying on of hands (see Numbers 27:18). Jesus chose and ordained Peter and his associates (John 15:16). Jesus conferred upon Peter the same priesthood, the order of Melchizedek, that he himself had forever (Hebrews 5:6). Peter referred to it as "an holy priesthood" and "a royal priesthood" that constituted certain ones as "the people of God" (1 Peter 2:5, 9-10).

The Lord further gave to Peter and the ancient Apostles "the keys of the kingdom of heaven" (Matthew 16:19; see also Matthew 18:18). Those so endowed have power to govern all the earthly affairs of the kingdom of God and to direct the administration of all the ordinances of salvation for worthy recipients (see D&C 35:25; 42:69; 65; 90:2-3; 97:14; 115:19).

There was a time appointed in which all things were to be restored "which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:21). All things are to be gathered together in one in Christ (see Ephesians 1:10). Gospel restoration is accomplished in the same way in which the gospel was first revealed. Angelic ministrants are sent from heaven to declare it; God declares its truth by his own voice; and the gift of the Holy Ghost is given to men (see Moses 5:58).

Peter, James, and John, messengers from God, came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and restored the priesthood Jesus had given them and all of the keys needed to exalt men in the highest heaven (see D&C 27:12-13; 110:11-16; 128:20-21).

All of the people of God who have subsequently been called of God as was Aaron can trace their line of authority to Jesus Christ in a few steps. 1

This is strong reason for the hope which is in us.

This same compelling logic applies to each step of the restoration of the gospel. For instance, the gathering of Israel has been promised as part of the dispensation of the fulness of times (see 1 Nephi 15:19-20; 2 Nephi 3:13-24; D&C 45:17; Acts 1:6). This means that scattered remnants of Israel will be converted to the true church (see 2 Nephi 9:2; 30:5; Mormon 9:36) and that Israel will be assembled to Zion or Jerusalem. (See Article of Faith 10; D&C 110:11; 2 Nephi 25:11; 30:8; Mormon 5:14.)

Moses held the keys to the leading and gathering and teaching of Israel. Those were the special powers and endowments that rested with the kingdom in his day. On 3 April 1836, Moses appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and committed to them the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north (see D&C 110:11). By virtue of the restoration of these keys, men are now authorized to use the priesthood for these great purposes.

The prophet Elias holds "the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days" (D&C 27:6; see also D&C 77:9, 14-15; Matthew 17:11; Mark 7:12). These keys have been restored and conferred upon man. Such things as have not already been revealed will be made known "in due time" (see D&C 132:45; 2 Nephi 25:11; 30:8; Mormon 5:14).

Malachi prophesied that Elijah would return before the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord:

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. (Malachi 4:5-6.)

In fulfillment of this Old Testament prophecy Elijah came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple on 3 April 1836 and conferred upon them the keys of the sealing power (see D&C 110:13-16).

It is because Elijah has come in this dispensation that the fulness of salvation is again available for the living and the dead. He "was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood" in ancient Israel, the Prophet Joseph Smith said. His latter-day mission was to "restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. . . . Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness" (TPJS, 172).

"The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah," the Prophet Joseph Smith also taught, "is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven" (TPJS, 337).

In all of this we not only deal from a position of strength, but it must also logically follow that man's very salvation is contingent upon angelic administrations.

If, indeed, the Lord gave something to Peter, James, and John that was necessary for man's salvation, then it must needs to be that the same be given to man in our day, if man is to enjoy the same result in our day.

So also with Moses.

If the prophecies of the scriptures are to be fulfilled, Elias and Elijah must come. It is the unique position of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints that they have come. Angelic ministration is vital and necessary to the restoration of the fulness of the gospel. This is sound reasoning. This is compelling argument. The Church is based on the truth.

"How shall God come to the rescue of this generation?" the Prophet Joseph Smith asked. "He will send Elijah the prophet. . . . Elijah shall reveal the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers. The anointing and sealing is to be called, elected, and made sure" (TPJS, 323).

COMPOSITE ANGEL

It has been heretofore noted that certain of God's messengers have been prophesied of in times past. Thus, their visitations have been in fulfillment of prophecy. Perhaps the most noteworthy prophecy of angelic administration in traditional Christendom was made by John the Revelator. Foreseeing the final great restoration of the gospel, the ancient Apostle wrote:

And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. (Revelation 4:6-7.)

Many angels were to participate in the events envisioned as necessary to complete the restoration. "This angel of the restoration was a composite angel, meaning that a number of angels were destined to participate in the events which necessarily must take place to complete the restoration" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 635). The Angel Moroni is usually more particularly associated with the fulfillment of this prophecy. This is because he effected the restoration of the Book of Mormon wherein the doctrines of the true gospel are recorded (see D&C 133:36-40; 135:3). Therefore, the "everlasting gospel" is restored. However, John the Baptist, Peter, James, and John, Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, Elias, Moses, Elijah, and "divers angels" (D&C 128:21) all came in fulfillment of this promise and restored priesthood and priesthood keys. It was in this way that the gospel was made operative in the lives of men (see D&C 13; 27:12-13; 88:103-104; 110:11-16).

The Apostle Paul makes the preceptive observation that the gospel consists of two parts: the word and the power (see 1 Thessalonians 1:5). Moroni brought that major portion of the word which is found in the Book of Mormon and which records the saving truths of the way to salvation; the other angels restored power. Moroni brought the message or word; the other angels brought the power of priesthood. All of this has been accomplished.

Yet the work of the angel of the restoration is not complete yet. Part of his work is in a postmillennial setting. This great prophecy of the ministration of angels has not been fully fulfilled. There will yet be other angelic administrants before "the hour of his judgment is come" (D&C 88:103-104).

INFORMATION GAINED FROM ANGELS

One of the important aspects of the ministration of angels is that we learn from them. The great King Benjamin delivered one of the most truth-laden sermons recorded in the scriptures. For more than two pages he simply quotes what an angel told him (see Mosiah 3). We have noted that one of the functions of angels is to teach. One can be sure one is getting at the heart of the matter if the word comes from a true messenger from God. Thus the essence of the angelic discourse to King Benjamin was that "salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:18). We are indebted to the angels for cutting through the irrelevant and setting our course squarely on the object of all true worship.

The revelation of John the Revelator, with its wealth of information, was given "by his angel unto his servant John" (Revelation 1:1). That book sheds forth a blaze of light on gospel understanding. Through this angel we have revealed a guide in overcoming the world and gaining salvation. He speaks with a voice that makes clear the mysteries of the kingdom. He tells of the restoration of eternal truth. Could anyone with spiritual discernment ask if angels are really relevant? What is more relevant than happiness and fulfillment here and salvation hereafter?

Let us examine two verses to see what insight we can gain to the eternal scheme of things. John records that he sees the Saints and angels singing praises to Christ after he comes in his glory.

And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation;

And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth.

And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels . . . (Revelation 5:9-11.)

These are saved beings who are singing. They are praising God for redeeming them. Full redemption is a blessing reserved for the Saints (see D&C 35:26; 45:46; 133:52). They are gathered out of every nation. The appeal of truth is universal, and this choir is made up of people from every nation. God had made them kings and priests; that is, they had enjoyed the ordinances of the holy temples while on earth.

What do we learn from this description of this angelic choir? We learn that before Christ comes in his glory, there will be converted and endowed Saints in every nation. All of this teaches us that there is much to be done in spreading the gospel over the earth before the coming of the Son of Man.

All of this is made known to us through the ministration of angels. We are indebted to angels for much of our understanding in gospel scholarship.

KEYS OF THE MINISTERING OF ANGELS

The power and authority of the lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the keys of the ministering of angels (see D&C 84:26-27).

This means that the Aaronic Priesthood opens the door to all that we have discussed relative to the ministering of angels. Quite literally this means that those holding the Aaronic Priesthood are in a position to have angels minister unto them. Inasmuch as this is the express potential of such a priesthood bearer, one is not fully enjoying his office and calling in the absence of such a wondrous experience. Wilford Woodruff, for instance, said: "I had the administration of angels while holding the office of a priest" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 298).

The scriptures reiterate that the keys of the ministering of angels have to do with the Aaronic Priesthood. On 15 May 1829, the angelic visitant, John the Baptist, came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and, averring that he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, conferred upon them the Aaronic Priesthood, saying:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. (D&C 13.)

In a revelation given six years later, the Lord said:

The power and authority of the lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel, the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, agreeable to the covenants and commandments. (D&C 107:20.)

Historically angels have to do with the lesser priesthood. Ancient Israel was given the lesser priesthood to administer the lesser law (see Hebrews 7:12; Inspired Version, Exodus 34:1-2). This priesthood was conferred upon Aaron and his sons after him (see Exodus 28-30; Leviticus 1:11; 3:2; 13:2; Numbers 18). It was conferred upon substantially the whole house of Levi who were between thirty and fifty years of age (see Numbers 4:3). Aaron and his sons after him held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood. The rest of the Levites held the Aaronic Priesthood (see Hebrews 7:5) but did not hold the keys of this ministry. Moses records the function of an angel incident to this ancient ministry.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I give it:

And I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:

Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the way.

And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments. (Exodus 33:1-4.)

The Priesthood of Aaron "is called the lesser priesthood . . . because it is an appendage to the greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has power in administering outward ordinances" (D&C 107:14). In commenting upon this passage, a modern scholar says, "Though it is a lesser priesthood, it is yet one of great majesty and power. It holds 'the keys of the ministering of angels,' meaning that those who hold it and are faithful have the key whereby they can open the door to the receipt of visitations from heavenly messengers" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 11).

Perfection does not come by this order of the priesthood. "If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?" (Hebrews 7:11). However, the keys of the administering of angels have been given. Insofar as we do not use these offered blessings, we default in our priestly prerogatives.

MINISTRY OF ANGELS AND THE PRESENCE OF GOD

The Lord has ordained the lesser priesthood and its concomitant blessings of ministering of angels so that we might prepare ourselves for the higher priesthood and its concomitant blessings of his personal ministrations to us.

In a revelation given through Joseph Smith, the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, on 24 February 1834, the Lord said:

Therefore, let not your hearts faint, for I say not unto you as I said unto your fathers: Mine angel shall go up before you, but not my presence.

But I say unto you: Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land. (D&C 103:19-20.)

Ancient Israel was given "an angel before thee," but not the presence of God; "for I will not go up in the midst of thee . . ." (Exodus 33:3). Modern Israel was given the promise that "angels shall go up before you, and also my presence . . ." (D&C 103:20).

As the Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of the ministering of angels, so the Melchizedek Priesthood holds "the key of the knowledge of God" (D&C 84:19) and "of all the spiritual blessings of the church" in that the holders of that priesthood may "have the heavens opened unto them" and "enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant" (D&C 107:18-19).

What do angels have to do with us? The Aaronic Priesthood and the Melchizedek Priesthood were restored to the earth in our day by angels (see D&C 13; 27:12-13). Our salvation is contingent upon them. The priesthood of the ministry of angels is to prepare us for the priesthood of our Lord's personal ministry to us. It is the means to have "another comforter" and have "our abode" with the God of Heaven (see John 14).

WHAT ANGELS WILL NOT DO

Angels do not attend men unless there is need. It is not their errand to satisfy idle curiosity. We have no scriptural accounts of any angels doing any service for man that man could have done without the help of the angel. With the ample precedents available for examination, we can establish this principle as the order of heaven.

A preeminent Latter-day Saint scripturalist and former Church president, Joseph Fielding Smith, said: "It is contrary to the law of God for the heavens to be opened and messengers to come to do anything for man that man can do for himself" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:196).

Angels do what is essential, and they do not do what man could do without them. When Moroni came to the youthful Joseph Smith, he told him that ancient records were in the Hill Cumorah and that he was going to turn them over to Joseph. Joseph was given instruction for four years; then he received the records and was required to translate. Why didn't Moroni translate? He knew the language, and it would have been no trouble for him to do it, whereas Joseph didn't know the language. It was a difficult assignment, but not an impossible one. Joseph could translate by the gift and power of God, which is in accordance with all angelic precedents. Angels do not do for us what we can do for ourselves. Joseph Smith followed the scriptural pattern.

Take, for instance, the case of Peter and Cornelius. Cornelius was a devout man who sought the Lord, and an angel appeared. The angel did not say, "Cornelius, the gospel has been restored, and since you are a good man and you believe, I will take you out and baptize you." He told Cornelius where he could go and be taught and have the saving ordinance performed. Then the angelic messenger went to Peter. He taught Peter and directed him so he would know what to do when Cornelius came to him. After sending Cornelius to Peter, the angel made sure that Peter would properly attend to the baptism. The angel did only that which was essential—that is all (see Acts 10).

When the Savior appeared as a heavenly messenger to Saul and stopped him in his mad course of persecution of the Saints, what did he do? He sent him to find the righteous Ananias. This mortal legal administrator would tell him what to do. Then he sent word to Ananias about Paul and told Ananias he had a mission for Paul. He told Ananias to find Paul and do what was necessary for him to have salvation (see Acts 9:1-18; 22:6-16). This is the way the Lord works. It is the order of the heavens.

To have a proper and correct understanding of the doings of angels, it is necessary to know what they will not do, even as it is necessary to know what they have done and will do. This is definition by exclusion.

The heavenly messengers do only what we cannot do for ourselves. "The only reason that Jesus Christ became the Redeemer of the world, and came here to atone for the transgressions of man, was that we could not redeem ourselves. It required an infinite atonement, as the Book of Mormon says. He came to do what no one else could do" (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:196; see also 2 Nephi 9:7).

OSCAR W. McCONKIE JR. was ordained to the office of an elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood October 22, 1944, by Oscar W. McConkie Sr.

OSCAR W. McCONKIE SR. was ordained by Rulon S. Wells November 7, 1909.

RULON S. WELLS was ordained by Brigham Young October 22, 1875.

BRIGHAM YOUNG was ordained an apostle February 14, 1835, under the hands of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon: Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, "who were blessed by the laying on of hands of the Presidency [Joseph Smith Jr., Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams]" to "choose the Twelve Apostles." (History of the Church, 2:187; see also D&C 18:37.)

JOSEPH SMITH JR. was ordained by Peter, James, and John in 1829.

PETER, JAMES, AND JOHN were ordained by the Lord Jesus Christ.
