Let's personalize this discussion on angels. It does appear from the scriptures that from Adam to the present time, whenever men have had sufficient faith, angels have ministered to them. The pattern and examples are before us; so is the precept. It is an unvarying principle. Moroni quoted his father, Mormon, as saying:

Have miracles ceased? . . .

. . . Behold I say unto you, Nay; neither have angels ceased to minister unto the children of men.

For behold, they are subject unto him, to minister according to the word of his command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness. . . .

Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? . . .

Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that . . . angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain. (Moroni 7:27, 29-30, 36-37.)

By precept and example we understand that angels minister to faithful servants.

David praised the Lord for this principle. "The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them. . . . O fear the Lord, ye his Saints: for there is no want to them that fear him" (Psalm 34:7, 9).

King David knew what he was talking about. He had experienced the angelic forces of God in his behalf. In inspired song he sang: "He hath delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against me: for there were many with me" (Psalm 55:18). This is an apparent reference to the Assyrian invasion of Judah wherein the righteous troops were encouraged:

Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us than with him:

With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battles. (2 Chronicles 32:7-8.)

One trouble is that we do not enjoy the joint effort that we otherwise might have. One of the purposes of this essay is to help us recognize our possibilities. When we see what angels have done with others, we may open our eyes.

There is a great Old Testament incident wherein the man of God saw the angelic hosts marshaled in favor of the forces of righteousness. By intercessory prayer the prophet was able to open the eyes of the people, and they became aware of the strength of their position. They saw that there were more that were for them than there were that were against them.

Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host: and they came by night, and compassed the city about.

And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do?

And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them.

And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha. (2 Kings 6:14-17.)

Since God is no respecter of persons, we can safely assume that he will treat us as he treated Elisha's men. It is as important in our lives, as it was in theirs, to know that "they that be with us are more than they that be with them."

In preparing this manuscript, I initially selected several occurrences, all within my jurisdiction in terms of area and time and church administration, events either personally witnessed or faithfully recounted to me by the participants, so that we, too, may see. In my personal, limited stewardship, I have been able to record many instances of the ministering of angels now. These were not hearsay, but were first-party testimony. Upon mature consideration it is my judgment not to permit a listing of such intensely personal and sacred experiences while the participants are still with us. It seems wisdom to me not to name buildings after living heroes.

To avoid any hazards in adding to the burden of sensitive, spiritually attuned, living witnesses, I have determined to make my point by retelling some verified, heretofore-published accountings of persons who established, in the entirety of their lives, a reputation for honesty and integrity and faithfulness.

We are not alone. One man and God make a majority. There are many with us.

WILFORD WOODRUFF

Consider first the testimony of the fourth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Wilford Woodruff. This statement was made in the solemnity of a general conference of the Church in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on Sunday afternoon, 10 October 1880. It has to do with the spirits of just men made perfect. The spirits of certain persons who have left their bodies in death and who reside in the spirit world are angels. Perusal of the modern and ancient records indicates that most angelic visitants are of this kind.

I believe the eyes of the heavenly hosts are over this people; I believe they are watching the elders of Israel, the prophets and apostles and men who are called to bear off this kingdom. I believe they watch over us all with great interest.

I will here make a remark concerning my own feelings. After the death of Joseph Smith I saw and conversed with him many times in my dreams in the night season. On one occasion he and his brother Hyrum met me when on the sea going on a mission to England. I had Dan Jones with me. He received his mission from Joseph Smith before his death; and the prophet talked freely to me about the mission I was then going to perform. And he also talked to me with regard to the mission of the Twelve Apostles in the flesh, and he laid before me the work they had to perform; and he also spoke of the reward they would receive after death. And there were many other things he laid before me in his interview on that occasion. . . .

I have had many interviews with Brother Joseph until the last 15 or 20 years of my life; I have not seen him for that length of time. But during my travels in the southern country last winter I had many interviews with President Young, and with Heber C. Kimball, and Geo. A. Smith, and Jedediah M. Grant, and many others who are dead. They attended our conference, they attended our meetings. And on one occasion, I saw Brother Brigham and Brother Heber ride in carriage ahead of the carriage in which I rode when I was on my way to attend conference; and they were dressed in the most priestly robes. When we arrived at our destination I asked Prest. Young if he would preach to us. He said, "No, I have finished my testimony in the flesh I shall not talk to this people any more. But (said he) I have come to see you; I have come to watch over you, and to see what the people are doing. Then (said he) I want you to teach the people—and I want you to follow this counsel yourself—that they must labor and so live as to obtain the Holy Spirit, for without this you cannot build up the kingdom; without the spirit of God you are in danger of walking in the dark, and in danger of failing to accomplish your calling as apostles and as elders in the church and kingdom of God. And, said he, Brother Joseph taught me this principle." . . . the thought came to me that Brother Joseph had left the work of watching over this church and kingdom to others, and that he had gone ahead . . .

. . . I do hope and pray God that we may magnify our calling while we tarry here, so that when we get through our earthly mission and go into the spirit world, we may meet with Brothers Joseph and Brigham and Heber and the rest of the faithful men whom we knew and labored with while in the flesh, as well as Father Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the prophets and apostles who have had their day and their time and their generation, and who have finished their work here below and gone home to glory. Do you not think they are interested about us? I tell you they are. (Journal of Discourses, 21:317-18.)

These were actual occurrences. They happened. President Woodruff understood the difference between actual visitations of personages, angelic visitants, and visions or other communications from God. He said, for instance, that when Paul was caught up to the third heaven and saw things not lawful to utter, not knowing whether he was in or out of the body, that was a vision. When Joseph Smith was visited by Moroni and the Apostles, he talked to them face to face. This was not a vision.

I want to preach a short sermon to this congregation. . . .

My mind reverts to the channels of communication from God to man. . . .

. . . the Lord has many ways in which He communicates with us. Frequently, . . . truths, principles, warnings, etc., are communicated to the children of men by means of dreams and visions. . . .

Then, again, there are visions. Paul, you know, on one occasion was caught up to the third heaven and saw things that were not lawful to utter. He did not know whether he was in the body or out of the body. That was a vision. When Joseph Smith, however, was visited by Moroni and the Apostles, it was not particularly a vision which he had; he talked with them face to face. (Journal of Discourses, 22:330-32.)

In point of fact President Woodruff did have experiences with heavenly messengers instructing him in vision. When he recorded them, he was careful to delineate the difference between a vision and a face-to-face confrontation.

I will refer to a thing that took place with me in Tennessee. I was in Tennessee in the year 1835, and while at the house of Abraham O. Smoot, I received a letter from Brothers Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, requesting me to stay there, and stating that I would lose no blessing by doing so. Of course, I was satisfied. I went into a little room and sat down upon a small sofa. I was all by myself and the room was dark; and while I rejoiced in this letter and the promise made to me, I became wrapped in vision. I was like Paul; I did not know whether I was in the body or out of the body. A personage appeared to me and showed me the great scenes that should take place in the last days. One scene after another passed before me. I saw . . . the various dispensations of God to man. . . . I saw the resurrection of the dead. . . . What does this mean? It was a testimony of the resurrection of the dead. I had a testimony. I believe in the resurrection of the dead, and I know it is a true principle. (Journal of Discourses, 22:332-33.)

While we have President Wilford Woodruff before us, we shall elicit some more testimony about angels. He talked to the Saints, again as recorded in general conference, about one of the more common type of visits from the other world. It is within the author's experience, and I am convinced that it is within the experience of many of the readers and/or their families, that persons who have preceded us in death are not infrequently dispatched to us as messengers and guides. President Woodruff said:

I have felt of late as if our brethren on the other side of the [veil] had held a council, and that they had said to this one, and that one, "Cease thy work on earth, come hence, we need help," and they have called this man and that man. It has appeared so to me in seeing the many men who have been called from our midst lately. Perhaps I may be permitted to relate a circumstance with which I am acquainted in relation to Bishop Roskelley, of Smithfield, Cache Valley. On one occasion he was suddenly taken very sick—near to death's door. While he lay in this condition, President Peter Maughan, who was dead, came to him and said: "Brother Roskelley, we held a council on the other side of the [veil]. I have had a great deal to do, and I have the privilege of coming here to appoint one man to come and help. I have had three names given to me in council, and you are one of them, I want to inquire into your circumstances." The Bishop told him what he had to do, and they conversed together as one man would converse with another. President Maughan then said to him: "I think I will not call you. I think you are wanted here more than perhaps one of the others." Bishop Roskelley got well from that hour. Very soon after, the second man was taken sick, but not being able to exercise sufficient faith, Brother Roskelley did not go to him. By and by this man recovered, and on meeting Brother Roskelley he said: "Brother Maughan came to me the other night and told me he was sent to call one man from the ward," and he named two men as had been done to Brother Roskelley. A few days afterwards the third man was taken sick and died. Now, I name this to show a principle. They have work on the other side of the [veil]; and they want men, and they call them. (Journal of Discourses, 22:334-35.)

It is noted that this other-worldly visitation had to do with the general body of the faithful Saints, not, as President Woodruff said, those "who bear rule in Zion." Experiences with angels are reserved for the faithful, not particularly for those in administrative positions.

BRIGHAM YOUNG

For our next witness we call Brigham Young, the second president of the Church. His testimony is cumulative in nature because it had to do with an angel who was a just man made perfect. It is noted that this instance took place in the form of a night vision or dream. It was recorded in the Manuscript History of Brigham Young on 23 February 1847, at Winter Quarters.

While sick and asleep about noonday of the 17th inst., I dreamed that I went to see Joseph. He looked perfectly natural, sitting with his feet on the lower round of his chair. I took hold of his right hand and kissed him many times, and said to him: "Why is it that we cannot be together as we used to be[?] You have been from us a long time, and we want your society and I do not like to be separated from you."

Joseph rising from his chair and looking at me with his usual earnest, expressive and pleasing countenance replied, "It is all right."

I said, "I do not like to be away from you."

Joseph said, "It is all right; we cannot be together yet; we shall be by and by; but you will have to do without me a while, and then we shall be together again." I then discovered there was a hand rail between us, Joseph stood by a window and to the southwest of him it was very light. I was in the twilight and to the north of me it was very dark; I said, "Brother Joseph, the brethren you know well, better than I do; you raised them up, and brought the Priesthood to us. The brethren have a great anxiety to understand the law of adoption or sealing principles; and if you have a word of counsel for me, I should be glad to receive it."

Joseph stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly said, "Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. Be careful and not turn away the small still voice; it will teach you what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom. Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it. They can tell the Spirit of the Lord from all other spirits; it will whisper peace and joy to their souls; it will take malice, hatred, strife and all evil from their hearts; and their whole desire will be to do good, bring forth righteousness and build up the kingdom of God. Tell the brethren if they will follow the spirit of the Lord, they will go right. Be sure to tell the people to keep the Spirit of the Lord; and if they will, they will find themselves just as they were organized by our Father in Heaven before they came into the world. Our Father in Heaven organized the human family, but they are all disorganized and in great confusion."

Joseph then showed me the pattern, how they were in the beginning. This I cannot describe, but I saw it, and saw where the Priesthood had been taken from the earth and how it must be joined together, so that there would be a perfect chain from Father Adam to his latest posterity. Joseph again said, "Tell the people to be sure to keep the Spirit of the Lord and follow it, and it will lead them just right."

HEBER C. KIMBALL

Heber C. Kimball, paternal grandfather of President Spencer W. Kimball, served as a counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency of the Church. His reputation for honesty and integrity is unblemished. He was so sensitive to spiritual phenomena that President Young referred to him as his prophet. President Kimball had much to do with angels. He recorded, for instance, " . . . we did not fear, nor hesitate to proceed on our journey, for God was with us, and angels went before us, and we had no fear of either men or devils. This we knew because they (the angels) were seen" (Life of Heber C. Kimball, 43-44).

It was President Kimball who recorded the name of one of the angelic ministrants who attended the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. "While these things were being attended to the beloved disciple John was seen in our midst by the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and others" (ibid., 92). He was there and recorded the happening.

As Heber C. Kimball was being prepared for the wondrous ministry that was to be his, he was given a view of angels that was similar to Elisha's seeing the army of angels that helped fight Israel's battles. Although he did not know it at the time, the great latter-day work had begun. There was conflict and the heavens were bestirring themselves. Truth and error were pitted against each other and the invisible world was up in arms. The prophesied signs in the heavens were showing. Of the night of 22 September 1827, he wrote:

I had retired to bed, when John P. Greene, who was living within a hundred steps of my house, came and waked me up, calling upon me to come out and behold the scenery in the heavens. I woke up and called my wife and Sister Fanny Young (sister to Brigham Young), who was living with us, and we went out-of-doors.

It was one of the most beautiful starlight nights, so clear that we could see to pick up a pin. We looked to the eastern horizon, and beheld a white smoke arise toward the heavens; as it ascended it formed itself into a belt, and made a noise like the sound of a mighty wind, and continued southwest, forming a regular bow dipping in the western horizon. After the bow had formed, it began to widen out and grow clear and transparent, of a bluish cast; it grew wide enough to contain twelve men abreast.

In this bow an army moved, commencing from the east and marching to the west; they continued marching until they reached the western horizon. They moved in platoons, and walked so close that the rear ranks trod in the steps of their file leaders, until the whole bow was literally crowded with soldiers. We could distinctly see the muskets, bayonets and knapsacks of the men, who wore caps and feathers like those used by the American soldiers, in the last war with Britain; and also saw their officers with their swords and equipage, and the clashing the jingling of their implements of war, and could discover the forms and features of the men. The most profound order existed throughout the entire army; when the foremost man stepped, every man stepped at the same time; I could hear the steps. When the front rank reached the western horizon a battle ensued, as we could distinctly hear the report of arms and the rush.

No man could judge of my feelings when I beheld that army of men, as plainly as ever I saw armies of men in the flesh; it seemed as though every hair of my head was alive. This scenery we gazed upon for hours, until it began to disappear.

After I became acquainted with Mormonism, I learned that this took place the same evening that Joseph Smith received the records of the Book of Mormon from the angel Moroni, who had held those records in his possession.

John Young, Sen., and John P. Greene's wife, Rhoda, were also witnesses. (Ibid., 15-17.)

President Kimball's experiences led him to the belief that angels are daily around us. He thus wrote:

I am now in my fifty-fourth year; I am a Latter-day Saint, full in the faith, and not only in the faith, but I have a knowledge of the truth of this work. I know that God lives and dwells in the heavens; for I have asked Him scores of times, and hundreds of times, for things, and have received them. Is not that a pretty good proof that He hears me, when I ask him for things and get them; and is not that a proof that He lives, and dwells in the heavens? I think it is. I suppose He dwells there. He could not dwell anywhere else, but in what particular portion He dwells, I do not precisely know, though He is not so far off as many imagine. He is near by, His angels are our associates, they are with us and around about us, and watch over us, and take care of us, and lead us, and guide us, and administer to our wants in their ministry and in their holy calling unto which they are appointed. We are told in the Bible that angels are ministering spirits to minister to those who shall become heirs of salvation.

We have the spirits of the ancients, also, administering to the Saints:

Who have you now in your midst? Have you Abraham and Isaac and the Apostles Peter, James and John? Yes, you have them right in your midst—they are talking to you all the time.

Who are you to be subject to? You say you are willing to be subject to God—to Jesus Christ. You are willing if Peter came along to listen to him. Well, Peter is here, John is here, Elias is here, Elijah is here, Jesus is here, and the Father is here. What! In person? If not in person, their authority is here, with all the power that ever was or ever will be, to seal men and women up to everlasting. (Ibid., 460-61.)

HEBER J. GRANT

We next call Heber J. Grant, seventh president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The author has never known a more credible witness. The experiences I have known him to relate, including this instant testimony, were told with painful accuracy. He had a reputation for never exaggerating. His recounting of an experience was known for accuracy in the most minute detail.

The remarkable experience that he tells is, once again, cumulative. Without further multiplying examples, the honest inquirer is convinced of the realness of just men made perfect and their workings with men in the flesh.

Forty years ago this October conference [1922], I met the late Elder George Teasdale at the south gate of the Tabernacle grounds. He shook hands with me and said: "Brother Grant, I am delighted to see you. You and I are going to be—" and he stopped suddenly and his face turned red. But the Lord gave me the balance of the sentence. Four times in my life I have been permitted to read the thoughts of people. The balance of Brother Teasdale's sentence was—"sustained this afternoon as apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ to fill the vacancies in the Quorum." And that went through me like a shock of electricity.

I came to the Sunday afternoon meeting of the conference, because of this partial sentence, and the balance that was given to me, with the assurance in my heart that Brother Teasdale and myself would be sustained as apostles. Those of you who were at that conference remember that it adjourned without filling those vacancies. I do not believe that any mortal man ever more humbly supplicated God during the next few days to forgive him for his egotism than I did for thinking I was to be chosen as an apostle. As you are aware, within a week a revelation came to John Taylor calling Brother Teasdale and myself to those positions. (Gospel Standards, 193-94.)

President Grant also gave us this stirring testimony:

While on the Navajo Indian reservation with Brigham Young, Jr., and a number of others, six or eight on horseback, and several others in "white tops"—I was riding along with Lot Smith at the rear of that procession. Suddenly the road veered to the left almost straight, but there was a well-beaten path leading ahead. I said: "Stop, Lot, stop. Where does this trail lead? There are plenty of footmarks and plenty of horses' hoof marks here." He said, "It leads to an immense gully just a short distance ahead, that it is impossible to cross with a wagon. We have made a regular 'Muleshoe' of miles here to get on the other side of the gully."

I had visited the day before the spot where a Navajo Indian had asked George A. Smith, Jr., to let him look at his pistol. George A. handed it to him, and the Navajo shot him.

I said, "Lot, is there any danger from Indians here?"

"None at all."

"I want to be all alone. Go ahead and follow the crowd." I first asked him if I allowed the animal I was riding to walk if I would reach the road on the other side of the gully before the horsemen and the wagons, and he said, "Yes."

As I was riding along to meet them on the other side, I seemed to see, and I seemed to hear, what to me is one of the most real things in all my life. I seemed to hear the words that were spoken. I listened to the discussion with a great deal of interest. The First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles had not been able to agree on two men to fill the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. There had been a vacancy of one for two years, and a vacancy of two for one year, and the conferences had adjourned without the vacancies' being filled. In this council the Savior was present, my father was there, and the Prophet Joseph Smith was there. They discussed the question that a mistake had been made in not filling those two vacancies and that in all probability it would be another six months before the Quorum would be completed. And they discussed as to whom they wanted to occupy those positions, and decided that the way to remedy the mistake that had been made in not filling these vacancies was to send a revelation. It was given to me that the Prophet Joseph Smith and my father mentioned me and requested that I be called to that position. I sat there and wept for joy. It was given to me that I had done nothing to entitle me to that exalted position, except that I had lived a clean, sweet life. It was given to me that because of my father's having practically sacrificed his life in what was known as the great reformation, so to speak, of the people in early days, having been practically a martyr, that the Prophet Joseph and my father desired me to have that position, and it was because of their faithful labors that I was called, and not because of anything I had done of myself or any great thing that I had accomplished. It was also given to me that that was all these men, the Prophet and my father, could do for me. From that day it depended upon me and upon me alone as to whether I made a success of my life or a failure. (Ibid., 195-96.)

I recall President Grant telling this experience in my presence. I was struck with wonder at the closeness of this prophet with those who were presiding on the other side of the veil of death. I pondered the fact that President Grant's father, who had before him served in the First Presidency, was acting as his advocate there in the heavenly councils. My memory of the incident was of his father saying, "What of the boy I raised up unto you?" To me this intimate glimpse into the world beyond is filled with hope and warmth. Certainly with President Grant there seemed to be many with him.

PARLEY P. PRATT

We now turn to another type of experience with an angel. Parley P. Pratt is the participant. The happening took place in May 1834. Our witness was a member of the first Council of the Twelve Apostles called in this dispensation.

It was now the first of May, 1834, and our mission had resulted in the assembling of about two hundred men at Kirtland, with teams, baggage, provisions, arms, etc., for a march of one thousand miles, for the purpose of carrying some supplies to the afflicted and persecuted Saints in Missouri, and to reinforce and strengthen them; and, if possible, to influence the Governor of the State to call out sufficient additional force to cooperate in restoring them to their rights. This little army was led by President Joseph Smith in person. It commenced its march about the first of May; passing through Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, it entered Missouri some time in June.

I was chiefly engaged as a recruiting officer, and, not being much with the camp, can give but little of its history. I visited branches of the Church in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri, and obtaining what men and means I could, fell in with the camp from time to time with additional men, arms, stores and money. On one occasion, I had travelled all night to overtake the camp with some men and means, and having breakfasted with them and changed horses, I again started ahead on express to visit other branches, and do business to again overtake them. At noon I had turned my horse loose from the carriage to feed on the grass in the midst of a broad, level plain. No habitation was near; stillness and repose reigned around me; I sank down overpowered with a deep sleep, and might have lain in a state of oblivion till the shades of night had gathered about me, so completely was I exhausted for want of sleep and rest; but I had only slept a few moments till the horse had grazed sufficiently, when a voice, more loud and shrill than I have ever before heard, fell on my ear, and thrilled through every part of my system; it said: "Parley, it is time to be up and on your journey." In the twinkling of an eye I was perfectly aroused; I sprang to my feet so suddenly that I could not at first recollect where I was, or what was before me to perform. I related the circumstance afterwards to brother Joseph Smith, and he bore testimony that it was the angel of the Lord who went before the camp, who found me overpowered with sleep, and thus awoke me. (Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt, 1928, 93-94.)

DAVID O. McKAY

It is not unusual for angels to attend earthly religious meetings and other sacred occasions. It has been authoritatively stated that angels attended the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. Of this occasion Joseph Smith recorded in his diary: "I bore record of . . . the ministration of angels. . . . President David Whitmer also saw angels in the house." He continues:

Brother George A. Smith arose and began to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the Temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and I beheld the Temple was filled with angels, which fact I declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. (History of the Church, 2:427-28.)

Such presence of angels is sufficiently common that it is within the relatively limited realm of experience of the author.

The witness selected to testify of this type of experience is David O. McKay, ninth president of the Church. The specific instance recited should be given special credence because it contains a prophecy that has since been specifically performed.

I was on my first mission, president, at the time, of the Scottish conference in the year 1899. Presiding over the European Mission were Elders Platt D. Lyman, Henry W. Naisbitt, and James L. McMurrin. President McMurrin represented the European Mission presidency at a conference held in Glasgow, Scotland. Following a series of meetings, we held a most remarkable priesthood meeting—one that will never be forgotten by any who was present.

I remember as if it were but yesterday, the intensity of the inspiration of that occasion. Everybody felt the rich outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord. All present were truly of one heart and one mind. Never before had I experienced such an emotion. It was a manifestation for which as a doubting youth I had secretly prayed most earnestly on hillside and in meadow. It was an assurance to me that sincere prayer is answered "sometime, somewhere."

During the progress of the meeting, an elder on his own initiative arose and said, "Brethren, there are angels in this room." Strange as it may seem, the announcement was not startling; indeed, it seemed wholly proper; though it had not occurred to me there were divine beings present. I only knew that I was overflowing with gratitude for the presence of the Holy Spirit. I was profoundly impressed, however, when President James L. McMurrin arose and confirmed that statement by pointing to one brother sitting just in front of me and saying, "Yes, brethren, there are angels in this room, and one of them is the guardian angel of that young man sitting there," and he designated one who today is a patriarch of the Church.

Pointing to another elder, he said, "And one is the guardian angel of that young man there," and he singled out one whom I had known from childhood. Tears were rolling down the cheeks of both of these missionaries, not in sorrow or grief, but as an expression of the overflowing Spirit; indeed, we were all weeping.

Such was the setting in which James L. McMurrin gave what has since proved to be a prophecy. I had learned by intimate association with him that James McMurrin was pure gold; his faith in the gospel implicit; that no truer man, no more loyal man to what he thought was right ever lived; so when he turned to me and gave what I thought then was more of a caution than a promise, his words made an indelible impression upon me. Paraphrasing the words of the Savior to Peter, he said: "Let me say to you, Brother David, Satan hath desired you that he may sift you as wheat, but God is mindful of you." Then he added, "If you will keep the faith, you will yet sit in the leading councils of the Church." (Cherished Experiences, 12-14.)

HAROLD B. LEE

The next witness summoned is Harold B. Lee, eleventh president of the Church. Once again we have a cautious and conservative witness. He is called to give his experience in being literally administered to by a personage from the unseen world. As with other cited testimony, his statement was voluntarily given in the solemnity of a general conference. On 8 April 1973, in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, President Lee said:

May I impose upon you for a moment to express appreciation for something that happened to me some time ago. I was suffering from an ulcer condition that was becoming worse and worse. We had been touring a mission; my wife, Joan, and I were impressed the next morning that we should get home as quickly as possible, although we had planned to stay for some other meetings.

On the way across the country, we were sitting in the forward section of the airplane. Some of our Church members were in the next section of the airplane. As we approached a certain point en route, someone laid his hand upon my head. I looked up; I could see no one. That happened again before we arrived home, again with the same experience. Who it was, by what means or what medium, I may never know, except I knew that I was receiving a blessing that I came a few hours later to know I needed most desperately.

As soon as we arrived home, my wife very anxiously called the doctor. It was now about 11 o'clock at night. He called me to come to the telephone, and he asked me how I was; and I said, "Well, I am very tired. I think I will be all right." But shortly thereafter, there came massive hemorrhages which, had they occurred while we were in flight, I wouldn't be here today talking about it.

I know that there are powers divine that reach out when all other help is not available. (Stand Ye in Holy Places, 187-88.)

President Lee knew, as did King David before him, "The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them" (Psalm 34:7).

ALEXANDER NEIBAUR

As heretofore discussed, the Lord is not an angel in the usual sense. However, he does play the part of an angel and is the messenger of salvation. We now call a witness who had to do with more than one angel, as we shall see. He was ministered to by the Lord of all angels.

Alexander Neibaur was born in Ehrenbriestein, France, January 8, 1808. It was then a part of Alsace-Lorraine, but it now [is] German territory. The parents of Alexander were Nathan and Rebecca Peretz Neibaur. They were of the higher class of Hebrews. This is evidenced by the fact that the father was well educated, being a physician and surgeon, as well as a facile linguist. He intended his son Alexander for the Jewish ministry and had him educated for a rabbi to elucidate the Law of Moses; but when the boy was seventeen years old he decided that he did not wish this career, and chose the profession of a surgeon and dentist. He attended the University of Berlin, graduating before he was twenty years of age.

He set out on his travels immediately after leaving the University, and became converted to the Christian faith. He finally located for some time in the city of Preston, England, where he met and married an excellent wife, by name, Ellen Breakel. Here the couple were found on July 30, 1837, when the first "Mormon" elders came over to open the Gospel door to the British mission at the famous "Cock-pit," Preston, England.

The story of his conversion is full of interest. It was one morning very early. . . . The women of Preston . . . had the custom of going out before sunrise to give their front stone steps and porticos a coat of whitewash. . . . It was on one of these mornings that the young wife of Alexander Neibaur was on her knees polishing to the last degree of whiteness her own steps, when a neighbor challenged her attention with the remark:

"Have you seen the new ministers from America?"

"No," answered the younger woman, still intent on her work.

"Well," asserted the neighboring housewife laconically, as befits great tidings, "They claim to have seen an angel." "What?" rang out an abrupt voice from an inner chamber, as the young Hebrew husband sprang from his couch and put his head out of the window. "What's that you say?"

The information was repeated for his benefit, and hurriedly dressing, the young man secured the address of the American preachers of this strange religion; and not many hours after he was in close conversation with Elders Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Orson Hyde and Joseph Fielding. His was the swift conversion of spirit that demanded baptism on the spot. One of the first questions he asked, was, "You have a book?" And nothing could satisfy that eager, inspired question till he had a copy of the Book of Mormon in his own hands, for he had seen it, so he declared, in his night visions and recognized the Book on sight. He was waiting for the great message.

He was advised by the elders to wait and investigate further. Taking the book home with him, he read it through in three days. He said later that he could neither eat nor sleep till he had mastered all the contents of that wondrous volume. When he returned the book he offered himself for baptism, but was advised to wait till he was prepared. He answered, "Gentlemen, I am prepared." And his subsequent life found him always prepared. He accepted the counsel, however, and waited till the following spring. . . .

Brother Neibaur's wife could not see the gospel so quickly nor so easily as did her husband. He sat long evenings reading the Book of Mormon to his wife. . . .

His baptism occurred on April 9th, 1838. . . . This step was not taken without many sacrifices and trials. His new friends and former associates were indeed bitter and relentless in their opposition to the further conversion of this brilliant young Hebrew. He had made friends through his business associations as well as through the genial manner and the honest nature of his life and dealings. He was of considerable promise, and all who knew him deplored the step he had taken and tried to dissuade him from wrecking his life.

Alexander Neibaur was a Jew, and he was the first of his race to accept the Gospel. . . .

. . . When he was convinced of the mission of Jesus as a Savior, he left his father's roof-tree to become a soldier of the cross; and thus when the Gospel star shone upon his horizon, he hesitated not in following its course, though it led him across the sea, into dangers manifold, and swept from him all former friends and associates. . . .

. . . He sailed from Liverpool, Sunday, February 7, 1841, in the ship "Sheffield," under the leadership of Hiram Clark with a company of 235 Saints on board. He was a student well aware of the value of history and record keeping. He began a daily journal with the sailing of that ship in which he faithfully set down the events, both great and small of that historic voyage. . . .

Arriving in Nauvoo, Brother Neibaur was welcomed by his former friends, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards. Under the hands of Willard Richards and John Taylor he was ordained to the priesthood, January 18, 1843, and ordained a seventy in 1844. He was honored with the friendship of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and was fired with the same passionate zeal for the Gospel and the fearless Latter-day Prophet which characterized the leaders and other faithful members of the Church. He had the extreme pleasure of becoming instructor to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the German and Hebrew languages, and treasured all his life the blessedness of that memory and association.

Asked by one of his daughters in later life how it was that he came to accept the Gospel, he replied that he was converted to the mission of Christ long before he ever heard a Latter-day Saint elder preach. He added that subsequently he had been visited in dreams and visions and had seen the Book of Mormon brought forth in vision; also that he had become familiar with the endowment ceremonies in the same mystic manner. On this point he once had a conversation with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and told the Prophet many things that had been manifested to him in his early youth. The prophet put his arm affectionately around Brother Neibaur's shoulder and said,

"You are indeed one of us, Brother Neibaur."

. . . He practiced his profession of dentistry when there was a chance, which was not often in that pioneer struggling community. . . .

It was while living in Nauvoo that Elder Neibaur wrote some of his best poetry. . . .

It is related by one of his daughters that one day he was singing hymns, as was his frequent custom and some question was asked of her father concerning this hymn, who repeated it for her.

"Yes," he admitted, "this was written by your humble servant." When asked why his name did not appear attached to it, he replied that he had taken the poem to Brother Parley P. Pratt, who had edited it in some places. And this small assistance caused the sensitively honest soul of Elder Neibaur to shrink from asserting his authorship. . . .

. . . When the pioneers who had been to Salt Lake Valley returned, and word went out that the first company of 1848 would make ready to move westward, the soul of Elder Neibaur was wrought up within him. . . .

When once in the Valley, Elder Neibaur shared the toils and the privations of pioneer life here. He was not fitted for hard or difficult labor, but he was industrious and he did as did his associates, made the best of all his opportunities. He did not go into debt nor was he a burden to any one. He taught his family to honor the God of the Former and Latter-day Saints. He taught them lessons of morality, of frugality, and of honesty and independence.

Elder Neibaur made the adobes for his own house which was the crude one-roomed, mud-roofed affair of those very primitive days. He added a log lean-to afterwards. Then as his fortunes mended, he later built him a good adobe house on Second South and Second East where he reared his large and industrious family.

He was the pioneer dentist of Salt Lake City, he was also the pioneer match manufacturer. . . . Elder Neibaur was also engaged each winter for some years in teaching German classes. He was himself an accomplished linguist. He spoke seven languages. . . .

Shortly before his death his son said to him,

"Father you have been telling us of your long and hard experience, and we have listened with intense affection and interest. But let me ask you, is it worth it all? Is the Gospel worth all this sacrifice?"

The glow of testimony and of truth lighted the torches in the dimming eyes of that ancient Hebrew prophet and poet and he lifted his voice in firm and lofty assurance as he said:

"Yes! Yes! and more! I have seen my Savior. I have seen the prints in his hands! I know that Jesus is the Son of God, and I know that this work is true and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I would suffer it all and more, far more than I have ever suffered for that knowledge even to the laying down of my body on the plains for the wolves to devour." . . .

. . . A short time before the end, his face suddenly lit up and his countenance brightened. He cast his eyes upward as if he could see far into upper distant spaces.

"What do you see, father?" they asked. The dying man murmured clearly,

"Joseph—Hyrum—" then his weary eyes closed forever.

With the burning testimony of truth on his lips he closed his life mission, laid down his body, and his soul went to meet and mingle with the redeemed of God. . . . Of such is the kingdom of heaven. (Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, April 1914, 53-63.)

EMMA SOMERVILLE McCONKIE

To conclude this personalized account of angelic administrations, I call as the final witness my grandmother, Emma Somerville McConkie. As with Alexander Neibaur, I have selected an unknown witness to demonstrate the universality of being ministered to from the heavens. Grandmother McConkie was a ward Relief Society president in Moab, Utah, many years ago. At the time of this experience she was a widow. My father wrote this in his diary.

Mother was president of the Moab Relief Society. JÂÂÂÂÂÂ BÂÂÂÂÂÂ (a non-member who opposed the Church) had married a Mormon girl. They had several children; now they had a new baby. They were very poor and Mother was going day by day to care for the child and to take them baskets of food, etc. Mother herself was ill, and more than once was hardly able to get home after doing the work at the JÂÂÂÂÂÂ BÂÂÂÂÂÂ home.

One day she returned home especially tired and weary. She slept in her chair. She dreamed she was bathing a baby which she discovered was the Christ Child. She thought, Oh, what a great honor to thus serve the very Christ! As she held the baby in her lap, she was all but overcome. She thought, who else has actually held the Christ Child? Unspeakable joy filled her whole being. She was aflame with the glory of the Lord. It seemed that the very marrow in her bones would melt. Her joy was so great it awakened her. As she awoke, these words were spoken to her, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Relief Society Magazine, March 1970, 169.)

While my father was alive I went to him and to his journal to make sure I had all the facts right in the preparation of a talk I was to give at a family reunion. I wanted to recount the foregoing incident in the life of his mother. At the time of the ministration from the heavens I watered it down, saying "She seemed to hear a voice." My father corrected me, saying, "She did not seem to hear a voice. She heard a voice." And that is the way it can be in the real world. It is my opinion that Alexander Neibaur and Emma Somerville McConkie have had their souls delivered by the ultimate angel. They have learned, as the Saints have in all ages before them. "God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble" (Psalm 46:1). "The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them" (Psalm 34:7).

True religious history demonstrates an undeviating pattern. We have models. Where men have faith, angels minister. So unvarying is this principle that it stands forth as a test of the divinity of any organization on earth. If angels minister to a people, they are the Lord's people. If angels do not minister to people, they are not the Lord's people. This is a scriptural standard (see Moroni 7:27-38). When judging by this standard, it is not difficult to find which of all churches is true.

MISSIONARIES ARE ANGELS

As we have noted, righteous mortal men on God's errand may properly be referred to as angels. One of the earliest accounts of biblical angels is of this type.

And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground; And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. (Genesis 19:1-2.)

The townspeople "called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night?" (Genesis 19:5). The text sounds as though these angels were mortal men. Certainly the local citizenry thought so. In his inspired rendition of this chapter, the Prophet Joseph Smith indicates that these "angels of God" "were holy men" (Inspired Version, Genesis 19:15). There are several scriptural citations to angels that are conducive to such an interpretation. Righteous mortal men may play the role of angels, and it is proper to term them angels under some circumstances.

During his earthly ministry, the Lord taught of the coming end of the world and of his coming in his glory. He told of the signs of these times, and then "they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other" (Matthew 24:30-31).

In a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, commencing, "Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ," we are given significant insight into the meaning of this citation. We read:

Verily, I say unto you that ye are chosen out of the world to declare my gospel with the sound of rejoicing, as with the voice of a trump. . . .

And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear my voice." (D&C 29:4, 7.)

The Lord uses the same terminology in both revelations. He shall send his angels with a sound of a trumpet, and missionaries are chosen out of the world to declare his gospel with the sound of rejoicing, as with the voice of a trump. The missionaries and/or angels are called to bring to pass the gathering of the elect. Clearly the missionaries are in the role of the prophesied angels. It is proper to say that these righteous mortal messengers are angels of God.

Those performing this service in the last days are "saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come; And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters" (D&C 133:38-39). These servants of God, the missionaries of our day, are saying the very words that John saw in his vision of the restoration when he heard the angel say, "Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and sea, and the fountains of waters" (Revelation 14:7).

In addition to discharging their angelic role, righteous mortal men who "go and preach this gospel of the kingdom" are given the promise and comfort of other-world ministering by having "mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:80, 88).

The Apostle Paul instructed the Hebrew Saints to "be not forgetful to entertain strangers" (Hebrews 13:2). This has always seemed to me to be a missionary function. We are to entertain and teach our Father's other children—that is, the outsiders and strangers. Paul adds meaningfully, "for thereby some have entertained angels unawares" (ibid.). I think this means at least two things: First, when we invite the stranger in to teach him the gospel, and invite the missionaries in, we indeed entertain angels. And second, when we invite the stranger in to partake of the gospel, the angels of God's presence will bear us up in this righteous endeavor. We may "entertain angels unawares" when we participate in God's purposes.

A young man tearfully told me of the fulfillment of a blessing pronounced upon his head years before. It was a patriarchal blessing given prior to his receiving his call to perform full-time missionary service. "You will envision in your mind the homes of those who are waiting to receive you. You will recognize them when you see them." The angels bore him up as this pronouncement was literally fulfilled. God's errand was both told and done, both by his ministrants.

ANGELIC HYMNS

Angels have been associated with music from the beginning. Faithful and patient Job was given a glimpse of before the world was, as he spoke of the heavenly melodies heard in the courts above at that time, "when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy" (Job 38:7). I have always imagined this as a mixed chorus with the morning stars being the preeminent and leading spirits. I am honored to number among my friends one valiant woman who was told in her patriarchal blessing that she sang in the choir, in her premortal life, when the plan of salvation was announced. Vocal and instrumental music are a part of true worship. One close to me was similarly blessed with the knowledge that a trump sounded in the heavens to announce his birth on earth. Music is given of God. It furthers his purposes; angels are intimately involved with it.

An angelic chorus from heaven heralded the birth on earth of the Son of God.

And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us. (Luke 2:13-15.)

Similar choirs are now being trained, the scores being composed, appropriate lyrics being written, instrumental accompaniment being prepared and rehearsed for our Lord's second coming. Inasmuch as this will be a coming in glory, one can scarcely comprehend the angelic music that will be part of this superlative event. The lyrics are of such importance that the name of one of the songs to be rendered, together with some of the words, was revealed to John in his great revelation, and he recorded them. He says they will sing "a new song" (Revelation 14:3). Modern revelation gives us the title, "the song of the Lamb" (D&C 133:56). As revealed to John, these are some of the words:

Great and marvellous are thy works, ÂÂÂÂÂLord God Almighty; Just and true are thy ways, ÂÂÂÂÂthou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, ÂÂÂÂÂAnd glorify thy name? For thou only art holy: For all nations shall come ÂÂÂÂÂAnd worship before thee; For thy judgments are made manifest. —Revelation 15:3-4

Resurrected Saints "shall sing the song of the Lamb." Righteous person have looked forward to singing "songs of everlasting joy" (D&C 45:71; 66:11; 101:8). In his last great sermon King Benjamin says, "I am about to go down to my grave . . . I . . . go down in peace, and my immortal spirit may join the choirs above in singing the praises of a just God" (Mosiah 2:28; see also Mormon 7:7; Revelation 14:2-3). I know at least one Latter-day Saint of whom a righteous patriarch said that he "shall compose a portion of the music to be rendered by the angelic choirs at the Second Coming."

What has this to do with us? I suggest that if we have interest in the fulfillment that these activities portend, we might commence to develop our spiritual and other talents. The Lord has said to us, in the here and now, "For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads" (D&C 25:12). If we are interested in being "partakers of the divine nature" (2 Peter 1:4), we had better be about it.

There will be many who are accepted into these heavenly choirs. Those who have experienced, or seen vision of, such matters talk about "all the host of heaven" (1 Kings 22:19) and often themselves turn psalmist: "Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts" (Psalm 148:2). John gives us some evidence as to numbers. "And they sung a new song . . . And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne . . . and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb" (Revelation 5:9, 11-12).

There are and will be great numbers of angels.

ANGELS COMING WITH CHRIST

So much for the choirs of angels that will accompany Jesus in his glorious second coming. There will be other heavenly hosts with differing assignments and purposes who will be on the Lord's errand and are properly included in a discussion on angels. They will attend Christ at his coming.

At his second coming, "the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads" (D&C 133:18). These are a part of the heavenly hosts. They are angels and they are more than angels. These are our Father's children who have achieved all that was given to them to achieve. They have the Father's name on their foreheads, signifying that they are the most advanced of all men and angels. They have progressed to godhood. They are gods, exalted personages. They are "redeemed from among men, . . . and in their mouth [is] found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God" (Revelation 14:4-5). These children of our Father have attained perfection. They have accomplished what Jesus behooved us all to do: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matthew 5:48). They have done what Jesus did before them, for as a resurrected being, he had attained perfection. It is interesting to note the difference in terminology used by the Lord after he was resurrected. To the Nephites, after his resurrection, he said: "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Nephi 12:48).

These personages who will attend Christ in his glory represent each of the tribes of Israel—except for some unspecified reason the tribe of Dan (see Revelation 7:2-8)—and "are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn" (D&C 77:11). These exalted men and angels are part of "a great multitude, which no man could number" (Revelation 7:9). All of them are exalted beings and have place in the Church of the Firstborn (see Revelation 7:9-17; Hebrews 12:22-24).

To persons of spiritual discernment it would be demeaning to inquire, "What have these to do with us?"

TESTIMONY

It has been a purpose of this essay to present information about angels in a logical and well-reasoned way. However, it should be said that we are not dealing with worldly knowledge. The truth about angels does not come from persuasive argument, regardless of reason or logic. Such thinking methods lead truth seekers along the path to things spiritually discerned. Logic and reason are aids in strengthening one's spiritual assurances. Perhaps the incomparable phraseology of Paul puts it best: "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God" (1 Corinthians 2:11).

The source of one's knowledge or assurance of the truth of the Lord's work with his messengers, the angels, comes by revelation. Such personal revelation is called a testimony and is had by way of the Holy Ghost. A spiritual certitude can only be obtained in this manner. In its nature a testimony consists of knowledge that comes by revelation from God. The Lord is called The Angel in a blessing given by Jacob (see Genesis 48:15-16). What has been recorded in the revelations about Jesus in this sense is applicable to all the righteous and holy angels. When the mighty and prophetic John fell at the feet of an angel to worship him, the angel said to him, "See thou do it not: I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Revelation 19:10). The testimony of Jesus and his angels must come by the spirit of prophecy, which is received when the Holy Ghost speaks to the spirit within men. It comes when the "still small voice" is heard by the inner man. Sometimes it is accompanied by angels, as in the case of Elijah at Horeb, the mount of God (see 1 Kings 19). Receipt of a testimony is a religious experience. In association with a testimony comes the feeling of calm, unwavering certainty. Those who have it can use logic and reason in defending their positions, but it is the prompting of the Spirit, rather than the reason, upon which the true testimony rests.

Jesus and the prophets in all ages have borne testimonies, including Christ (see John 4:25-26; 10:25, 36), Job (see Job 19:25), Peter (see Matthew 16:13-20), John (see John 6:68-69), Alma (see Alma 5:45-46), and Joseph Smith (see D&C 76:22-24).

The receipt of a testimony of spiritual truths brings a concomitant responsibility to bear witness (see Mosiah 18:9; D&C 88:81). Blessings are promised the faithful who bear testimony to the world (see D&C 62:3: 84:61). Thus, I sense an obligation to share with the reader some heretofore almost unspoken intimacies.

While serving on my first full-time mission, in New England, I was favored with a companion who gave me good balance. I was descended from old Church families; he was a convert to the Church of only a year or so before his mission call. He was a product of active Protestantism: I was a product of the restoration of all things. Between the two of us we had the breadth of experience to effectively teach many people of the fulness of the gospel.

Upon returning to his home in the northwestern United States, this strong man was beset with times of struggle. He had a large family and was under the necessity of developing a business that was very demanding. All this was time consuming and energy draining, but in addition he was loaded with Church activity, for he served in a ward bishopric.

The awful thought plagued him: Was it worth it? Living the gospel and serving in the Church seemed to demand so much. Would the true church take from him the time he could otherwise be spending with his family? He had to know.

This good man prepared himself in fasting and prayer. He approached the Father in the name of the Son and poured out his heart.

As he slept that night he had a vision. He saw himself in a great struggle, in the midst of a huge battle, fighting with every ounce of his strength. But the terrible doubt was there. He didn't know whether he was fighting on the right side or not. Just as he was about to abandon himself to destruction, a shaft of light appeared over his head. It rested upon one of the troopers leading the battle in the section in which he was engaged. He recognized the man. It was his missionary companion in the New England Mission so many years before. Then he heard the voice of the Spirit: "When you are on his side, you are on the right side." Calmness and certainty were his once again. The scene closed. He knew, and was given tranquillity.

Almost immediately he made preparation to represent his ward at a general conference in Salt Lake City. There he contacted his old companion and in loving camaraderie, around a kitchen table eating bread and milk, he related his trial and successful overcoming of the world. He wanted his missionary companion's family to hear it from his own lips. This is life. This is how it is. It can be made up of treasured moments—for believers.

The vision incident to this experience was repeated to another participant nearly a quarter of a century later. A sensitive and spiritually mature Arizona missionary who served as my assistant reported to me that as he was pondering the meaning of this experience, the eyes of his understanding were opened. He saw the same great conflict, and the same pageant was reenacted before him. However, this time he saw himself in the midst of the battle. "And the spirit said to me that exact same words," he told me.

Publication of these two personal and sacred instances is intended to apply only to matters within the realm of spiritual discernment, such as the subject matter of this discussion on angels.

The heavens, in small measure, have been opened to me. I too have a testimony of Jesus by the spirit of prophecy. His work is true. We in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are engaged in it. It was implemented in our day by his angelic ministrants, just as he said it would be. I should like to add my witness to the cumulative witnesses that encompass us. The angels came to the Prophet Joseph Smith just as he said they did. What they did is inextricably concerned with our personal salvation; we could not have it without them. Our very salvation is contingent upon angels!
