Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

A Woman's Role and Destiny

IDA SMITH

Over one hundred and fifty years ago the Lord restored the gospel of Jesus Christ to the earth through the boy prophet, Joseph Smith. Through this young man, knowledge and information that had been lost, forgotten, changed, and, in some cases, denied, for nineteen centuries was once again made available to the children of God. In most cases the inhabitants of the earth were no more ready to receive the gospel in 1830 than they had been to receive it from the Savior himself nineteen hundred years before. As the Prophet described it, the vision and understanding of the people suffered because of the "traditions of their fathers"—and, I would add, because of their mothers, as well.

The people cried blasphemy when the Prophet declared that not only could God still talk to man (revelation had not ceased), but that he had talked to him. He was denounced when he claimed that God and Christ had corporeal bodies—separate, distinct, and tangible.

But this was only the beginning of new, revealed truths to come to the world through this young prophet chosen to usher in the last dispensation. And history shows that the world at large was still not ready, able, or willing to receive most of what he taught.

From a tiny core of devoted converts, the Lord sent out missionaries to preach the restored gospel, and as the little band of "Mormons" grew, the Prophet Joseph endeavored to teach and prepare a Zion people that could, one day, teach and bless the Lord's children all over the world. Many of the revealed truths found unpalatable then still stick in some throats today; but one area of knowledge—hard, if not impossible, to swallow then—is finally, in our day, coming into its own. That area: Women.

The Prophet Joseph Smith did more than just preach that men and women were of equal value and importance in the sight of God. He preached that in order for a man to achieve his highest potential (the celestial kingdom and godhood), he must have a woman—equally exalted—by his side and sealed to him forever. (See D&C 131:1-2; 132:4.) A just God would not require the yoking of two unequal beings for eternity. Joseph also learned that our Father in heaven is not single, that we have a mother in heaven as well, that together they reign, and that we are made in their image—male and female.

As temples were built and temple ordinances restored, our knowledge of the eternal values of the male-female relationship has increased. We now know that both men and women share in all the blessings of the priesthood and that both share in all the gifts of the spirit (i.e., to heal, to be healed, to speak in tongues, to prophesy, etc.). We now know that the man's function in the priesthood is to administer, that the woman's function is creative, and that together they have a perfect balance. As Paul stated, "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.)

Marriage may or may not happen during our stay in the second estate. President Kimball said in his talk to women in September 1979: "Sometimes to be tested and proved requires that we be temporarily deprived—but righteous women and men will one day receive all that our Father has. It is not only worth waiting for—it is worth living for! Meanwhile, one does not need to be married or a mother in order to keep the first and second great commandments—to love God and our fellowmen—on which, Jesus said, hang all the law and all the prophets." (My Beloved Sisters, Deseret Book, 1979, p. 41.)

The important thing for a woman to learn in this life is her eternal role so that when she is sealed, she will be prepared and ready—with all her heart—to function in and glorify that role. That means being ready and prepared to function as a full partner in a celestial team—without having to look up for help and direction or look down because of any feeling of superiority, but being able to look across into the eyes of an equally prepared, equally magnificent eternal mate.

Such an exalted role for women was mind-boggling for nineteenth-century America. Here, as elsewhere, not only were most societies male-dominated, but men were generally regarded as superior beings. Men were not only to be protectors of women, but they were responsible for the salvation of women as well.

When the Prophet Joseph organized the women after the pattern of the priesthood in 1842, he charged them that from that time forth, they were responsible for their own sins. This was a radical thought in those days. He taught them that they were responsible for their own salvation, that they had access to every blessing the priesthood had access to, that they had equal access to the Holy Ghost and to every spiritual gift, that they also had direct access to the Savior—to model him, to become like him, to be heirs in his kingdom.

The Prophet removed some of the excuses afforded woman in her passive, dependent role and made her responsible for herself. In a very real way, he started the modern-day women's movement. Many of the early Mormon sisters caught his vision for women, got in the game, and ran with the ball. Women in Utah and Wyoming had the vote fifty years before women in the United States received it generally. And as we read and ponder the writings of many nineteenth-century Latter-day Saint women, we know that they knew who they were.

Somewhere in the last eighty or so years, Mormon women have not only dropped the ball, but they have left the game. And as we have watched from the sidelines the growth of the women's movement in the hands of the world, we have been aghast at some of its excesses and some of the directions it has taken. It is the devil's pattern to imitate God's plan and to thereby deceive mankind. Whereas God wants us to know that we are of equal value and importance, the devil would have us believe that we are not different, but the same. The Lord's way is to become like each other only as we take upon ourselves all of the Savior's traits; the devil's way would be for us to become a unisex society. We must be careful not to confuse the phony with the real thing.

Some women complain that they have no strong role models in the scriptures. That is not true, for we have many. And our main model is the same as for men—the Savior. Nowhere is it written that he is a model for men only; nowhere is it written that he came to save men only; nowhere is it written that men and women should each be allowed only half of his traits. The world has divided up character and personality traits and has labeled some of them masculine and some of them feminine. Latter-day Saints—of all people in the world—should know better than to be deceived by this. Nowhere does the Lord say that tenderness, kindness, charity, faithfulness, patience, gentleness, and compassion are female traits and should be exemplified by women only. And nowhere does he say that courage, strength, determination, leadership, and a willingness to fight—and, if necessary, die—for what is right should be the exclusive prerogatives of men. Any notion that God desires that women should remain passive bystanders should have been dispelled when the Prophet told women they are, from 1842 forward, responsible for their own salvation.

Not just women suffer with sexual categorization; man is also charged to become Christlike. A heavy burden is placed on him when he realizes that many of the traits that will make him Christlike have been labeled by the world as feminine, and that by taking upon himself those characteristics, he will run the risk of having his masculinity seriously questioned by his peers. In the world, in most societies throughout history, masculinity has been equated with virility, or, in today's vernacular, macho behavior. Women have usually been considered seductive and submissive. The world, unwilling to admit the Creation, has tried to explain existence and behavior as physical and has succumbed to the process of fragmenting the whole person.

As members of the Church, we find ourselves running from the present movement—which would give human beings back their wholeness—for fear of moving into a unisex society. And we are justified in running because that's the imitation. The Lord's plan is for men and women to become like each other only as we truly take upon ourselves the Savior's characteristics. If we are true to our basic natures, as the Lord has outlined them for us, our basic masculinity and femininity will not come into question. We should all possess both strength and sensitivity, courage and compassion, tenacity and tenderness. And as we best incorporate all those traits within our beings, we will be true to the male or female in us, which has been part of us since the beginning. If our sexual identity is based solely on our outward visible activities, our situation is serious indeed. The Savior was no more effeminate when he clasped the children to his bosom while in the Americas and blessed them and wept than was my great-great-grandmother unwomanly when she, as a widow, took the reins in her own hands and drove a team of oxen across the plains to Utah. If we feel that a woman lacks femininity because she is magnificent on the playing field or that a man lacks masculinity because he is a great artist, we are missing the point completely.

If the true male role is, indeed, to be obedient and sacrificial, how can a man achieve his highest potential with only macho traits? And if the woman is to reach her highest potential in her creative and nurturing role, how can she achieve it by being helpless and dependent?

President Kimball, in essence, has been urging women to get in condition, to get involved in the life around them, and to have a greater influence for good on what is happening in the world. He has urged women to become educated, to become gospel scholars, to develop every talent with which the Lord has blessed them and then to use their talents for the benefit of mankind. We need to learn and then teach each other the exalted role of women as revealed by the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. We need to be sure our spouses understand it. And if we have children, we need to be sure that our sons and our daughters understand it.

The Prophet Joseph said in 1842 that the key was now turned in behalf of women and that knowledge and intelligence should flow down henceforth. President Kimball put it this way to the women of the Church in September 1979: "Much of the major growth that is coming to the Church in the last days will come because many of the good women of the world . . . will be drawn to the Church in large numbers. This will happen to the degree that the women of the Church reflect righteousness and articulateness in their lives and to the degree that the women of the Church are seen as distinct and different—in happy ways—from the women of the world." (My Beloved Sisters, p. 44.) In the same talk he said: "You must be wise in the choices you make, but we do not desire you to be uninformed or ineffective. You will be better mothers and wives, both in this life and in eternity, if you sharpen the skills you have been given and use the talents with which God has blessed you." (My Beloved Sisters, p. 43.)

We have been taught that where much is given, much is expected. If we as Latter-day Saints really understand the gospel of Jesus Christ and all that it portends for women, we will realize that no blessing can be withheld from us if we are prepared and worthy to receive it. The Lord expects us to be exemplars and teachers. I pray that we may catch the understanding and vision of who we really are—and so be.
