Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Our Wives and Our Mothers in the Eternal Plan

J. REUBEN CLARK, JR.

To find the place of our wives and mothers in the eternal plan, we must trace out the creation and peopling of this earth from "the beginning," yet remembering the Lord has said that "unto myself my works have no end, neither beginning" (D&C 29:33; and see D&C 39:1; 20:26; 61:1; 76:4; 88; 6:13; 93:8; Moses 1:3; Ps. 90:2; 102:27). . . .

What were the processes of creation? How was it done?

Paul declared to the Hebrews that "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God" (Heb. 11:3)—faith which is declared to be the gift of God (Rom. 10:17; 1 Cor. 12:9). Now Paul defined faith as "the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen" (Heb. 11:1). . . .

Through what instrumentality was this faith employed? We have already given the scriptures declaring that the Only Begotten did the work, with help from others acting under the authority and command of the Father (Abr. 4). What was this authority? Brigham Young said:

If anybody wants to know what the Priesthood of the Son of God is, it is the law by which the worlds are, were, and will continue for ever and ever. It is that system which brings worlds into existence and peoples them, gives them their revolutions—their days, weeks, months, years, their seasons and times and by which they are rolled up as a scroll, as it were, and go into a higher state of existence (Discourses, page 201; 1941 edition, page 130).

The Prophet Joseph has told us:

The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years; that Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next and that Adam obtained his priesthood in the Creation, before the world was formed (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 157-58).

Up to this point in the eternal course of world progression, as recorded in the scriptures, the Priesthood had performed the full service rendered, all had been done in the spiritual and temporal creations by the Great High Priest, with Adam, who stands "next," and others assisting (See Abr. 4). Plant life had been so created that by the laws of reproduction set up to govern that life, plants might propagate their own kinds; animal life had been created, male and female, that they might reproduce each its own kind.

Now, again following the scriptural order of events, it is recorded before the record is made that Adam was given a body `from the dust of the earth,' that God said to him (and it may be to all the hosts assembled): "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth" (Moses 2:28; Abr. 4:28). Upon the fulfillment of this command, so given, depended the whole Plan of the Great Council in Heaven, because those who kept their "first estate," must have opportunity to come to earth, to obtain mortal bodies, that they might then be proved in this "second estate," "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them . . . and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever" (Abr. 3:25-26).

To provide mortal bodies and a mortal life and experience for the waiting spirits, was the very purpose of the creation.

Adam, still in intimate association with the Lord, must have remembered at least a part of what he knew before he was made "from the dust of the ground," and, if so, he must have recalled the eternal truth of motherhood, so beautifully voiced by Eliza R. Snow in her great poem:

In the heavens are parents single? No; the thought makes reason stare! Truth is reason, truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there.

Yet, notwithstanding the great powers of the Priesthood which he held, Adam was powerless to go forward by himself, to the providing of earthly tabernacles for the spirits eager to enter into their "second estate," so that, as the Lord's plan provided, they might have opportunity to "prove" themselves, and, so doing, "have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." Under the eternal law, there must be a father not only, but a mother as well. "And I, God," declared the Father, "created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them" (Moses 2:27; Gen. 1:27).

To work all this out, it was indispensable that the Priesthood, powerful as it was, must have help. Adam must have an helpmeet. . . .

After the Lord God placed Adam in the Garden, he spoke thus: "And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten, that it was not good that the man should be alone; wherefore, I will make an help meet for him" (Moses 3:18; Abr. 5:14; Gen. 2:18).

One may easily believe that some longing or unexpressed desire of Adam, alone in the magnificence and glory of Eden, drew this expression of purpose from the loving Father. For Adam, still in communion with the Father, not yet forgetting that in Heaven parents are not single and that he had a mother there, and still recalling . . . the Great Plan presented to the Council of Heaven which provided that all the intelligences there assembled were to have the chance to come to earth, receive bodies, and, desiring it, "keep their second estate." (Abr. 3:25 ff) Adam, with all this in mind, must have realized the great responsibility which rested upon him; he must have known the part he was to play (for, we must remember, not yet was he shut out from the Father), and he knew, what later, after the Fall, Eve was to sing. (Moses 5:11) that `he must have seed, that he must know good from evil, that he might have the joy of redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.' Adam alone, no matter what his Priesthood, could not bring this about. He must have a helper.

But, Adam wandered alone in the glorious Garden in Eden, which he had dressed and adorned—the Garden of Eden with its stately trees, its lovely flowers heavy with sweet odors, its grassy swards, its magnificent vistas with the far reaches of its placid rivers, with its gaily plumed birds, its lordly and graceful beasts, all at peace, for sin was not yet in the world. Through all this magnificence Adam wandered, lonely, unsolaced, uncompanioned, the only being of his kind in the whole world, his life unshared in a solitude of exquisite elegance, and, what was of far greater moment, his mission, as he knew it to be, impossible of fulfillment, except the Father gave him an helpmeet.

So, obedient to the necessities of the commandment given that man should multiply and replenish the earth; pursuant to his promise, after he had placed Adam in the Garden of Eden, that since it was not good that man should be alone, God would make an helpmeet for him; and resultant from his observation, following the record of the creation of the animal kingdom "out of the ground" (Moses 3:19-20), that `there was not found an helpmeet for Adam,' the Father created and brought to Adam, his wife, Eve. Then Adam cried aloud: "This I know now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man" (Moses 3:23).

Glorified by the joy of this great blessing that had come to him, Adam announced the great law of marriage, the union of man and wife, joined together by the power of the Priesthood for time and for all eternity: "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh" (Moses 3:24; Abr. 5:18; Gen. 2:24).

So came Eve, an helpmeet to the Priesthood mission of Adam—Eve the last created being in the creation of the world, without whom the whole creation of the world and all that was in the world would have been in vain and the purposes of God have come to naught. Receiving her, Adam took her in her purity, took her, radiant and divinely fair, into the Garden he had dressed and kept for her, into the bridal home he had built, into the Garden that from then till now has been the symbol of heaven on earth, there to begin together their earthly life, that was finally to bring opportunity for salvation and exaltation to the untold myriads of spirits then waiting for the mortal tabernacles these two were to make it possible for them to possess.

The Only Begotten had fashioned the world, had filled it with beautiful flowers and lofty forests, with grasses and grains, and multitudes of living creatures; Adam had had some part in this. But the key to the glorious arch of temporal, earthly creation for man was still missing. So Eve came to build, to organize, through the power of the Father, the bodies of mortal men, to be a creator of bodies under the faculties given her by the Priesthood of God, so that God's design and the Great Plan might meet fruition.

This was her calling; this was her blessing, bestowed by the Priesthood. This is the place of our wives and of our mothers in the Eternal Plan. They are not bearers of the Priesthood; they are not charged with carrying out the duties and functions of the Priesthood; nor are they laden with its responsibilities; they are builders and organizers under its power, and partakers of its blessings, possessing the complement of the Priesthood powers and possessing a function as divinely called, as eternally important in its place as the Priesthood itself.

Millenniums later, Paul, under the inspiration of God, was to declare: "Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God" (1 Cor. 11:11-12).

When, after the Fall, both Adam and Eve knowing good from evil, the Lord promised them redemption and Adam prophesied concerning their posterity. Eve, hearing the glorious Plan and the destiny of herself and Adam, was gladdened, and broke into a great song of praise: "Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient" (Moses 5:11).

From that day, when Eve thus placed first among her blessings the power to bear children, the greatest glory of true womanhood has been motherhood.

What a miracle is motherhood; how nearly infinite is mother. She fashions in her womb the most complex structure known to man, the whole visible universe being, in contrast, the simplest of creations. From the cell she herself has built from the dust of the earth, fructified by the father cell formed also of dust of the earth by the father, she mounts cell on cell, each born of clay, till the normal man is brought into the world—built of head and trunk and limbs, of bone and flesh and blood, of brain, eyes, ears, and mouth, of muscles and sinews and nerves, of heart and lungs and stomach and intestines, of liver and spleen and kidneys, of glands and lymphs, of arms, hands and fingers, of legs, feet and toes, all of these and every vein and attery and nerve, every nail upon the fingers, every joint and muscle, each and every one in its never-varying place (save some prank of malformation), never the feet where the head should be, never the heart and lungs below and the liver and spleen and kidneys above, but all in perfect order, every man brought forth organized as were those who went before, as they will be who come after, the pattern in all its infinite detail faithfully followed down to the last jot and tittle of the human frame—a body fashioned in the very image of the Son who was in the image of the Father. What an infinitely glorious concept, what a supreme destiny, and what a divine-like achievement.

This is wife's and mother's task and opportunity and did she fail so that new body-forms came or that none came, then the Great Plan would fail and God's purposes would come to naught. They must build in the likeness of the Father and the Son. This must never change.

Thus she must go forward always, from now till time, being no more, merges into eternity, that all the spirits keeping their "first estate," shall come into their "second estate" to prove whether they shall live that estate and be given life everlasting. Thus Eve's daughters, under the destiny God gave to them, must build for every spirit, a body that the spirit can call its own for the span of time not only, but for the expanse of eternity through the resurrection, so that every soul, willing to work and sacrifice for it, can `become perfect even as our Father in Heaven is perfect.' Eve's daughters only can do the service that thus makes possible this perfection. The Priesthood cannot do this without the helpmeet.

Her spirit breathing to her mind this divine truth, the mother folds the newborn to her breast, and into her soul comes the mother love that lives thence forever, for this tiny being is `bone of her bone, flesh of her flesh.'

The crowning glory of motherhood came to the daughters of Eve, when, in Bethlehem, there was born to Mary of Nazareth, a mortal, the Christ child, begot of the Father. Gabriel "sent from God," had foretold to Mary, "Hail . . . highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed . . . thou among women" (Luke 1:28). And later Mary's cousin Elisabeth, about to bear John, the Great Forerunner of whom the Christ declared, "Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist" (Matt. 11:11; see Luke 7:28). Elisabeth "filled with the Holy Ghost, spake out with a loud voice" to Mary, who came to visit her, saying, "Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb" (Luke 1:41-42).

Then Mary, likewise inspired, broke forth into her great song of joy and humble triumph:

My soul doth magnify the Lord, And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden; for, behold, from hence forth all generations shall call me blessed. For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is his name. And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation. He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath sent empty away. He hath holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy; As he spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever (Luke 1:46 ff.).

So spake this mortal mother soon to bear the mortal, yet deified Christ. The spirit of prophecy entered her soul, and, recalling the past, and being enlightened as to the future, she forecast the work and service, the love and character of him whom she was to bring forth—the Christ, the Redeemer of the World.

So measurably may every mother who has lived and is living righteously, envision something of the destiny of her offspring, if it be God's will.

But the full glory of motherhood is not yet reached when her child comes forth into this world of trial, nor is her opportunity for service passed when her creation breathes the breath of life. Still from the dust of the earth she must fabricate the food that keeps alive and nourishes the little one. She feeds not only, but clothes it. She cares for it by day and watches over it by night. When illness comes, she nurses it with that near divine love that fills her heart. She gently leads its faltering steps, till it walks alone. She helps to frame its first lisps and teaches it the full art of speech. As consciousness matures, she deftly sows into the plastic mind the love of God, of truth, and, as the years flow by and youth comes on, she adds the love of honor, of honesty, of sobriety, of industry, of chastity. She teaches, bit by bit, loyalty and reverence and devotion. She implants and makes part of the growing, virgin intellect an understanding of the restored gospel. She steadies the swaying will when temptation first comes. She builds into the warp and woof of her creation, self-control, independence, righteousness, love of God, and a desire and will to serve him.

Thus to the full stature of manhood and womanhood, mother guides, incites, entreats, instructs, directs, on occasion commands, the soul for which she built the earthly home, in its march onward to exaltation. God gives the soul its destiny, but mother leads it along the way.

When the souls shall return to the presence of the Father of All, the worthy mothers will be there to welcome their worthy children, and with humble pride born of righteous achievement, they will reverently bow and humbly speak:

"Father, we come back to thee with the righteous souls whose earthly bodies thou lettest us to build, `bone of our bone, flesh of our flesh,' all to thine everlasting honor and glory and to our blessing and exaltation forever.

"Blessed were our wombs, for they bore children, even as thou didst command, in the image of thine Only Begotten, who is in the image of thee.

"Richly fruitful have been our blessings on earth, for we come back home to thee with these thy children.

"Great is the joy of this the end of our labors, for these souls have been saved with eternal life.

"Blessed were we in our example set, for thou gavest us the power to live worthily; in the teaching of thy children, thou didst give us a goodly measure of wisdom.

"Blessed were we in our faith, for thou didst richly endow us with this thy gift.

"Blessed were we in our understanding, for thou didst cause the Holy Ghost to enlighten our minds.

"Blessed were we in our living, for thou didst give us patience and kindliness, and forgiving natures, with charity and unbounded love.

"Blessed were we that thou didst send these spirits to the bodies which we by thy power fashioned, for they were choice spirits.

"Blessed were we in their rearing, for they walked always in thy paths; and in their maturity they departed not from the ways of their youth.

"Blessed were we in their companionship, for they were loving and kind, respectful and obedient to us.

"Blessed were we in the mortal fathers of our children's bodies, for they gave us comfort and help, and love and kindness and unmeasured, and likewise walked worthily before thee.

"Our souls cry out to thee, our Father, in worship of thee, for thou hast been with us from the beginning and hast covenanted to be with us during all eternity. Honor and Glory and Love to thee forever, and forever."

Then we shall believe the Father will say to the mothers:

"Well done, thou good and faithful handmaids, enter thou into the rest I have prepared for those who builded the mortal temples in which dwelt the spirits I created, that they might keep their second estate, for without the keeping of their second estate they could not have `glory added upon their heads for ever and ever'" (Abr. 3:26).

And then the Priesthood will wish to proclaim their debt to these their helpmeets without whom the Priesthood could not have worked out their destiny. And the Priesthood shall bow in reverence and in love unbounded before these mothers who did the service the Priesthood could not do, and thank and praise them for bearing their children, a service without which God's purposes had failed and the intelligences which God called around him "in the beginning" had been deprived of the divine destiny God marked out for them in the Great Council held in Heaven before the earth was formed.

These, Wives and Mothers in Israel, are your rewards and your destinies. And your offspring, saved and exalted in the presence of God, will never forget you, will ever bless you, and will sing hymns of eternal gratitude for the bodies you gave them and taught them to make the Temples of the Spirit of God.

God be thanked for the knowledge he has given us of all this. Overflow our hearts with gratitude for this great destiny, I ask, in the name of Jesus, the Christ, Amen.
