Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Must We Always Run Faster Than We Have Strength?

KATHLEEN BUSHNELL JENSEN

And see that all these things are done in wisdom and order; for it is not requisite that a [woman] should run faster than [she] has strength. And again, it is expedient that [she] should be diligent, that thereby [she] might win the prize; therefore, all things must be done in order.

—MOSIAH 4:27

One night last spring I remember sitting at my kitchen table thinking in frustration, "I have not accomplished a thing this whole week." My windows still needed washing, and there were a dozen other things that I had not gotten to. I wondered why I felt so tired for not having accomplished much. I got out a pencil and paper, but, on impulse, instead of writing a to-do list, I began jotting down some of the things that had gone on that week. I was surprised. I had been to two soccer games, two soccer practices, two piano lessons, one gymnastics lesson, and one doctor's appointment. I had made a fairy costume for the Shakespeare festival for our fifth grader, gone on five one-hour exercise walks with my husband, made a poster for the first-grade teacher for teacher appreciation week, attended the ground breaking for the Bountiful temple, spent one-half day helping the fifth grade with the rain forest unit, attended two tennis matches for our senior son, prepared and served Sunday dinner for fourteen people, gone on a picnic, and hiked around Causey Dam for family home evening. I was exhausted even remembering! I had called people to serve and bring food for the grade school Shakespeare festival feast, washed and dried at least twelve batches of laundry, sobbed with my husband and our children when our dog got run over, attended a college football game, given my Primary in-service lesson, completed the cancer drive for my daughter who couldn't get it finished, lived through numerous teenager ups and downs, wrote to our missionary daughter in Germany, took our baby bunnies for first grade show and tell, planted pansies, watched a Jazz game. The list went on and on. I looked at it and thought, "Well, maybe I did accomplish something!"

I concluded that often we sell ourselves short. Maybe we're not so different from those hard-working pioneer women who were busy from sunup to sundown. Our days are every bit as challenging. We may not card wool, hoe beets, or slop hogs, but we need to give ourselves credit for what we do.

In fact, perhaps a more pressing question for us is, "Are we running faster than we have strength?" The role of women has changed dramatically in my lifetime. When I was a child, my mom was always home, and that was wonderfully gratifying for me, good for my self-esteem. My mother let me know somehow that when I came home, I lighted up her day. Many times I'm not home when my children come home, though I try to be. I try to do a lot of the worthwhile things for my children that my mother did for me, but it's difficult with our smorgasbord of options. When I attended college some twenty years ago, most women trained as either teachers or nurses. Any other career seemed almost eccentric. In contrast, my daughters and their friends have the world open to them. They can go into any of the professions, a wonderful change for women. But one thing hasn't changed: a day is still twenty-four hours. We still have our agency to choose what we want to do in those twenty-four hours. Therein lies the dilemma. I don't struggle so much with good and bad choices; rather, I have ten good choices, all worthwhile pursuits, vying for my time. It's often difficult to prioritize, to judge which things are really important and which to put on hold.

Anne Morrow Lindbergh wrote of this dilemma almost forty years ago in Gift from the Sea. Her words still ring true. She observes that in the modern world the women's movement has gained for women more privileges and opportunities. But "the exploration of their use, as in all pioneer movements, was left open to the women who would follow. And woman today is still searching. We are aware of our hunger and needs, but still ignorant of what will satisfy them. With our garnered free time, we are more apt to drain our creative springs than to refill them. With our pitchers, we attempt sometimes to water a field, not a garden. We throw ourselves indiscriminately into committees and causes. Not knowing how to feed the spirit, we try to muffle its demands in distractions. Instead of stilling the center, the axis of the wheel, we add more centrifugal activities to our lives—which tend to throw us off balance."<#>1

How true! A few years ago I served in my ward Relief Society presidency. I was surprised to find that the problems women were having were not so much economic as spiritual and emotional. I had not known that so many women are unhappy and frustrated. This experience prompted me to think about why that is, and I have identified several possible reasons and solutions.

For one thing, we demand so much of ourselves. Most of us have a hard time saying no in this day and age. For another, it is too easy to forget to be grateful. The other day I went out to my garage, pushed the garage door opener, and was dismayed when the door wouldn't go up. I was full of exasperation and in a hurry. As I unplugged the opener and lifted the door manually, I was thinking, "I have got to get that fixed tomorrow, because I cannot manage without that garage door opener." And then I thought to myself, How odd. We've lived in our home for eighteen years, but before that we lived in a home with no garage at all. I had four small children, and I'd come home from grocery shopping and park in front. If it was raining, I'd be drenched by the time I carried in the baby, then the two-year-old, then the four-year-old, then the stroller, and finally the groceries. I'd think, "If I had a garage, life would be wonderful!" I used to envision life with a garage. I'd see garages, and I'd think, "Those people have got it made!" That day, after fuming about the defective garage door opener, I remembered what it used to be like with no garage at all and wondered, What's happened to me in eighteen years of living in this house? I never thank the Lord for my garage. I just go out and use it.

Apparently, I'm not the only one who forgets to be grateful for our many blessings. At a regional conference this year, Bonnie Pinegar spoke on this topic. She confessed that one of her self-assigned tasks is to be the worrier of the family. While her husband, Rex, is across the bed from her sleeping soundly, she is fretting about everything—all the problems of her married children, illnesses, money, anything. Finally, one morning after another restless night, she asked him, "How can you sleep with all the problems we have?" He answered, "One way, Bonnie. I count my blessings."

I don't know why that story brings tears to my eyes. I guess because I'm so lousy at counting mine. I'm the one who wants the garage door opener to be working all the time, and I forget that I'm awfully lucky to have a garage. I think we get spoiled; we want it all, and we want it now. Many times we're just not willing to wait. All that wanting makes us really unhappy.

Envy can also cause pointless frustrations. A friend of mine had needlepoint seats on all her dining room chairs. I love needlepoint. One day I looked at those chairs and thought, I'll never have that. I'll always have the kind you have to wash off real fast. I'll just never have pretty needlepoint chairs. And it's true. Maybe I won't ever have them. Needlepoint is a hobby my friend loves doing. Someday I may take up needlepoint, but perhaps I'll be too busy with grandchildren to make it a priority.

Still another reason we are needlessly unhappy is that we lose our spiritual perspective. Sometimes we forget that the Lord is aware of our presence, that he knows and cares about what we're doing. We can draw great strength from that knowledge. A notable example is early Church pioneer Joseph Millett, who recorded in his journal his experiences of homesteading in Nevada:

"One of my children came in, said that Brother Newton Hall's folks were out of bread. Had none that day. I put . . . our flour in sack to send up to Brother Hall's. Just then Brother Hall came in. Says I, `Brother Hall, how are you out for flour.' `Brother Millett, we have none.' `Well, Brother Hall, there is some in that sack. I have divided and was going to send it to you. Your children told mine that you were out.' Brother Hall began to cry. Said he had tried others. Could not get any. Went to the cedars and prayed to the Lord and the Lord told him to go to Joseph Millett. `Well, Brother Hall, you needn't bring this back if the Lord sent you for it. You don't owe me for it.' You can't tell how good it made me feel to know that the Lord knew that there was such a person as Joseph Millett."<#>2

Sometimes we think we are all alone in our day-to-day struggles. We feel no one is really aware of our lives as they unfold. But the Lord is aware. He knows all; he has experienced all. The Lord knew that there was such a person as Joseph Millett. He knows there is such a person as Kathy Jensen. And he knows of you and your life.

Also, we mustn't forget "it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." (2 Ne. 2:11.) Note that the scripture doesn't say that there's opposition in some things, but in all things, in everything. I don't know why it has to be that way. Opposition makes life a lot more difficult, but then it also makes us appreciate what we have. People who lived through the Depression appreciate money differently from the rest of us. It is often difficult for them to spend money. Some die with huge savings accounts, certain the next economic catastrophe looms on the horizon. They never give anything to Deseret Industries. They recycle, mend, patch, redesign, and reuse. My husband's father always said to him, "You need to live through a depression. You'd be a lot more careful." And maybe it's true. Experiencing opposition does give one a perspective.

When our last baby was born, I was a basket case. I was forty-two years old. No one was telling me how smart I was for having a baby at that age. After her birth, I continued to worry. At about six weeks old, she still wasn't smiling. Was she all right? Would she be autistic? This fear ballooned into a real trauma to me. Every day I'd tell the other children to interact with her, smile at her, get her to look at them, get her to smile. But she didn't smile. I'd had enough children to know that by that age babies are ready to respond, and she just wasn't responding. I became distraught and sank into worse than usual postpartum blues. I felt overwhelmed as I worried that I might have to raise a child with imperfections. I know that many others have been asked to do so, but as I asked myself if I could do what they do, or handle it, I was in turmoil for a while. I prayed and pleaded with the Lord, promising that I would appreciate everything about her—every normal annoying little thing would be a gift to me. She did finally smile and is a very normal, active little girl. A year later, when I was out in the hall during sacrament meeting trying to settle her down, I tried to remember my promise. I've tried to keep my perspective. I watch her with gratitude for her active mind and energetic body. Maybe I wouldn't have been so grateful if I hadn't experienced fear that she might not be normal.

Another way to keep perspective is to remember that "to every thing there is a season." (Eccl. 3:1.) When I had several small children, I tended to look at women who were out doing things—taking institute classes, tole painting, skiing—and I would think, "How do they do it? I'm so unorganized." As I look back, my advice is be content where you are. If you have young children, enjoy them! I'm old enough to know that you don't have young children very long. Those moments are fleeting. Don't wish away your toddlers and bright-eyed pre-schoolers. They will never be yours at that age again. Don't rush your seasons. I feel the most off balance when I'm trying to run faster than I have strength, when I'm trying to keep up with people who are single or who maybe don't have as many children at home. Our needs are different. When you have small children, you don't need to have a totally spotless home. When I go into a home that is full of young children and yet is totally spotless, I think, "What do the kids do all day? Live outdoors?" Be realistic; let your kids have some fun. Let them make messes. Don't worry about what everyone might be thinking. And don't compare your home to anyone else's.

One day several years ago, I had been harping at my children to clean their rooms and get the house looking nice. I assigned them several jobs and then left, telling them I expected to return to find everything perfect. When I got back, I found a sign on the refrigerator that our junior-high-aged daughter Julie had made. She had written, "Better to be happy and messy than clean and mean. If you agree, please sign here so we can show Mom." The missionaries had dropped by that day, and they'd signed it, all the kids' friends had signed it, everybody who had come by had signed it. It made me stop and think, What message am I sending my children? Is it more important to have a clean house or a happy house?

Sometimes we simply fail to communicate clearly by words or actions our real priorities. Many of us say, "My family is the most important thing." But do our lives show that? Every so often, we need to rethink our activities. Are the things we spend our time with really the things that are important to us? It's easy to get sidetracked when we have so many interests and opportunities.

Sometimes our seasons don't always include what we thought they would. We expect to have children and find we can't. We expect to be married and are single. We expect to raise our children a certain way and find we can't afford to be at home. We expect our children will always choose the right in the important things and they don't. And we feel guilty or ashamed that our lives don't match our ideal expectations and perhaps confused about what we should be doing now. Often we forget that we're entitled to inspiration in our lives, if we just ask for it. If we are being led by the Spirit, we don't have to feel guilty or ashamed of our choices and circumstances. We can feel secure in our own decisions. Many, many women, for example, have to work outside the home. If you and your husband have prayerfully decided that's what you need to do in your family, then do it. Feel good about your decision, and don't apologize for it. Church members often apologize for how few children they have. They'll say, "Oh, we just have two." And I want to say, "Well, that's great! What a joy to have those two!" We should never equate righteousness with numbers of children or judge what is appropriate for anyone else. A woman in our ward has eleven children. She's wonderful mother. She comes to church with a smile on her face and even looks sane. I suspect that I am at least two children beyond my max, but clearly she is not. She's thrilled to have her eleven children. That was the right choice for her. Our place is to support and enjoy one another, not judge or compare.

I also feel that we really need to take care of ourselves. So many women give their all to their children or husband and have nothing left for themselves. We can become "depleted women," as Jo Ann Larsen says in her book I'm a Day Late and a Dollar Short . . . and It's Okay!<#>3 We're always the ones who get the burnt toast or the spoon that's been caught in the disposal. It is important for our families that we value and spend some time caring for ourselves. President Marion G. Romney said: "How can we give if there is nothing there? Food for the hungry cannot come from empty shelves. Money to assist the needy cannot come from an empty purse. Support and understanding cannot come from the emotionally starved. Teaching cannot come from the unlearned. And most important of all, spiritual guidance cannot come from the spiritually weak."<#>4

Neither can we afford to ignore our physical health. We owe it to ourselves and to our families to keep physically strong. Last year my husband and I agreed to start walking together in the mornings. It's been very good for both of us. It's fun, and I can tell him everything I want and he doesn't fall asleep. I have a captive audience for one hour, and so does he. Our walks have been good for our marriage, for our health, and for our mental outlook.

I recommend spending some time alone each day to think and be who you are. If you have small children, a moment alone is precious. It's easy to forget who you really are. Too often we become what we are needed for—the Cub Scout den mother, the soccer carpool driver, the PTA commissioner, the team mother—instead of who we are. Solitude is one way to not get lost in doing. Making sure you are having fun doing what you are doing is another way. Sometimes that is difficult in your own family. You may prepare a new recipe, knock yourself out working all afternoon, and then you can sit down to the meal and the kids pick out all the green things and say they'd rather have macaroni and cheese. When we're feeling that kind of discouragement, the world outside our homes seems pretty enticing. It's more gratifying to cook for a Relief Society luncheon. The other sisters rave and ask for the recipe. We get a lot of strokes that way. It's easy to be nice to people you see at a PTA meeting or in the church foyer or even at an office. It's much harder to work out a relationship with a teenaged son who's giving you a hard time. It becomes very enticing to spend your time away from home. But ultimately that is a counterfeit source of satisfaction. We need to build our family relationships, and that is all the more reason to build in fun times with the family.

Last Mother's Day I read an article about a woman who had been selected as Utah's Mother of the Year a few years ago. Her husband died when she had eight very young children, including an infant, and she raised an outstanding family in near poverty. Her son Monroe McKay said: "I tell people that she was not perfect; she simply did the best she could in that day. She didn't do the best that you wanted her to do or that she wanted to do, but she did the best she could; and that was good enough. She didn't raise perfect children either; we had our share of problems."<#>5

Many times we think we have to be perfect instantly and perfect in everything: that's what causes us to run faster than we have strength. But God knew that we were all human and imperfect. He knew that we needed a Savior. If we had been capable of perfection on our own, we wouldn't need a Savior. Jesus came to help us make up the difference between what we can do at our best and what we aspire to become.

That is the comforting, good news of the gospel. If we're doing all we can do, and we keep trying, then our inevitable shortcomings and mistakes are not going to bar us from being Christ's. "See that all these things are done in wisdom and order; for it is not requisite that a [woman] should run faster than [she] has strength."

NOTES
