Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Balance: The Joy of Perspective

ANNE OSBORN POELMAN

In a devotional at Brigham Young University, Bruce C. Hafen, then president of Ricks College, related the suppressed frustration of an overworked, somewhat harassed young mother who, when advised to "just be sure you put the Lord's work first," blurted out in near desperation, "But what if it is all the Lord's work?" (Ensign, August 1979, pp. 63-67.) Merely perusing the titles of the pieces included in this book reminds us of the many varied aspects in our lives that must be balanced.

Lest we become overwhelmed by the Savior's admonition to "Be ye therefore perfect" (Matt. 5:48), let us remember that one of the great learning experiences of this life is not only to make the right decisions, but also to sequence them properly. The configuration or priority of correct choices is as important as the choices themselves. To choose not only wisely but also timely and well brings to us the joy of a balanced, productive life.

There is a sense of eternalness about joy that is simply not present in the concept of mere pleasure. I am therefore convinced that in order to experience the joy of a balanced life we need to sequence our priorities (and the sometimes complex, difficult decisions they imply) from the eternal point of view. The eternal perspective brings our choices and challenges into sharp, clear focus. "If we look upon life as an eternal thing . . . all happenings may be put in proper perspective." (Spencer W. Kimball, Tragedy or Destiny?, Deseret Book, 1977, p. 2.)

While there are surely some major decisions that must be made between right and morally wrong choices, for most of us the greater difficulty comes in choosing between two equally correct alternatives. Most choices we face are therefore not between right and wrong but between right and right. Few of us have to choose between holding family home evening and robbing a bank. More often the most difficult decisions are between equally attractive, worthy activities. Should we can the fruit that is now perfectly ripe or go on a much-needed date with our partner? Should we get in that long overdue temple session or take the children on an outing? We must have the eternal perspective to recognize that when two equally right choices are at least temporarily mutually exclusive, we should assume no burden of guilt because of our inability to do the impossible.

Almost overwhelmed by the immediate pressures of Church callings and professional responsibilities, I used to feel terribly guilty about postponding my genealogical work. Attending genealogy class in Sunday School once induced feelings of panic and near-despair as I enviously eyed the family histories and charts dating back to the 1600s that were proudly displayed by other class members. Yet I finally resolved those feelings of conflict when I realized I couldn't manage to do all righteous things simultaneously. Now that we've been asked to complete our four-generation charts by July 1981, other activities are being temporarily put aside (without guilt) while I complete that important assignment.

When we contemplate all the various aspects of our personalities that must become developed on the long pathway to perfection and exaltation, it is all too easy to despair when confronted with seemingly unreachable ideals. Somehow we Mormon women often feel we need to cook like a Julia Child or Winnifred Jardine, have the intellect and wit of an Elaine Cannon, the leadership talents of a Barbara Smith, the deep, abiding spirituality of a Camilla Kimball. And, of course, this is in addition to keeping a daily journal, becoming scriptural scholars, writing our personal history, maintaining a garden that looks like something out of the Burpee seed catalog, completing our four-generation genealogical charts, rendering compassionate service, becoming involved in community activities, fulfilling Church callings, providing a nurturing home environment for our families, and so on. For many women in the Church it may also be in addition to acquiring an education, making a living, or both.

In fact, if we weren't so often on the verge of collapse from sheer fatigue we might have the perspective to chuckle at ourselves for our sometimes unrealistic expectations and the demands we place on our own shoulders. The tasks at hand and those that lie ahead are gargantuan only if we fail to see that ordering these very activities, putting them in proper perspective, is indeed part of our mortal learning process.

The practical problems are encountered when free agency intersects the dimensions (and limitations) imposed by time. To develop and magnify our talents in the time allotted is a difficult (but "do-able") challenge. About a year and a half ago I developed a severe case of respiratory flu. After six weeks had passed I was still weak, had developed a chronic cough, and continued to feel awful. Ruefully realizing that the doctor who treats himself has a fool for a patient, I finally gave up and made an appointment with a colleague. "I can't afford to feel like this. I've got too much to do," I complained. Muttering, he punctuated his thorough physical examination with some rather pointed questions. "How many Church jobs do you hold?" "How many scientific papers did you write this last year?" "How many hours sleep do you get a night?" "How many miles a day did you say you run?" "Did you have a garden again this year and put up all your own produce?"

When he'd finally finished he put his hands on his hips, looked me sternly in the eye, and demanded, "Just exactly who or what do you think you are? Wonder Woman? You're expecting a thirty-five-year-old woman's body to perform as it did when you were twenty-one. In fact, you're copping out. You're avoiding making decisions by trying to do everything. Grow up. You don't need a doctor; you need a good verbal spanking!" Sheepishly I acknowledged he was absolutely right. And I have subsequently tried to temper my choices, realizing that my strength and energy are limited. I still try to do too much, but at least I'm gradually getting a little better at choosing among equally worthy activities.

Elder Neal Maxwell has reminded us that the scripture "do not run faster or labor more than you have strength" (D&C 10:4) suggests "paced progress" (Ensign, November 1976, p. 12). I am certain that the Lord gave us that precious scripture because in his infinite wisdom he knew some of us (like me) would senselessly feel impelled to do precisely that. In the eternal realities there is simply no such thing as bionic tennis shoes or spiritual seven league boots. Wonder Woman is, after all, a comic book character.

We are so often impatient with ourselves, forgetting that the Lord himself is infinitely patient. "Continue in patience until ye are perfected" (D&C 67:13), "run with patience the race" (Heb. 12:1), and "add to temperance patience" (2 Pet. 1:6) are words of eternal worth and wisdom, were we only to heed them.

Timing is as important as content of choice. Yes, we can and will eventually get it all done! But that requires taking things one step at a time. It may necessitate putting some long-range goals momentarily aside as we deal with more immediate demands and the exigencies of the moment. It may require the emotional maturity to accept temporary asymmetries in the balance and rhythm of our daily lives to achieve eternal symmetry in our personal development. It is not easy, but it is possible.

In our individual and collective quest for perfection, it is not the sprinter, the saint whose spirituality is only momentarily incandescent, who wins the eternal prize. Like running a marathon, to finish, to endure to the end, is to win.

Winning itself must, of course, be viewed from the eternal perspective. All too often we yearn for the praise and prize of being first rather than the much more important process of completing the task itself. A much beloved, oftrepeated story in our family is about my mother. As a child she was a very capable, successful competitive swimmer. One day my grandfather brought several friends to watch her race in a particularly important meet. One of his friends, caught up in the enthusiasm of the competition, exclaimed, "Jeannie, if you win I'll give you fifty cents." My grandfather put his arm around her shoulders and quietly said, "Jeannie, if you lose and are the first one to congratulate the winner I'll give you fifty cents." Nearly fifty years later I'm sure my mother can't remember whether she won that particular race or not. But our grandfather's wisdom and proper perspective became guidelines for his future generations. Do your best, win when and if possible, but keep all things in proper perspective.

With our institutional emphasis on excellence it may become easy to envy those who we, from our limited perspective, feel have been given more or better talents, more visible callings in the Church, or more in the way of worldly goods and wealth. In a Relief Society seminar that I conducted not long ago a quiet, somewhat withdrawn sister suddenly remarked vehemently, "You know, I've been a member for over sixty years and I've never had an important job in the Church!" As I understand it, there is no such thing as an unimportant calling. In fact, the stewardship each currently holds is for that person the most important job in the Church. From the eternal point of view, are perhaps willingness and diligence not equally important with worthiness? We all have been given at least one gift that, if utilized to the fullest, will bring other opportunities for growth and service. Like Alma, we should learn to be content with those things allotted to us (see Alma 29:3), realizing that we also have the open invitation to "seek earnestly the best gifts" (D&C 46:8).

To me, the parable of the talents teaches us a startlingly important but subtle point: those who truly magnify their talents, regardless of their type or number, receive the identical eternal reward. When the talents were originally distributed, the individual who was given only two (that is, he received neither the least nor the most) might well have complained either that he didn't receive more or that he didn't particularly like the ones he got. Yet he diligently, faithfully worked to utilize and increase his own assigned stewardship. There is an unusual feature about celestial arithmetic: when the final accounting came due the servant who had faithfully doubled his two talents, thereby having four, received the same accolade from the Lord as did the one who had originally been given five and ended up with ten. Like the latecomer to the vineyard who labored only an hour yet nevertheless completed his assigned task, each of us will receive whatsoever reward is right. A comforting concept for us converts!

It is trite but nevertheless true that each of us is unique. Like a multifaceted diamond, we are polished one surface at a time. Like that precious jewel, no two of us are alike. The Lord certainly never intended us to render the same service or follow identical schedules of personal development. There is an eternal balance not only between people, but in the very rhythm of each individual's life itself. My children will probably never appear in the ward Christmas program wearing stunning outfits I carefully crafted for them. I've learned to sew people but not clothes! While I can and do admire the talent of those who have, I won't feel guilty about clothing family in "store-bought" dresses.

From the eternal point of view it is also important to distinguish between the things of God and the things of man. As an example, formal educational degrees—things of man—are relatively unimportant from the eternal point of view. The personal qualities that the educational process enhances are not. In the eternities no one will likely remember—or even care—about the presence or absence of letters following our names. Perhaps the only honorifics that will truly matter are those like Brother, Sister, Elder, Mother, Father. While the earthly medical degree I worked so long and hard to attain has permitted me to render a very special type of service, perhaps even more important are the qualities of compassion, intellectual discipline, decision-making, analytical skills, and faith that were honed and enriched by that rigorous professional training. These are portable, eternal qualities that can and will rise with us in the resurrection. Compassion is always employable. Unlike technological skills, faith and intellectual discipline do not become obsolete.

The temporary asymmetries in life induced by circumstance will, if we can but remain faithful, become balanced in the eternities. Since I am unmarried at age thirty-six, it is easy for me to envy wistfully the young mother who lovingly cradles her child in her arms (forgetting the many dirty diapers and sleepless nights she's endured). Conversely, it is easy for the young mother with four children under the age of six to envy the seemingly carefree, glamorous life of a career woman (forgetting the long years of dedicated study and personal sacrifice that were prerequisites).

The upwardly mobile career woman may have to struggle to render compassionate service. The busy housewife or young mother, pressed to the wall by the immediate needs of her family, may have to struggle to study the scriptures and grow intellectually. The widow struggling with loneliness may have to make a determined effort to brighten the lives of those around her. There are celestial compensations and earthly challenges in every circumstance. With some forethought, it is possible to fulfill partially some of each other's needs. I sometimes become a "mother for an evening," baby-sitting so I enjoy her children while their mother relishes a rare moment of peaceful freedom!

Finally, let us remember that it is quite literally the small and simple things out of which great things are brought to pass. The small and seemingly insignificant choices we continually make can become either stumbling blocks or stepping-stones on the pathway to a joyful, balanced day-to-day life and—ultimately—eternal life and exaltation.

Let us also be realistic, not expecting or demanding more of ourselves than the Lord does. Exaltation is not an instant process. Life is not leaping tall buildings at a single bound. It is more like carefully pacing ourselves, marshalling our precious energy and spiritual resources so that we can mount those steps one at a time. And perhaps we may even develop the eternal sense to pause a moment for rest, reflection, and contemplation of how far we've actually come. Then, as we resolutely turn our hearts and faces upwards, we rejoice in the wonders and delights that surely lie ahead.

Of this I am certain: the gospel with its eternal perspective adds a much-needed dimension of joy that I had never believed possible. New horizons, entire new vistas are opened only by the gospel of Jesus Christ. Life has balance, meaning, and a firm foundation that make personal possibilities truly infinite.
