Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Thoughts of a Grasshopper

LOUISE PLUMMER

I first became acquainted with the story of the grasshopper and the ant as a young girl—not by reading Aesop's fable, but by seeing a Walt Disney cartoon. In the cartoon the grasshopper fiddles and sings and eats the leaves off trees while the queen of the ants warns him that he'd better prepare for winter too, but the grasshopper continues fiddling and singing. When winter comes, the grasshopper, blue from the cold, can no longer play his fiddle. In desperation, he knocks on the tree where the ants live and begs them to let him in. The queen of the ants gives her "I-told-you-so" speech and ends with, "So take your fiddle and"—there is a long pause—"and play." So the grasshopper earns the warmth and food of the ants by playing his fiddle.

Aesop, in contrast, is not as kind to the grasshopper. When he comes begging for food, the ant merely tells him, "You sang through the summer; now you can dance through the winter."

I remind you of this story so that I can tell you that, even when I was a child, it made me uncomfortable. It still makes me uncomfortable. The story of the grasshopper and the ant makes me uncomfortable because I am a grasshopper. I dance in elevators. The second the door closes, I begin tap dancing and flinging my arms wildly about. I make faces and stick my tongue out at the hidden cameras I believe exist in every elevator. When the doors open, I stop short and stare with what I hope is a bored elevator look into the open hallway ahead.

I am a grasshopper. It takes me a full day to dismantle my Christmas tree because I dress up in the decorations. I wrap the gold tinsel around my head like a turban. I make a shawl for my neck from glass beads and paper chains. I have a special pair of vampy red high heels that I wear only on the day I undecorate the tree. Red glass balls hang from my ears. I sing in front of the hall mirror. I sing "New York, New York—if you can make it there, you'll make it anywhere." I don't know who wrote it, but it's the kind of song that can make you a star.

I am a grasshopper. I have never prepared for winter or the Apocalypse. I do have two thousand pounds of wheat that I hope never to eat and a box of chocolate chips that won't last through next week. Last summer I tried to bottle some peaches—the cold pack method—just to see if I could do it. I bottled three jars full. They sit in my freezer like museum pieces.

I am a grasshopper. I live in a metaphorical world. I read and write fiction. I draw pictures. I dance in elevators. I sing dressed in Christmas tree decorations.

But I was raised by ants. My mother and father emigrated from the Netherlands to America in 1948 with four children. Five more children were born in Salt Lake City. My father was an electrician. My mother kept the house and us immaculately. She knitted us sweaters and baked our bread. Dinner was ready each night at 5:30 on the nose. She taught me the correct principles of work. She forced me to wash woodwork, wax floors, and clean behind the toilet, but my priorities were not the same as hers. My distress is recorded in my journal of 1959 when I was sixteen years old. The first entry reads:

Mother has just blown her top. I am a lazy bum with no sense of responsibility, and all I do is write stories and draw and visit my friends. According to her I am no good. Which is not altogether true, but not altogether false either. I already knew everything she told me, so she really didn't have to get all fired up.

Another entry:

I hate to get up in the morning. This morning, Mother started yelling for me to get up at the unearthly hour of 11:00. Then every five minutes, she'd come in and say, "Are you getting up now or not?" Then I would say, "Do I have a choice?" As soon as she leaves the room I lie back down and daydream. I like to stay in bed so that I can daydream.

And finally:

Mother is mad because she can't find the little top thing to the pressure cooker and since I was the last one to use the pressure cooker, I lost it. Well, I didn't.

Even from these excerpts you can tell that I considered my work to be different from my mother's. I was already writing, drawing, and daydreaming. And I never outgrew it. I never intended to. If growing up meant leaving behind the imagination I loved, I didn't want to be grown up, at least, not in the same way as most of the adults I knew.

As much as I love my mother, I have not grown up in her image. But I admire her work. I love to open her linen closet and see the neatly folded sheets and pillow cases, color-coordinated, meticulously stacked. I like to stand in front of the year's supply in her dust-free basement and admire the rows of preserves, of laundry soap, of peanut butter, and of polyunsaturated oils. I like to see her white—really white—laundry blowing on the clothesline. I like to ask her for the kinds of things that I can never find in my own house, like the negative of a picture taken twenty years ago or a darning needle. She always knows where such things are.

I clean too. I'm not always on top of it like my mother, but I do something my mother doesn't do—I write lists of things I clean up. Here's a list from my journal, dated March 3, 1984, Saturday:

What we found when we cleaned under our bed:

Books: one triple combination; A Mormon Mother, by Annie Tanner; The Clown, by Heinrich Böll; The Tin Drum, by Günter Grass; An Essay on Criticism, by Graham Hough: The Labyrinth of Solitude, by Octavio Paz; the December '83 National Geographic; the Roseville phone directory; Be My Guest, by Conrad Hilton; the April '83 Popular Photography; Time magazine, February 27, 1984; Louise's journal, March, 1977; The Power of Positive Thinking, by Norman Vincent Peale; the February '84 Reader's Digest, including the titles "My Angry Son" and "Advice from Sexually Happy Wives"

One set of Tom's office keys

A photograph of Sam and Louise

A photograph of Tom and completed jigsaw puzzle

A letter from Roseville schools about Jonathan's registration

Dishes: one red mixing bowl; two saucers; two mugs; one kitchen knife; one empty cherry-cola can; one empty Häagen-Dazs chocolate-chip carton with lid; one Melmac cup

One Rotex labeler

One broken toothbrush holder

One photograph of Dave and Sue Salmon and girls

One empty raisin carton

Four black lead pencils

One red lead pencil

Five felt-tip pens

One ballpoint pen

One roll of packing tape

One cloth handkerchief

One pair of pantyhose

One black high-heeled shoe

One plastic race car

One page from the church directory

Two pen caps

One broken dart

One hanger

One bank-deposit slip

One seminary worksheet (Ex. 24, 25, and 27)

One white shoelace

One yellow wrapping ribbon

One Roseville bank envelope

One disposable razor

Three yellow legal pads, one filled with notes on how to get rich, including the title "You Can Negotiate Anything"

One stake directory

One plastic action figure

One pair of scissors

One metal whistle

One roll of toilet paper

Notes by Tom on developing a seasonal recreational facility for ultralite planes, golf, fishing, horseback riding, cross-country skiing, and key words from Norman Vincent Peale: visualize, prayerize, actualize.

One empty Kleenex box

One score sheet from Yahtzee

One belt

One piece of chalk

One orange peel AND

One popsicle stick

I'm not completely comfortable with this list, just as I haven't always been comfortable with being a grasshopper. I always wondered if there was room in a family of ants for a grasshopper, room in a community of ants for a grasshopper, or room in a church of ants for a grasshopper. My discomfort, I believe, comes from my fear of disapproval, my fear that ants will not accept me unless I am just like them.

I take comfort in Flannery O'Connor's short story, "Revelation," in which Mrs. Turpin, a middle-aged Christian Southern woman, views mankind as a hierarchy: "On the bottom of the heap were most colored people; . . . then next to them—not above, just away from—were the white trash; then above them were the home-owners, and above them the home-and-land owners, to which she and Claud belonged. Above she and Claud were people with a lot of money and much bigger houses and much more land" (Everything That Rises Must Converge [New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1978], 195).

At the end of the story, Mrs. Turpin receives a vision that destroys her delusion of a hierarchy. She sees a "vast swinging bridge extending upward from the earth through a field of living fire. Upon it a vast horde of souls were rumbling toward heaven. There were whole companies of white trash, clean for the first time in their lives, and bands of black [people] in white robes, and battalions of freaks and lunatics shouting and clapping and leaping like frogs. And bringing up the end of the procession was a tribe of people . . . marching behind the others with great dignity, accountable as they had always been for good order and common sense and respectable behavior. They alone were on key. Yet she could see by their shocked and altered faces that even their virtues were being burned away" (ibid., 217-18).

I like this story because it is about redemption. Without the atonement of Jesus Christ, our virtues, whatever they are, are meaningless. We are all equally human.

King Benjamin asks, "Are we not all beggars?" (Mosiah 4:19).

"What about works?" someone may ask. "Don't ants work harder than grasshoppers?"

No. Grasshoppers work differently from ants.

I would like to rewrite the ending of "The Grasshopper and the Ants" like this: It is winter, and the grasshopper is walking in the snow, talking to herself and answering herself. She wears a yellow slicker over her sweater, because she can't find her parka (which is buried in the debris under her bed). Because she was out of groceries this morning, she is eating a brownie with a carton of milk bought at the 7-Eleven which, thank heaven, is open 365 days a year. The door in the tree where the ants live swings open. The queen ant appears and says to the grasshopper, "We are bored to death. Won't you tell us a story or at least a good joke? Our teenagers are driving us crazy; maybe you could write them a play to perform, or just a roadshow? Do you have any ideas for a daddy-daughter party?"

The grasshopper replies that she had ideas for all of them. So the ant invites her in and seats her at a spotless kitchen table with pencil and paper, and the grasshopper writes the roadshow.

The ant feeds her guest a slice of homemade bread, fresh from the oven, and a glass of freshly squeezed orange juice. "How do you get all of these ideas?" she asks the grasshopper.

"They come to me," says the grasshopper, "while I am taking long hot baths."

I am a grasshopper. I work hard at writing, at teaching, at singing and dancing, at mothering. I have taught my four boys some grasshopper ways. They all can make chocolate-chip cookies and brownies without a recipe.

My mother used to say, "I don't know where you came from." This bothered me, because if she didn't know, I certainly didn't. But I found out where I came from years later when I went back to Holland for the first time since I was five years old. I stayed with my paternal grandmother—Oma—who lived in Utrecht. She set her alarm for nine o'clock in the morning. When I saw that, I knew where I came from. I came from Oma.

I came from you, too, Mother. Otherwise, I would never clean under my bed.

I came from God.
