Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

"My Hands Are Martha's Hands"

HELEN CANDLAND STARK

My mind zeroes in on a small framed print, sitting for many years on my desk. It is a reproduction of Jan Vermeer's painting of Jesus in the house of Mary and Martha. It is one of only forty paintings the seventeenth-century Dutch artist produced in his short lifetime.

For me, it is an icon, a religious picture with symbolic meaning. For me, it represents two competing life forces in the lives of other women as well as in my own.

I was surprised to realize that Mary and Martha's story is told only in the book of Luke and that it comprises only four verses. Bible translations that I compared tell the story essentially in the same way:

"Now as they went on their way, he entered a village; and a woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, who sat at the Lord's feet and listened to his teaching. But Martha was distracted with much serving; and she went to him and said, `Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Tell her then to help me.' But the Lord answered her, `Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things; one thing is needful. Mary has chosen the good portion which shall not be taken away from her.'" (Revised Standard Version, Luke 10:38-42.)

Does one consciously choose to be Mary or Martha? Are genes or the environment determining factors? I don't know.

I do know that for most of my eighty-eight years I have been Martha.

My life falls into three eras—life before marriage, married years, and post-retirement years when we moved from Delaware back to Utah. For most of my life I bought the whole Mormon Martha package. I lived it, lock, stock, and barrel. But from earliest memory, I also knew a Mary tug. Here are some particulars:

Life on our ranch in Sanpete County was rugged pioneer stuff. I was the eldest of nine with my next sister ten years younger. Our menfolk came in late for supper, after which dishwater had to be heated on a coal range and the dishes washed under a kerosene lamp.

Once in a fit of adolescent self-pity, I wrote:

The canyon breeze comes floating down A perfume-laden stream. The tired housewife only knows It's time to skim the cream.

Of course, someone quickly pointed out how lucky I was to have cream to skim.

Once, after a long, hard day at a treadle sewing machine, turning a bolt of outing flannel into winter pajamas for my five brothers, I was so tired I began to weep. My mother took me for a walk along the dusty country road. She said nothing, but her hand on my arm communicated, without words, "This is the way it is, Helen. This is the way it is."

I was an accepting participant in the way it was. And I did not, with conscious intent, dig in my heels for time of my own. But two limits I insisted upon. Sunday afternoons on the ranch were to be mine. I spent those hours putting together a newsletter, complete with columns, for two absent friends.

And I would not darn. If I managed, purposely, to complete an assigned task early, my mother was wont to say, "Good, Helen. Now you have time for a little darning." No way. The basket of hose for eleven people was bottomless.

But Martha chores were evidence of a good woman, so when I married belatedly and gratefully, I was determined to be the best wife known to man. That meant that I would never just open a can of beans. I would do tedious and intricate things to them.

My husband, a gardener at heart and raised in the same pioneer tradition, thought that was just fine. For his own part, he lavished loving attention on vegetable patch and fruit trees. He was justifiably baffled, therefore, when one day I came up with a verse I titled "Green-eyed Dirge," with apologies to Joyce Kilmer:

Alas, that I can never be As lovely as a garden pea. The bulby beet, the carrot svelte, Can both be tucked behind a belt. The parsnip knows its proper place Upon a plate beneath the face. I was not even made to wear A nest of parsley in my hair. And I have cravings wild. I talk. Not so, the docile celery stalk. With bugs I am not overrun To challenge sprayer and spray gun. If I am nicked by careless prod I do not meekly kiss the sod. No charms, alack, my love will heed Unless they have been grown from seed.

Still I wore my Martha role like a halo. If someone fell heir to a lug of kumquat plums, I was the expert to call. If our homeless branch in Delaware needed dinner space for eighty-five people, I could cope. In the struggle of our small LDS group to earn money for a chapel, our family raised and sold corn, raspberries, apples, and squash. I operated a bread route. With a laden basket, once a week one of the children delivered loaves to the neighbors. A student who brought his fiancée to call said, "I want you to meet the woman who bakes the best bread in Delaware."

But my specialty lay in salvaging borderline produce. Seventeen split cantaloupes in the morning became seventeen jars of cantaloupe butter by night. The celery crop that froze one night became quarts of puree for soup. A blender and assorted ingredients turned overripe corn into pudding. Eastern guests got the grand tour of the house and gawked at the row on row of bottled produce.

Perhaps I am carrying this too far, because my Mary side continued to ruffle the waters. What came out was verse. For others of you, it might well be music, painting, or dance, to name but a few Mary outlets.

At this juncture, I planned to share a few of those Ah-moments when I felt the Spirit break through. Instead I now want to make a small end run. That series of words—poetry, music, painting, dance—prompts a new line of thought about the Martha role.

In the third period in my life, when after retiring we moved back to Utah from Delaware, I inexplicably bought new bottles for canning. The culture prodded. My inner backlash was an essay for Exponent II, "The Good Woman Syndrome, or, When Is Enough, Enough?"<#>1 The Era had previously printed an article about cookies.<#>2 They were identified as a woman's "medals of honor." Apparently one whipped up a different recipe every day, for seven recipes were included.

My "Good Woman Syndrome" is almost a cliché statement about the role of females in my generation. My own rebellion in the 1970s I now explain as an early stirring of the women's movement, which prompted many of us to question our totally domestic script. Maybe, after all, we had been merely drudges doing chore work.

But the new enlightenment, while sorely needed, was not necessarily benign. Glad to abandon their aprons and even their children if urged, a new work force in tailored suits asserted itself into the market place. Before long, few households could function without two paychecks.

Implications for society have been widely explored. Are gender roles now more evenly divided? Do many of the new outside jobs offer restrictions similar to the old homebound ones? Are women less tired? And particularly, are they freer to touch life at many points?

This last question leads me back to Martha and Mary. Martha roles in whatever guise are essentially outer-oriented. Mary turns within for creative inspiration from feeling and from intuition. Hence, it seems to me, Mary is more truly feminine.

These ideas are all subject to argument. My thesis is that Mary-ness arises in the central core of the individual. It is not a persona that can be put on or taken off. It is a given.

Now please try to visualize with me some small Mary epiphanies. My poem called "Marriage Portion" tells of our pioneer heritage of hard work:

You muscle down defeat. By labor, deserts blossom as the rose; Weariness chocked off yields shining wheat.

The last couplet summarizes:

Roses from deserts are a brilliant yield If we prize, too, the lilies of the field.

Here are three short nature poems. The first describes an experience with snow. The mother is an archetypal figure who speaks the one-line refrain of each quatrain. The daughter begins:

NIGHT SNOW

My mother and I will walk in the snow: This is an hour to keep. Drifts mount high on the tulip beds. "As snow, so falleth sleep." Gone is the moon and gone are the stars. The sky is foam tonight. We tread on meadows of mother-of-pearl. "Snow filleth our hands with light." The wire harshness of leafless bush Is soft as a mourning dove. Beautiful, gracious, transfigured world. "So sayeth all who love." Quietly, patiently falls the snow, Cool and sweet to the face. We have not striven. The gift is given. "As snow so cometh Grace."

Next is a sonnet about autumn. My husband and I were visiting in the Vermont woods. He went off exploring, and I used my quiet time to write!

AUTUMN IN VERMONT

How shall I make myself one with this time? Let go, let go, even your scarlet treasure, Maple despoiled. Knee deep in gold. I measure Leaves' profusion—know they melt to lymn With amber dust the fern's first leaf in spring. In the cone's cup the blood-root makes its bed. The bare fingers of birch so whitely dead, Point to the pulse of each transmuted thing. Now I am drunk with color, now at last Submerged in peace. I turn for one more look To hope the floating oak leaf on the brook Returns, swirls into consciousness, to cast In some dark hour its secret on my shore. Oh, baby hemlock trees, be spirit's store.

Our house in Salem overlooked a little lake. Here is a Japanese haiku about a transient moment:

Come! Over the dark water A soaring rainbow— Too late. It is gone.

Now I am eighty-eight years old. Jesus said, Mary has chosen that good portion which shall not be taken from her.

My Martha accomplishments have been taken from me. The prom dresses have vanished along with sumptuous dinner parties. Now I write a haiku about aging:

Hush! In the dark center DNA unravels Its intricate spirals.

All those years of domestic chores. Were they worth it? I was never consciously trying to influence my world. But yes, it did help my struggling branch in Delaware to have a home base. The woman with the kumquats happily managed. In our Wilmington Ward Cookbook, my Zuni bread is considered a minor classic.

And what do my children say who grew up within this framework? They say they are grateful. They say they may have kicked sometimes against a way of life that made finishing chores a condition for going out to play. But they learned responsibility to the family, to work efficiently so as to have private time, to develop skills especially useful for their marriages. We had two kinds of work: help work and money work. Raspberries had to be picked; that was help work. But polishing the silver could be money work. Order and efficiency are Martha gifts.

But I am just now gathering up my verses. Would a photocopy of them be a welcome present to my children? I see my son sharing an Ah-moment with his little daughter, and I hope so.

That brings me to my last poem. Martha is speaking.

MARTHA AND THE WAY

My sister, when our Lord was gone, Brought me a drink fresh from the well. I said, "O worthless one." I struck The cup of water so it fell. She laid her fingers on my arm. I threw them off. I would not stay. The heavy house is quiet now. She sought my Lord and went away. My hands are Martha's hands, alert, Skillful, strong, and swift to hurt; But, ah, my soul, could I surprise The look of Mary in my eyes!

Before I had compared the story in the various translations, I remembered—wrongly, as it turned out—that Jesus had said "Mary has chosen the better part." I thought, if there is a better part, then there must be a good part as well as a best part. And that is the way I still ponder that verse in my heart.

You notice that Jesus chided Martha with great tenderness. "Martha, Martha." The repetition of the name endears it. He loved Martha as well.

Not either good or better, not even both good and better, but something greater than both transcends toward wholeness. We enrich ourselves, and we bless each other. That is the reward of the creative blending of roles that I wish I could pass along, especially to you young women. All of us are "cumbered by much serving," as the King James Version so wisely puts it. (Luke 10:42.) It behooves us, therefore, to heed those quiet promptings to "sit at the Lord's feet and listen."

NOTES
