Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Today's Woman: All Things to All People?

JO ANN LARSEN

In today's Western world, most women are soul mates. No matter what their roles—married, single, single parent, or grandparent, worker or homemaker—most are trying to do too much too well. In a day in which many women have added eight or nine hours of work time to their daily schedules without giving up much, and in which even the home-maker's role is ever-chaning and sometimes overwhelming, women report that their lives feel chaotic and out of control. There is always something up ahead to do, something behind left undone, and something unraveling. And it feels like their fault.

For a woman, that's when the frustration and the feelings of guilt and inadequacy flood in. She feels discouraged, sometimes even helpless and hopeless. And then, finally, she becomes angry at herself. She's trying as hard and moving as fast as she can—working sometimes sixteen or eighteen hours a day (sometimes with night duty)—and things are still left undone. Even when she's operating at top capacity, she's still not making it. So she often thinks, "There must be something wrong with me. If I just worked harder, organized better, and slept less, I could get things done." Sadly, she concludes that the flaw is in herself, and as a result, she often berates herself endlessly for her inadequacies.

But in the midst of her berating, this woman pauses to ponder her circumstances: "Wait a minute," she says to herself. "I've been working hard all day long, all week long, even all month long—for years and years—so how come it's all my fault I can't keep my act together?" Thinking about the matter logically, she knows she can't be completely responsible all the time. Look at how hard she's working, how hard she's pushing nonstop. She feels overburdened, unappreciated, and overworked. It's not fair.

So the woman looks around for another culprit to share the blame, and who does she spy? A husband, if she has one. A husband who isn't helping, or who isn't helping enough. From her perspective, she's out in the lake drowning without a life preserver—going down for the third time—and he's on the shore, wanting his dinner. So now she's angry at him. She wonders why he doesn't rescue her, and this poor, hapless man doesn't even know she's sinking.

Other culprits that get press for a woman's life being out of control are her children, if she has any. Maybe it's their fault she can't stay afloat, so the woman says things to them like "I do everything for you and you don't appreciate it." Or "You don't care enough about me to clean your room." Or even "You're just like your father." Inadvertently, the woman sometimes puts her children on massive guilt trips—and she's good at it.

One mistake, then, that the '90s woman often makes is in looking for a flaw in herself or someone else. She knows she's having trouble staying afloat, and her conclusion is that it has to be someone's fault. But the truth is, the flaw isn't in the woman, or in anyone else, for that matter. The flaw is in a schizophrenic, runaway culture that gives women never-ending conflicting messages about what they should do and be. And because they sometimes fail to filter and choose from these messages, women attempt to respond to many more than is humanly possible. As a result, they reel from stress, often depleting and exhausting themselves and falling into burnout or depression.

Perhaps the most significant factor pressing today's women is the seismic cultural shift in traditional gender roles. Faced in the '90s with financial pressures, dismayed by the high expense of rearing children, and sometimes required to carry on as single parents, women face confusing and confounding choices—wonderful choices, in one respect, that allow for personal growth and development. But choices that also leave a woman staggering because she doesn't know how to meet all her obligations and fulfill all her responsibilities.

In the past, a woman was not expected to take charge of her life. In the '90s, however, she has to. The challenge for today's woman is to become her own taskmaster and guardian, to make her own choices, and to decide on her own priorities. Doing so, however, requires a woman to bring to a conscious level and take control of the implicit cultural messages that drive her to work so hard, to feel so bad, and to expend herself in so many directions.

The six women of the '90s introduced in this article are designed to aid in that challenge. The first five of these women—the caretaker, the juggler, the guilt sponge, the perfectionist, and the pleaser—are actually implicit and runaway cultural themes that we, as women and as creatures of the culture, have absorbed throughout our lives and that unknowingly affect our choices and decisions. These themes, based on culture and tradition though not necessarily on truth, may drive us at an unconscious level to stretch ourselves too far in too many ways.

The sixth woman—the depleted woman—represents the consequences of a woman's not making judicious decisions regarding the expenditure of her time, energy, and resources. Driven by the choices she makes in her caretaking, juggling, pleasing, and perfectionist roles, and by the overwhelming guilt she experiences when she isn't all things to all people, the woman often pushes herself too hard in too many ways and neglects the care of her own self.

The Caretaker

The first woman, the caretaker, is that '90s woman who takes charge of other people's needs and feelings and decisions and who assumes the care and comfort of everyone within her purview. She's the "fix-it" woman who has a twenty-four-hour beeper to alert her to anyone who comes into her space, anyone who may need her help. And she will speed rapidly to meet the needs of that person, sometimes even before he or she has needs.

In the '50s, the caretaker was the woman who, in the main, took emotional responsibility only for her family, and in her role she seriously and carefully managed and kept track of her family, molding her children's behavior within the constricted cultural expectations of the day.

In the '90s, the caretaker is the woman who is still taking emotional responsibility for her family (or, if she's single, for many other people); but in this new world, the number of people she cares for has expanded quantitatively to the point that, as one woman put it, we designate ourselves "general managers of the universe."

"There is no end to the people that we take care of," reflects another woman. "When we're through raising our children, then we take care of our grandchildren. And if we're lucky enough, we get to take care of our great-grandchildren." We become, as it were, veteran caretakers.

In today's world, as in the '50s, the caretaker's role is the most noble and notable of women's roles, but even that role has to be bounded, because there is no end to the messages bombarding a woman concerning what she ought to do and be. As one woman put it, "For many years, I always felt I was invincible—that I could stretch to take care of as many people, accomplish as many tasks, and borrow from my sleep as much as I wanted, and there would be no penalty. I did that until I burned out and there wasn't enough of me left to take care of them."

It is, then, the caretaker's challenge to respect the fact that she is finite—that she has limited time, energy, and resources—and that she must respond to the needs of others while staying within her boundaries. This requires that she identify and respond first to her priorities, weeding out of her schedule time-drainers that sap her strength, and that she learn to say no when the occasion merits.

Most caretakers, however, report difficulty in saying no. "If I say no, I might hurt someone," says one. "If I say no, someone will think I'm not doing my job," says another. Still a third says, "I have a `can do' reputation to protect." Most often the caretaker's difficulty in saying no is consistent with these reasons: she doesn't want to reject anyone and she doesn't want to be rejected or diminished. In her caretaking role, saying no is not a value-neutral issue. Rather, most caretakers emotionalize the issue of saying yes or no, their answers having connotations for their self-esteem and their very viability as human beings.

In that respect, the caretaker's challenge is to approach the issue of saying yes or no as though it were simply a job or a task to be done that needs to be weighed in terms of her priorities, needs, values, interests, time, and resources. The caretaker's bottom line is to reserve the right to prioritize her life in a way that makes sense to herself without her choices being skewed by whether her worth is at stake.

The caretaker faces another challenge, that of putting her own self on her schedule. The caretaker feels guilty if she's not taking care of someone else. And she feels guilty if she is taking care of herself. The result is that she often defaults on the care of herself. As one woman puts it: "I would take care of myself, but they need me more than I need me." Another woman says, "When I think about exercising or practicing my art strokes, I suddenly find myself in the kitchen cooking something wonderful for my husband." A vital issue for each of these women, as with all others, is to keep herself in focus by first, scheduling daily appointments with herself in her day planner for her own care and maintenance, and second, keeping those appointments sacrosanct.

Finally, the caretaker faces the challenge of releasing herself from her house. The word housewife means, essentially, a woman "bonded to the house," and indeed, a woman's self-esteem is often bonded or tied up with the condition of her house. If her house is chaotic, she is chaotic.

From the caretaker's perspective, deep down she knows it's her job (even when she has help) to keep the house clean (her mother told her so). And if it's not clean, she's flawed. To her, a sock on the floor is a mark on her character. And so she's vulnerable, because in most houses things don't stay put, and in fact, never in recorded history has any woman ever finished the housework. The caretaker's issue, then, is that of protecting her self-esteem by learning to deal with the dirt and clutter in her home without emotionalizing those things.

The caretaker's life is further complicated because very few men make a connection between a sticky floor and a woman's self-worth. He would just like some of her time, please, maybe to sit with him or watch TV, and she declines. "There's work to be done, clutter to clear away, dishes to do, clothes to put away, children to bathe and put to bed, and then I'll relax," she responds.

So then he feels hurt. Housework is more important than his relationship with her. He's taking time out. Why won't she? He gets angry—and shows it. Now she's hurt. She expects him to understand the world the way she does. You don't leave dishes!

Here, the conflicts and hurt feelings both sexes feel emanate from the ambiguity of what were once well-defined gender roles. Lacking clear guidelines in the '90s, both sexes need to stop the chore wars and offer the quality of mercy to each other, making a conscious effort to treat housework as simply a task needing to be done, and problem-solving household chores based on available time and resources.

The Juggler

After the caretaker comes the juggler, that hardworking woman who, at home and at work, does an incredible, almost impossible balancing act. This is the busy woman whose every move has to have a work purpose and who prides herself on doing four or five things at a time. And this is the woman who operates from lists—and sometimes, lists of her lists. "We have to have lists," says one juggler, "because we have a lot more on our minds than there is room for."

The juggler is also the efficiency expert who's always thinking two or three moves ahead. At work, she eats her lunch while she's preparing her latest report and thinking about her dinner menu for that night or doing leg squats. At home, as she makes sweeps through her house, she's thinking that she'll empty the garbage this time, take a swipe at that cobweb the next trip, and the time after that, she'll pick up the dirty socks.

It is the juggler in the '90s woman who makes it difficult for her to relax. When the juggler stops, she begins to feel somewhere on the scale between "uncomfortable" and "excruciating." "Here I am relaxing," she thinks, "not doing my job." And when she does relax, the juggler sometimes does what one woman calls "multiple relaxing": "That's when I sit down and I watch TV and do my nails and sew on buttons and write notes to my friends." But "multiple relaxing," she says, "is really stressful."

In this respect, the juggler's major challenge is to learn to draw artificial lines that say, "After this time, I don't work. Or do a particular task or activity. I choose to give myself time off to take care of myself." It's imperative for the juggler to establish such artificial lines because there are no instruction manuals in her world telling her that she can take a break at two-thirty or that she only has to work until five o'clock. No one saying, "STOP! You've done enough. You can rest now." Only the juggler can give herself permission to relax or to outline the boundaries of her job description.

The juggler also needs to take a deep breath and just be for a while—to learn to live for her todays, to celebrate the temporary, and to enjoy the fullness and joy of her moment-by-moment experiencing. And, in the words of Judith Viorst, the juggler also needs to ponder her priorities, to think "about what makes us feel good, . . . and what restores our hurried, harried souls."

As jugglers, Viorst reflects, we can all afford more room to linger awhile—"to linger over simmering pots and child's play and talks with friends and music and mending. To savor the simple acts that give us that sweet sense of peace that I call domestic tranquillity."

The Guilt Sponge

Next comes the guilt sponge, that woman who has guilt festivals about nearly everything nearly all the time. This is the woman who feels guilty when her phone book automatically opens to the pizza parlors. When she's carrying ten extra pounds. Or when the geranium that she got for Mother's Day dies (or she throws it out prematurely).

The guilt sponge is the woman who reels from conflicting "shoulds." Agitating her mind are often hundreds of these "shoulds" that whirl around in her brain, pulling her this way and that, confusing her, and keeping her from feeling good about herself. She should keep her house totally immaculate (all the time), look young and slim and beautiful, exercise every day, feed her kids oatmeal, do the dishes cheerfully, get up earlier. And these "shoulds" that flog a woman's mind are no respecter of how much she is doing, how hard she is trying, or how much she has already accomplished.

The guilt sponge also suffers over things that she can't control, as in the case of a woman who drove by a business every day on her way to work, noticing that the business was failing. One day, she says, as she drove by the business, she saw a "Closed Forever" sign on the door, and the guilt rushed in as she thought, "If I had just frequented that business and if I had just sent my friends in, we might have been able to save it."

One challenge for the guilt sponge is to release herself from feeling responsible for those situations in her life over which she has little or no control. Another challenge is to examine her "shoulds" (and "oughts")—"I should weight ten pounds less," "I should keep the house mother-clean," "I should always have well-matched children"—and decide whether any of these "shoulds" represent, for her, a true value, a value that is chosen rather than imposed. At issue is a woman's choosing to develop her own mature conscience, a conscience constituted of the behaviors, ethics, values, opinions, preferences that she (not someone else) espouses.

Also at issue is a woman's distinguishing between "earned" and "unearned" guilt. At times, guilt is "earned"—that is, a woman has perhaps been unkind or even unforgiving. In such instances, a woman can benefit from apologizing and making amends. But more often, a woman suffers from "unearned" guilt over the many things in her life she takes emotional responsibility for but can't control. In such instances, a woman's challenge is to let go of the unearned guilt and to quit suffering over things she can't change.

The Perfectionist

Following the guilt sponge comes the perfectionist. This is the woman who never has a run in her stocking or a chip in her nails, and whose shoulder pads never slide off her shoulders. This is also the woman whose spices are alphabetically organized. And, as Mary McBride offers, when her children "sit on Santa Claus's lap, they ask for world peace."

The perfectionist is also the woman who sets impossibly high goals for herself and then berates herself endlessly because she can't achieve them. This is the woman who is haunted by her incompletes rather than heartened by her successes, whose achievement is tied closely to her worth. And she is also the woman who doesn't know when to say, "I've done enough. This is good enough."

The ultimate perfectionist pays a price for her perfectionism in that she fights for her self-esteem every minute of her life because every detail undone accuses her of not doing her job. In that sense, the price she pays is that she is not free; her life is controlled by her list of unaccomplished things. In addition, the perfectionist's drive to achieve imposes high costs to her physical and emotional well-being and may even eventually erode her energy and ability to cope, plunging her into burnout or depression. "No one," in fact, "can do everything and do it well; there is always a price to be paid for doing too much," reflect Claudia Bepko and Jo-Ann Krestan.

Tempering perfectionism is a quest, not an event, for any woman. The perfectionist's challenge is that of releasing herself from having to do everything well. In softening her standards and cutting corners, any reforming perfectionist can benefit from the motto, "If it's just barely worth doing, then just barely do it." And from the motto, "Some things are worth doing well. And some things aren't worth doing." And even from the concept of "average"—"I'm going to do just an average job of cleaning my house this year." At issue for the perfectionist is examining her production and performance and making informed choices that release her from many of her pressures and burdens.

The Pleaser

After the perfectionist comes the pleaser, the woman who requires the endorsement of others to feel good about herself. If she receives approval from outside sources, the pleaser's self-esteem goes up; if someone disapproves, her self-esteem goes down. In that regard, her very sense of self comes from being valued by or approved of by other people, and any situation that even hints of disapproval can be devastating

because it calls her very worth into question.

Among the pleaser's issues are that she sacrifices her own needs in order to please others; that she has difficulty accepting compliments; that another's view of her and her choices is more important than her own; and that she often believes something is inherently wrong with herself. The pleaser also devalues her own opinions and positions, concluding that if her views differ from those of others, she's wrong, and at the extreme, she apologizes excessively for almost everything, including all of her perceived deficiencies.

Complicating the pleaser's vulnerability to the views of others is that she lives in a sea of mood changers in which the emotions and stances of others readily change. In this sense, the pleaser's challenge is to move from an other-centered position, which is dependent on validation from the outside world, to a position of centeredness and high self-regard in which she is not vulnerable to the capriciousness and whims of people and events over which she has no control.

Becoming centered and achieving that high regard requires that the pleaser view herself as separate from others and realize that anger and disapproval from others has to do with their own issues and choices, not her worth. Others are in charge of their own anger and, in any given instance, will make three basic choices: whether or not to get angry, whether or not to stay angry, and whether or not to express their anger destructively.

When someone exhibits disapproval or is in a bad mood, the pleaser needs to view the problem as residing with the other person. At issue is the pleaser's building a shield around herself, protecting herself from anger or frustration coming her way, leaving it where it belongs—with the other person—and refusing to let it lower her self-esteem.

Also of importance to the pleaser is putting herself in the "I count" position and learning to endorse her own feelings, opinions, and decisions. Coming out into the open and learning to trust her judgment and to depend on herself for accurate information about herself can be an exhilarating experience for a woman, as one woman reflects: "My life changed when I realized there were as many different frames of reference as there are people—and that I was entitled to my own."

The Depleted Woman

Finally comes the depleted woman, as represented in one woman's remark that she "didn't do mornings" and another's that "sleeping is the best of two worlds: it allows you to be unconscious and alive at the same time."

Today's depleted woman is that stressed-out woman who eats on the run, who overcommits, who doesn't exercise regularly, who neglects sound nutrition, and who, when she's pushed, chronically borrows from her sleep. Women, in fact, "come up with a thousand reasons why they can't take an hour a day to exercise, meditate, read, soak in the bath, do whatever it is that revitalizes them," reflects an author. (Joseph Procaccini, as quoted by Carol Tannenhauser.)

Inherent in the solutions to the depleted woman's problem is her commitment to establishing a self-repair, maintenance, and enhancement program, which includes all of the regulars—good sleep, sound nutrition, a regular exercise plan, time to relax—and, in addition, preventative health care—health exams and monthly breast self-examinations.

Finally, the depleted woman needs to pay attention to the state of her exhaustion. At times, the depleted woman falls into an actual clinical depression, in which all the lifestyle changes in the world can't break the hold of the hopelessness and despair that set in. There is a stark difference between depression-the-blues, which can affect any woman periodically, and depression-the-chemical-disorder, which is a physical, sometimes even genetic illness, akin to ulcers or high blood pressure, triggered by a change in the chemicals in the brain.

In cases in which a woman experiences over time such symptoms of depression as sleep disturbance, difficulty concentrating, a low energy level, rapid mood swings, low stress tolerance, loss of appetite, or withdrawal or isolation from friends or family, she may need to obtain medical treatment for her disorder. As one psychiatrist stresses, "People don't realize there is a difference between the mind and the brain. The mind is what we think of as ourselves, and the brain is an organ. When a person suffers from a chemical depression, the brain's chemicals are imbalanced, and in such instances the brain, as an organ, needs medications just as the liver, heart, or lung needs treatment when there is a problem with them." (Susan Mirow.)

Other Issues

Of issue to all the '90s women—the caretaker, the juggler, the guilt sponge, the perfectionist, the pleaser, and the depleted woman—is recognizing that taking today's cultural roller coaster ride is a choice. Each of these women is represented in unconscious, embedded, cultural aspects of ourselves that we as women can become aware of and substantially bring under control. We do not have to let these driving forces determine our choices, aggravate our guilt, and lower our self-esteem. Nor do we need to let them cause our burnout and depression.

As '90s women, we are pioneers who must carve out new roles under unprecedented conditions. Yet we are using many outmoded remnants of cultural programming from the past to analyze and assess our adequacy in the present. Our most basic challenge as today's women is designing a set of guidelines for performance and assessment that work in a new world in which we ourselves can be a relevant guiding force in assessing our priorities. Other guiding forces—our religious background and our current family situation, for instance—help us set priorities. But it's up to us to make wise decisions regarding how to spend our time and energy.

At issue first, if you are like most women, is taking better care of yourself—making decisions about your life care and your lifestyle having to do with eating and exercise and sleep that improve your emotional and physical well-being. At issue, second, is realizing that you're in charge of your own choices and the number of commitments you make. It's as vital to budget your time, energy, and resources as it is to budget your money.

One option in budgeting and gaining control of your time expenditures is to put a category on your schedule in your day planner for the care and maintenance of yourself and then a category for the important people in your life. Fund these categories with time allotments and, after that, categorize and fund the other important causes and commitments in your life. Next, decide how to allocate other time to other, less important causes. Grant yourself the right to determine your own boundaries and the right to preserve your resources for those tasks and people that you yourself prioritize.

At issue, finally, in the '90s are the challenges embodied in a woman's accepting her own appearance and investing in herself as a maturing human being. As with the culturally specific attributes embodied in each of the six women of the '90s, today's woman also receives conflicting and confusing cultural messages about her appearance and body image. For most women, appearance is a continual problem. They feel that their bodies are not good enough, pretty enough, thin enough, firm enough, or young enough, and they couple their appearance with their own worth.

One challenge in coming to terms with your appearance and body image is remembering that beauty is a culturally defined trait that has varying and, most times, contradictory facets that no one woman can achieve. Inherent in this challenge is the task of releasing yourself from having to achieve any particular model. Enhance your appearance to the extent you'd like—but don't try to achieve an ideal set by someone else or by any of the anonymous theys of this world.

Another challenge is giving yourself permission to have body flaws. "If we saw the same models that appear in Vogue in the grocery store without their makeup and all their trappings, they would look just like us," says one woman. It is through the use of makeup artists, creative lighting, and sensitive camera lenses that the media models present an inflated norm against which the average woman can't compete.

Finally, give yourself the latitude to be comfortable with your own weight. "In the back of every woman's mind is the thought, `I have to lose ten pounds,'" says one woman. "And when each of us dies, on her lips will probably still be the indictment, `I didn't lose ten pounds.'" As an option to suffering over your body weight, consider what weight is really realistic for you to achieve, follow through on a goal to achieve it, and then give yourself permission to be at that weight without self-recrimination.

The final challenge for the '90s woman is to invest in herself as a forever-growing human being and to take full responsibility for her own growth and maintenance. "People often say that this or that person has not yet found [herself]," reflects Thomas Azasz. "But the self is not something that one finds. It is something that one creates."

For a woman, defining or even enhancing a self requires certain core conditions: First, recognizing that she is an intrinsically valuable human being deserving of her own investment. Second, acting to find interests and activities of her own that she takes initiative to pursue, even when there are pulls from outside forces to dissuade her from continuing her investments. Third, viewing herself as an ever-evolving human being, capable of continuing growth and maturity through all the seasons of her life.

As with all other challenges in the '90s, in a growth process a woman's task is to take responsibility for herself as her own taskmaster and guardian. It is the woman who feels good about herself and her life, and who reaches to meet her own as well as others' needs, who is able to give fully to herself and those she loves.
