Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

The Touch

NORMA B. ASHTON

We are so much like violins Frames, with sensitive strings The touch of the hand That holds the bow Determines the music it brings.<#>1

—EDNA MACHESNY

In this large audience are sisters who have many, many kinds of challenges. There are widows, divorcées, women who are unmarried and married women who have been unable to have children. Some women are married to husbands who have strayed, who are inactive or are so involved with their professions that the family sees too little of them; some women are working with rebellious children, and others with handicapped children. And there may even be a few women who have almost perfect mates and super children. Probably there are some who suffer from a low self-image, and yet others who are comfortable with who they are and what they can do.

We all have sensitive strings, like the violin, but oh, how different is the touch of our hands holding the bow, and what different music comes into our lives. Wouldn't it be boring if we all played the same melody? Would there be opportunities to grow, to develop individual talents and character if each of us experienced the same challenges? Confucius said, "Seek not every quality in one individual."

Often we have heard: "For all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God. To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby." (D&C 46:11-12.) All of us have been given blessings and gifts. The programs of the Church offer innumerable opportunities to develop our talents. William George Jordan once said, "Man has two creators: his god and himself."<#>2 With the package of blessings and gifts life hands each of us, we have the opportunity to meet challenges and shape our own destiny, knowing full well that divine help is waiting if we will but ask.

Some words from Joseph Smith give us specifications to follow: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence, and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping the commandments of God."<#>3 Yet we are also told, "In the world ye shall have tribulations." (John 16:33.) So if happiness is the design of our existence, yet—as we can all testify—we shall have tribulations, how do we walk through the maze of life?

Lowell Bennion has said, "Be not defeated twice, once by circumstances and once by oneself."<#>4 In other words, don't yield to the temptation to feel sorry for yourself or to blame yourself for the circumstances in which you find yourself.

Self-condemnation has a paralyzing potion in it. We stagnate when we agonize over what we might have been or what we might have done. Patti Perfect<#>5 has had a lot of publicity and has fallen out of grace lately. She is the woman who seems to be able to do everything well but then has a nervous breakdown brought on by guilt and her fears that she isn't doing enough. In East of Eden John Steinbeck wrote of one of the characters that when she knew she didn't have to be perfect, she could be good.<#>6 Sisters, we can be good without being perfect.

I am concerned about the damage that guilt can bring into women's lives. So many voices call. So many demands are made. When we can't answer all the calls or finish all the projects, how can we avoid that monster guilt? This little couplet written by Gaile Cook gives sage advice:

I'll be content if I can just learn Which bridges to cross and which to burn.

I can't tell you which to burn. Only you can set your priorities. You have the right and the gift of personal revelation to help you make those decisions. But, I plead, when you have to decide between two right choices, between two worthy activities, wipe guilt feelings totally away.

You can't be two places at once, so if you decide to conduct a PTA meeting because you are the president and have to miss a leadership meeting, don't feel guilty when someone at church says, "Where were you last night?" Or maybe your husband unexpectedly asks you to go on a short trip with him, and you have a bushel of apricots that should be bottled. Can you give the fruit away and not feel guilty later when a neighbor calls you over to see her shining rows of newly canned fruit? When you choose between two rights, leave guilt feelings for Satan to use on someone else.

Know that you don't have to be perfect. Contrary to opinion, we are not expected to achieve perfection in this life but rather to make steady progress towards it. We are masochists, sometimes. For example, I overeat one time and think, That's it. I've blown it. No reason to stay on the diet now. Sometimes we withdraw too readily from other challenges as well. If we have been impatient with our children or if we arrive late to church, during Relief Society we feel we'll never be able to measure up to everything we're told to do. So, in effect, we give up, because in the back of our minds we think, I can't do all of this so I'm a failure. Again, such a thought pattern is a clever and successful tool of the adversary. We must keep trying but be able to forgive ourselves when we can't do it all and then get on with life.

In Rom. 14:22 the Apostle Paul makes this wise statement: "Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth." After the fact, we can't give too much heed to what might have been. Such regrets can actually get in the way of what still can be. We want to learn from the past, but we don't want to carry it around like a monkey on our backs. We must make do with the present and look forward.

In the Church News of February 6, 1988, there was a story about Sister Lenore Kimball Nitsch, who is paralyzed from her waist down. For forty-five years she has been the chief receptionist at Welfare Square. She has greeted the leaders of many countries, heads of universities, and government officials. Elder Glen L. Rudd said of her, "There is something deeply spiritual about her that radiates over the telephone and when people meet her in person. People from all over the world have visited Welfare Square; they have felt from her everything the Church represents. You don't meet her without receiving a spiritual lift. She is a star."<#>7

Yet Sister Nitsch has known many kinds of trauma. At birth she had spina bifida and was not expected to live. She did not attend school because of her disability; her older sister taught her to read. Her formal education began at age twenty. Her only Church experience came during her frequent stays in the Primary Children's Hospital.

When she came to Salt Lake City to attend the marriage of her sister, she was determined to be independent and refused to go home to California. She began job hunting. Disabled and uneducated, she was turned down time and time again. Someone in the employment offices finally said, "If she has determination enough to keep coming, I'll find something for her or die trying." Soon she was called for an interview at Welfare Square and hired. So for forty-five years she has brought her radiant spirituality to her job. She taught Sunday School for twenty-five years, wrote ten road shows, and cared for a sick sister. She sustained herself with pride and dignity. She nourished herself and then nourished others with her faith.<#>8

We learn from Sister Nitsch about another needful trait. She lived by the counsel from James 2:14: "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him?" As we nourish ourselves in faith, we must also anxiously work at growing and learning.

Regardless of the circumstances in which we find ourselves, the way we face life is in our own hands. Bobby Jones, one of the great golfers of all time, was asked to what he attributed his greatness. He answered, "I have learned to hit the ball where it lies." His advice seems simple. But sometimes it is difficult to start from where we are and go on from there. Some of us may spend so much time wishing that our golf ball were on a nice smooth patch of grass instead of out in the rough behind a tree that we forget to finish the game.

As best you can, work at solving your problems, and if you have chosen between two rights, don't beat yourself over the head. C. Kay Allen has written, "One of the hard facts of life is that self-esteem comes from your ability to solve problems, not from sympathy, not from realizing that life has handed you a raw deal, and not from blaming your parents or teachers or employer. If you can't solve problems and deal with conflict, your self-esteem is going to stay low."<#>9

How can we solve our problems? I'm sure there are as many methods as there are challenges in life. Each of us has different obstacles. We learn in Rom. 14:22, "Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth." Condemnation of self prevents us from moving forward.

As I was visiting with a friend who is divorced, I asked her what advice she might have for others in a similar situation. "First," she said, "never give up. There is a light at the end of the tunnel. This too will pass. If you look for it, there is always a glimmer of hope. There is no divorce without hurt. Your earning power is limited. Widows get a lot of sympathy, but divorcées don't get much attention." A bishopric member helped her, and she found some support from singles' groups, but her greatest help came from a source available to all of us. She said, "I came to realize that I was entitled to answers from God about my problems if I were in tune. I prayed a lot. You don't know how much I prayed. When I started asking, I realized I was getting help with my problems." Her advice is applicable to most of our challenges in life. There are good times and bad times. Sometimes the path of life is easy, and at other times all obstacles hedge up our way, but we can all pray.

Patience is another helpful ingredient. Paul advised us, "And let us run with patience the race that is set before us." (Heb. 12:1.) When the American hostages came home after 444 days of awful captivity in Iran, I remember what Bruce Langland, the spokesman for the captives, said when he was asked how he was able to endure it all. He told how a friend had slipped a tiny piece of paper into his hand. On it these words were written: "Patience is a bitter cup from which only the strong can drink." He kept these words firmly entrenched in his mind, and they helped him through those dark days. He knew he had to have patience to be strong.

As God helps us and as we help ourselves, the obstacles that come into our lives can be overcome. Optimism, prayer, and patience are important ingredients. My husband has helped many people with these words: "No one is a failure until he stops trying. The direction in which one is headed is what is important." Dr. Brent Barlow has these words printed on his business card: "What we are is more important that what we have been. And what we can become is more important than what we are."<#>10 As women in the Church, we have vital roles to fill. Motherhood can never be diminished. Generations to come will be influenced by mothers who nurture, teach, and produce honest, good, faithful sons and daughters. Many in the world today tend to look down at mothers and suggest that only those not smart or motivated enough to work stay home. But that's just not true. It is a clever ploy of the adversary to try to persuade women that their God-given role is somehow lesser or unimportant. Yet motherhood takes so many twists and turns these days. Very few women go through life with only the traditional parental challenges of colic, teen rebellion, and a few fender benders.

There is no "typical" living situation. No one lives a "normal" life, even though we all think there is such a thing and then compare our lives against this imaginary normalcy we have created in our minds. But our own lives always come up short, because we're comparing our actual experiences with a utopia that doesn't exist. I hope that we as women will stop comparing our lives to an imaginary perfection.

Single parents are becoming more prevalent, and their challenges more demanding. But from time immemorial great people have come from single-parent homes. Children can develop hope, courage, and faith if their mother displays those qualities herself. She becomes a role model, teaching by example to help her children progress. Testimonies are gained by various means. What matters is that spiritual growth goes on and on during life, regardless of the path life takes.

Today, some women become confused—and even feel guilty—if their life pattern is not like that of the majority. Yet there is no royal road to exaltation. Many divergent paths lead back to Heavenly Father's kingdom. Whatever our circumstances, we must learn the lessons of life. Our challenge is to learn and not be defeated by the package life hands us or by our attitude about that package. Remember Lowell Bennion's words, "Be not defeated twice, once by circumstances and once by oneself." Isaiah promises, "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength." (Isa. 40:31.)

I cried out for help as I prepared to come before you. I felt so inadequate. I haven't been divorced or widowed. I have a faithful husband, and I have experienced motherhood. I asked many questions, read a lot, and prayed often. One day as I was struggling, I felt as if Heavenly Father were saying, "You may not know what many sisters face. Nor do they know altogether what others have to face, but I know. Don't let them forget that their Heavenly Father knows." What can be more comforting than to realize that our Father knows and will help? Yet we have all found out that He helps the most after we have helped ourselves all we can.

I have often quoted Sister Camilla Kimball's words delivered at the Paris Area Conference:

"I would hope that every girl and woman here has the desire and ambition to qualify in two vocations—that of homemaking and that of preparing to earn a living outside the home, if and when the occasion requires. An unmarried woman is always happier if she has a vocation in which she can be socially of service and financially independent. . . . Any married woman may become a widow without warning. Property may vanish as readily as a husband may die. Thus, any woman may be under the necessity of earning her own living and helping to support dependent children. If she has been trained for the duties and the emergencies of life which may come to her, she will be much happier and have a greater sense of security."<#>11

Not only do we need temporal preparation but we also need spiritual strength. There are no priesthood role models in many homes. Stories of spiritual power exercised by women of faith filter through Church history, are expressed in missionary testimonies, and are retold over the back fence. Our faith is nourished as we learn to fortify ourselves with the basic principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I learned an important lesson in reading President Ezra Taft Benson's biography, by Sheri Dew. She reported an incident concerning his great-grand-parents. Pamelia was interested in the Church and got her husband E. T. Benson to go with her to sacrament meeting. A dispute arose between two individuals who were administering the sacrament. Harsh words were spoken. Pamelia was worried about the effects the dispute would have on her companion. She asked him what he thought of it all. "He replied that he couldn't imagine the actions of its members altering the truth of Mormonism."<#>12 To me that philosophy is one we should all internalize. The truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ can never be altered by the actions of imperfect people. When the truths our Savior teaches become firmly entrenched in our very soul, we will become women of unshakable faith and not lose our testimonies as we observe human weaknesses in those around us.

What different specifications we all have for our life's journey! And though our goals seem similar (to gain exaltation), the Builder uses very different blueprints to help us build our mansions on high.

Jeanie McAllister is a single Latter-day Saint woman who has a deep conviction of eternal marriage and family. She has wondered how she fits in. In a chapter of the book A Singular Life she describes her struggle to understand and deal with her circumstances. She says that the words of Viktor E. Frankl helped her realize that "Why am I in this situation?" is the wrong question to ask. "Speaking of the horrors of life in a concentration camp, Frankl says: `We had to learn . . . that it did not really matter what we expected from life, but rather what life expected from us. We needed to stop asking about the meaning of life, and instead to think of ourselves as those who were being questioned by life—daily and hourly.' (Man's Search for Meaning: An Introduction to Logotherapy [New York: Pocketbooks, 1963], p. 122.)"

Sister McAllister goes on to say: "As a single woman, whenever I have replaced the question `Why is this experience happening to me?' with the question `What does this situation require of me?' I have discovered specific actions, the doing of which has prevented my derailment and kept me pushing along the path, even in darkness. Unmet expectations may be bitter, but I want to be better for my experiences. . . . Asking `What does this situation require of me?' helps me see that I can make choices. I can control my life, even if that control extends only as far as my perceptions and attitudes."<#>13

When we feel fatigue and discouragement, we still have the promise that God can make weak things become strong.

Belle Spafford, former general president of the Relief Society, gave comfort and guidance to another single sister with these words:

"The only thing that is important in this life is that you endeavor to make your contributions of the highest quality. If you will do that, you will fulfill your destiny, and you will realize the blessings of eternity. . . . This is a new day and a new age where we need strong, available, capable, righteous women to carry our womanhood so that extremists will not run away with it."<#>14

From another very talented and accomplished friend, Sheri Dew, I was given this insight: "I think it is interesting that in our society we tend to categorize each other primarily according to marital status, when that is only one distinguishing factor. Regardless of which group we fall into, we tend to think we have the hardest set of circumstances with which to deal. We may tell ourselves that no one else can really understand how difficult life is for us—that no one who lives in one of the other `categories' can possibly have as hard a `row to hoe' as we do. But, in fact, we all have challenges, we all face disappointments, we all feel sorrow and pain.

"The real challenge, I think, is to not focus so intensely on marital status and thereby divide us into little groups but to learn as women how many things we have in common. When all is said and done, what we must do is work to sink our spiritual roots deep—deep enough that when the winds of life blow (as they most certainly will) we'll be prepared to face them and to give the kind of nurturing strength our sex is known for. I know that I much prefer to be thought of as an LDS woman rather than as a single LDS woman."<#>15

These words of advice are applicable to all of us. The young mother who feels that the days of diapers and dishes will never end, the single woman trying to find her niche, the middle-aged woman with wrinkles and arthritis starting to appear, and the older woman who wonders where she fits in, all need to ask, "What does this situation require of me?" Then we can choose a course of action and pray for strength and faith to find joy promised to us wherever we find ourselves on the path of life. When we accept our own situations, we can give a helping hand to those around us.

President David O. McKay wrote, "Our lives are wrapped up with the lives of others and we are the happiest when we contribute to their happiness."<#>16 Christ admonishes us, "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." (Luke 22:32.) We are challenged to strengthen ourselves in the faith and then strengthen others.

I suspect that those two admonitions run concurrently. It seems to me that whoever helps a sister grows stronger herself, whoever teaches a lesson is a greater learner than her students, whoever gives service to another is the recipient of increased love. Nevertheless, we do need to be aware that with us always are those who need a helping hand, who need to feel noticed and accepted and loved.

One winter Sabbath my husband and I were attending a stake conference. As often happens, a member of the stake presidency took Elder Ashton in to greet the Primary children, who were meeting separately. He spoke to them briefly, patted the heads of a few children sitting close to him, and left to join the main body of the conference. As the two men were walking down the hall, they heard the running of small feet and a voice calling, "Elder Ashton." Marv stopped, waited for a little boy to catch up to him, and asked, "What can I do for you?" Looking up with hurt in his eyes, the young lad said, "You didn't pat my head." Marv gave the young man an extra pat or two, ruffled his blond hair a bit, and was rewarded as the Primary child smiled and ran back to his class. Only a pat on the head, but just what this child needed. He was assured that he was as important as those on the front row.

It seems to me that one of our important roles as daughters of God is to be givers of pats. The touch of a hand, a word of appreciation, or an expression of love—as small as these things seem to be, they can help people reach their potential. Our little day-to-day acts of love and positive encouragement water spiritual seeds and help them grow in all of us. By showing our love to others, we give them added hope that they are loved by Christ. And if we show our love for the word of God, perhaps others will experiment with the Word and believe enough to plant the seed of faith in their lives.

It is true that we are encouraged to plant our own seeds of faith in fertile soil and keep them well watered and nourished, but none of us does that task completely alone. In addition to the women and men of the scriptures, great women and men in our lives have pulled some of the weeds from around our seeds and handed us watering cans to revive wilting plants. As sisters in God's kingdom we can, and are obligated to, nourish each other in the faith.

This assignment needn't be overwhelming. I'm reminded of a couple we met who had lived most of their lives on the East Coast. Missionaries had given them the lessons a few times but had never been able to baptize them. When our paths crossed, they were living in Idaho and had just come into the Church. As we heard their story, we asked what changed their minds about baptism. "The quiet living of the gospel by our next-door neighbors," they replied. "We wanted what they had."

The wife had a deep love for music and musical talent she hadn't developed since her school years. Her first assignment was to direct the music for Relief Society, and she was thrilled about her calling. I stopped to think how some of us react to a call. Have you ever said, "Oh no—not that job." Sometimes it takes a person with a new perspective to help us realize that Church calls are more than "just a job." God helps us develop our talents, which strengthen not only ourselves but others as we share our God-given gifts and take part in the programs the Church offers.

Throughout the world, excited sisters two by two or older couples with a sparkle in their eyes are stalwarts in the mission fields. How mission presidents plead, "Send us more couples." Most live in circumstances much less comfortable than they had at home, but they are sharing talents developed through a lifetime of living the gospel. They nourish the faith of all whose lives they touch. They are eager to tell us of their wonderful experiences. They share their talents, as President Spencer W. Kimball counseled: "Our great need, and our great calling, is to bring to the people of this world the candle of understanding to light their way out of obscurity and darkness and into the joy, peace, and truths of the gospel."<#>17 Our missionaries are bringing that candle to many all over the world.

Examples of courage and faith strengthen all of us. A few weeks ago we sat at a luncheon with a couple who were on their way to the Gilbert Islands to fill their second mission. Their dedication and enthusiasm were very evident, even though they knew of the "less than comfortable" living conditions they would find there. Only as we parted did we learn that just a week and a half earlier they had lost a son to leukemia. Tears glistened in the father's eyes as he told us about this outstanding young man. My faith was strengthened by their courage.

If we can live gospel principles with quiet dignity, we can be an influence for good among all people. Sister Belle Spafford, after at first being shunned by the National Council of Women, went on to serve as their president for two terms. She said, "In my experience in working with non-Latter-day Saint women, in the main women of good conscience but living by man-defined rather than God-revealed truths, I have countless times had to call upon all the courage I possessed in order to stand firm for what I knew to be right. In doing so, I have never once lost a friend—temporarily perhaps, but never permanently."<#>18 She respected the beliefs and points of view of her associates in that organization, but in no wise adopted them if they ran counter to what she believed. Yet she became one of the most highly esteemed members. They created new jobs to keep her on their executive board.

Edward Markham's poem "A Creed" describes the results of nourishing those around us:

There is a destiny that makes us brothers. None goes his way alone. All that we send into the lives of others Comes back into our own.<#>19

Alan Loy McGinnes says it this way: "Self-confidence, like happiness, is slippery when we reach out to grasp it for its own sake. Usually it comes as a by-product. We lose ourselves in service or work, friendship or love, and suddenly one day we realize we are confident and happy."<#>20

As Seneca wrote: "Soil, no matter how rich, could not be productive without cultivation, and neither could our minds." And neither can our faith. Day by day, week by week, month by month, we must nourish our faith and the faith of those with whom we associate. It is in this process of learning how to sink our spiritual roots deep and anchor them in the Savior and His message—and then in helping those within our sphere of influence to do likewise—that all women share common ground. We have many programs in which we may take part. We may think we are helping the bishop or even the Lord, but every time we participate, we are the ones who benefit.

Challenges are ever present. But always when we have done our best, the helping hand of the Lord is reaching out for us to grasp. How grateful I am to live in this time when the gospel is here on earth to point us in the right direction.

Regardless of where we are in the special world of women, we can handle our problems with wisdom and dignity by combining faith and works. Alma reconfirms this point with this counsel: "Whosoever shall put their trust in God shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions, and shall be lifted up in the last day." (Alma 36:3.)

To recall the poem with which I began:

We are so much like violins Frames, with sensitive strings The touch of the hand That holds the bow Determines the music it brings.

May the notes each of us plays be written on the staff of the gospel of Jesus Christ. In the eyes of God, nobody is a nobody. Each of us possesses gifts that make her distinct. We can recognize these qualities and develop them by working diligently, by using the opportunities offered by the Church, and by exercising patience and faith.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is true and is our guiding light.

NOTES
