Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Mothers Who Are Widowed or Divorced

MARILYNNE TODD LINFORD

To prepare materials for this article, I interviewed and listened to as many mothers who were single parents as I could. I quickly found that although these mothers are often lumped into one category, to do justice to this important subject, I had to divide the article into two sections: mothers who are divorced and mothers who are widowed. Although they have many similar needs there is one key difference. The divorcée is usually left to fend for herself, whereas the widow usually receives comfort and support from many sources.

Mothers Who Are Divorced

Think of the hub of a spoked wheel. The hub is the woman who is parenting alone. If the woman became single because of the death of her spouse, think of the spokes supporting her from all directions: his immediate and extended family, her immediate and extended family, friends, coworkers, ward members, neighbors, Bible teachings ("Visit the fatherless and the widow in their affliction"), the law (the widow usually receives all that she and her husband had, but the divorcée gets, at best, half), the insurance company, the mortuary staff, the greeting-card companies who make thousands of cards for the widow—but what would a card say to the divorcée?

Now think of the hub as a divorcée. She is often left in an unrealistic suspension without the spokes of a support system. She may be a victim of unsympathetic or gossiping neighbors, who suddenly begin to criticize her if she leaves garbage cans out, if her lawn isn't groomed, or if her children spend time alone in the house. Other spokes that detach themselves include financial security, an intimate other to touch and talk to, and a labor market that views a divorced woman as being temporary or in transition so that promotions and raises go to others.

One of the spokes that no longer supports her is usually her in-laws. This is especially unfortunate when the in-laws have been an integral part of the family's life before the divorce. When their support, love, and attention are gone, the woman feels not only divorced from her husband but also from his family, who also had been her family.

Even well-meaning friends, neighbors, and ward members separate themselves from the divorcée. "Some of the ward members suddenly became distant," was a frequent phrase I heard. "I felt they wanted to be helpful, but they didn't know how. So instead of trying, they avoided me. It was an awkward situation."

Another divorcée said it this way: "Sometime during the first few months after my divorce, I remember someone saying to me that it was not going to be easy to be a divorced woman. They said that single women would not be comfortable around me because I had been married, and married women would not be comfortable around me because I wasn't married. Although this was not always the case, it did not take long to discover that I did not fit into most groups. Even within the Church it became very apparent that most people could not relate to someone who is divorced. No one seemed to be sure how to treat me."

One of the spokes is the children. A divorced mother has to endure increased mother abuse. This makes her a victim in her own home. Children have various ways of showing their frustration about the divorce, and usually mother is the one who takes the brunt of it. Instead of rallying around her and helping her in her time of need, they often have such insecurities and fears of their own that they make her life more difficult.

On top of all this separation is the physical burden of doubled responsibility, doubled workload, and quadrupled stress. The divorcée suddenly has to care totally for the home, the car, the paperwork (like taxes, time payments, and insurance), the finances, the children, what to do on holidays, what traditions to keep, the spirituality in the home, and so forth.

A divorced woman may also victimize herself with self-defeating behaviors. She may feel burdened with guilt even when the divorce was not her fault or idea. She may feel alone and lonely and yet not be willing to do anything about it. She may spend hours, even years, in "if only" and "what if" thoughts. She may feel that she has failed and that there is no hope. Her dreams are gone. She feels fear, hate, remorse, and especially rejection. She may wallow in self-pity or have moments when she is relieved it is all over, vacillating between highs and lows, peaks and valleys. But the mood is usually deep down in the valley of depression and negative thoughts. It is no wonder with all this mental, emotional, physical and psychological turmoil that the divorcée's self-esteem is low. One divorcée said, "My self-esteem didn't exist."

Another said, "In the early years after my divorce, I was not in control of my self-esteem or my emotions. I was at the mercy of the whims of other people and situations. My self-esteem depended on whether I had a good or bad day. If my daughter had a day of misbehaving, or the money wasn't able to stretch as far as is needed to, my self-esteem dropped. I became a failure at everything."

And still another said, "At first my bad days outnumbered the good days, and the good days were just not enough to build my self-esteem. I could not weather the bad days. I was aware of this at the time but just did not seem to have the control that I needed to turn this around."

The divorcée does not have a flood of visitors expressing sympathy, or cards and letters stating love, or flowers as tangible symbols of concern. Instead, she faces awkward silence and shifted eyes to avoid eye-to-eye contact. She is divorced from most of those support systems she has been accustomed to. She is a victim of an unsuccessful marriage, and everyone and everything seems to pile on top of her while she is down.

After the initial shock wears off, there are stages of adjustment that each divorcée moves through. Sometimes the progress is negligible. There are days, months, or maybe even years when no real progress is felt. During that time, the divorcée must first have hope that there is something to live for and then keep plowing on.

All the above may sound hopeless. But, if divorce is an end, it is also a beginning. At a certain point, she will say to herself, "I think I'm going to make it. I think I can cope. I think I am in control once more." When the control comes back, the divorcée is no longer a victim. When she starts to act upon her situation, when the positive begins to overtake the negative, when instead of feeling rejected, she "leans on His ample arm," and when she begins to think outward to help a new divorcée, at that point the divorce becomes an opportunity.

A woman who is divorced has opportunities to forgive. She has opportunities to forget. She has opportunities for Christlike love.

If she conquers fear, hate, and guilt; if she can learn to be independent and self-sustaining; if she can grow emotionally, spiritually, intellectually, and physically; if she can take control of the eight ball that life has placed in her pocket, she has lifted herself far above what others normally achieve.

I understand that when a bone of the body is broken, the point of fracture actually becomes the strongest place in the bone when it is healed. The divorcée can become stronger than the rest of us when she is healed, because of all she has endured and risen above.

One of the women I interviewed wrote a letter to me describing the progression of her feelings. It read as follows:

"One spring day I returned home to find an unexpected letter from my husband of nearly twelve years—a letter of goodbye.

"At first I had a difficult time coping with anything at all. I wanted to curl up and die. I felt as if my muscles wouldn't work. I knew I could not care for myself and certainly not for my children. I could not even get out of bed. (At least, this is what I thought.)

"The days following the letter were so desperate that I cannot look back on them without the same awful pains returning to my chest, making it difficult to breathe. I didn't want to go on. Every time I managed to go to sleep, I would awaken to the nightmare of realizing all over again what had happened.

"Fortunately, though, no one came to my rescue. I was forced to care for myself and the children. They still needed to be fed and have their laundry done. This was a real blessing because I had to make myself go through the motions of normalcy.

"It was an agonizing effort to take care of my children's needs. I was inconsolable. Surely there was something I could do. My mind darted in every direction trying to grab on to something to make sense of my situation—first hating myself, then hating him for the pain he had inflicted.

"I found that routine was not enough to take my mind off myself. I decided to go back to school. There was a need to force myself to think about other things because the more I dwelt on my own problems, then the longer the wounds stayed open with no chance to heal.

"When nothing was any comfort, I turned to prayer. My Heavenly Father was the only one I felt could understand my grief. He sent the Comforter, and over the days and weeks and months as I prayed, gradually there came a peaceful feeling. At first the feeling came and went. It was as if I were being dragged back from the edge of a precipice, into which if I fell, I would be lost forever.

"Finally this peaceful feeling grew until after about a year, I felt an almost constant radiation of warmth inside. I began to feel new hope, which increased until I felt like praising the Lord continually. I couldn't wait to be on my knees. My life became a constant prayer. This, is spite of problems and overwhelming responsibilities with my children, became a joyful time. I knew I could not take care of the children alone, and He became my constant companion."

If you are not divorced, be grateful. Show your gratitude by going the extra mile for every divorcée you meet. "Bear one another's burden." (Mosiah 18:8.) As I have interviewed these divorcées, my heart has filled with compassion for them. In every case, they do not deserve what life has handed them, but they are striving to make the very best of their future. Do not judge them. Extend the hand of friendship. Be a positive influence in their lives. Try to lift at least one of their many burdens.

If you are divorced, hang in there. Fortunately it does not matter what life does to you, but what you do to life. You really only have two choices: you can give up, let life continue to push you around, and let outside forces determine your self-esteem, or you can force yourself to believe in yourself and, therefore, repair and build your self-esteem.

Mothers Who Are Widowed

Widows are different from divorcées. A widow suffers grief, extreme feelings of loss, and goes through the trauma of making a new life for herself, but she usually does not suffer the same devastating blow to her self-esteem that the divorced woman does.

I do not know if a larger sampling of young Mormon widows would confirm my theory, but each widow I talked to was much more at peace with the world and had a higher self-esteem than the women who were divorced. At least, the recovery time for divorcées appears to be longer.

The widows who responded to my questionnaire seem to have a special feeling that perhaps God had allowed them to become widowed for a specific purpose. They seem to be anxious to discover what that purpose is and work out their problems to the best of their ability. This is not to say that there aren't periods of self-pity, depression, and overwhelming stress because of the workload and responsibility. That would be an understatement. But they seem to have an undercurrent of ultimate faith to see them through. Here are some responses that illustrate that faith:

Linda: "At first when the realization hit me that I was alone, the feeling was one of fright and worry and of being incapable of doing everything alone. I have never considered myself single, however. I still feel married and become very resentful when I receive literature from the special interest group. That may seem strange to others, but I am still married. As I have worked hard and as the time since Eric's death has increased, life has progressed and my self-esteem has risen to probably a higher level than before I was widowed. I now see that I can do it. I can manage alone—not that it's pleasant."

Marcie: "After the funeral I was anxious to get back to our home and keep my family unit intact. I didn't want to become an extension of my parents' family. I wanted to be home with my little family. I felt that if there was a place Dave's spirit would come, it would be to our home. I wanted to keep things as much the same for the children as possible. I wanted their routine to be back to normal quickly."

Patti: "My own will to survive and make the best of every situation has been a help to me. I determined to be happy, and that comes from my testimony that there will be a reunion with my family someday. I feel Bob is just away on a trip . . . he seems close. I do not feel terrible anguish and loneliness, but then I have family around and a very full schedule every day. I try to keep busy at night too, but nights are the worst."

I asked these women, "What are the hardest things about being widowed?" They answered as follows:

Tara: "My biggest problem with being a single parent is that I have no one to discuss any problems with. The decisions I make weigh heavily as to whether they are right or wrong. I try to ask myself how Tom would have handled the situation."

Patti: "Sometimes it is hard to look at couples and at my friends who are having babies. I occasionally have to force myself to be happy for them."

Marcie: "The twenty-four-hour-a-day responsibility is sometimes just too much. At first, I didn't even have a way to say, `Take the children for an hour and let me take a bath.' Little things—even going to the store—seemed like a big deal."

Linda: "It is hard to find other singles my age. There really aren't a lot of young widows. The girls who were divorced or never married—well, we just don't have a lot in common. I am more comfortable with the friends I already had."

Tara: "I don't really have anyone I can talk to who understands. I think I have to be a superwoman to everybody. I don't want it to show when I'm depressed because that is like soliciting sympathy. That's not helpful because people give you too much. I just never let my barriers down."

Patti: "When you are so used to having a constant companion, it's hard to ask someone to do something with you. Many times I would rather go shopping alone or to a concert alone, for instance, than go to the trouble of asking someone to go with me."

Tara: "It is hard to be in groups when the ladies are talking about what their husbands are doing. I come home burdened by that sometimes. I don't know what my husband is doing, and the ladies would be uncomfortable if I expressed what I think he is doing in the spirit world. But then I say to myself, `Hey, you can't feel bad about loving someone and missing him.'"

Linda: "I miss the sweet, complimentary things my husband used to say to me. That is gone. It is easy for me to get discouraged because I don't get complimented any more."

Marcie: "When I finally was persuaded that I should date, I set myself up for many discouraging times. Blind dates are the pits. One guy called and said his family was making him call me, that he was under a lot of pressure to take me out. So, he wanted to get it over with as soon as possible. I did go out with him. I can't believe now that I patronized him. Another said he wouldn't take me out until he had seen me. He came over, left his car running, came to the door, took one look at me, and then walked out. He never did ask me out. At the time it really hurt. Now I see how funny it was."

Linda: "Lots of people are inspired as to whom I'm supposed to marry. It's never that they feel I might have a fun date or a nice time or friendship. No, it's always that they have had it revealed to them the man I am supposed to marry. Those kinds of things are shattering. I wonder why I have to be exposed to all of this. Those times would shake me up. Then I'd have to stabilize myself again."

I also asked, "What helped you adjust to your situation?"

Marcie: "I needed time to myself. I took time to grieve. I kept track of my feelings in my journal."

Tara: "At the time of my husband's death, the Spirit of the Holy Ghost was constantly with me; it carried me through the funeral. After the funeral, when I didn't feel the Spirit with me all the time, I'd always compare myself to those times I felt such peace and joy. Then I'd feel guilty about being down. I'd think, `Why can't I sustain that peaceful feeling? I must not be a very good person if I can't remember all those neat things and maintain an eternal perspective.' The minute I'd feel depressed, I'd feel guilty and that would just depress me more. It took me a while to allow myself that down time and say to myself, `It's OK.'"

Linda: "I went to some lectures for single mothers and learned how to manage the stress that comes from feeling overwhelmingly responsible for everything. I found that I didn't have to do everything all at once. I was in charge, and I didn't have to feel pressure from others if I didn't want to."

Patti: "Some people were so gushy with sympathy that I couldn't stand it. Others acted like I didn't deserve any sympathy. Like my dad. He would always say things like, `Who do you think you are, someone special? Get up and get going.' He would let me know I wasn't going to get any sympathy from him. He always pulled me up by my bootstraps. From him I could take it. It really helped."

Marcie: "So often I'd see all the things I didn't have instead of all the things I did. I had to make lists of my blessings. So often I felt overwhelmed with the things I wanted and needed but couldn't change. Making lists of blessings helped me."

Tara: "Writing in my journal when I was feeling really up was a great help. Then I could go back to those places in my journal and see I was way up there once. If I got there once, I could do it again. I know exactly where the ups are written. My journal falls open to them."

Linda: "My greatest source of spiritual strength came from going to the temple. I felt a closeness, a peace, a promise of reunion."

Next, I asked, "What advice would you give to new widows, and what would you do differently if you had it to do over again?"

Marcie: "If I had to do it again I would definitely be more selfish in that I would consider my education and my needs as important as my husband's and children's. I would try to prepare for the possibility that I might be a widow. I think someone called it widow preparedness."

Linda: "The advice I would give to newly widowed women would be to get involved in hobbies, school, helping others—anything to keep too busy to dwell on yourself."

Patti: "Long before a woman becomes widowed, she should prepare herself for the eventuality. Know everything about your husband's business or profession—the financial end of things. Know about your insurance, where his will is, how to run the business of the family before you have to do it by yourself. Learn about money and how to manage it. Your husband might not want you to know about all these things and may say he doesn't want you to worry your pretty little head about it . . . but believe me, it will be more of a worry afterward if you don't know anything about insurance, legalities, and finances."

Tara: "At the funeral the bishop said, `Trust in the Lord. He is fair. This may not seem fair to you right now, but you will be compensated. The rules of life are fair, but sometimes you have to wait into the eternities to understand the reasons.' Every time I feel down, I try to remember and believe those words."

The last question I asked was: "Are there any compensations right now, in this life, to being a widow?"

Linda: "I think I have been truly blessed with wonderful health and strength to accomplish the almost impossible right now. The insurance money paid the mortgage and gives us enough each month that along with my part-time work, we will be just fine. My job is pleasant. My prayer is that I can carry on long enough to get each of the children safely on their feet. Yes, I feel I am watched over a little bit more than married women, by my Father in Heaven and by my family and by the ward."

Patti: "I feel His grace compensates. I think widows get extra help. I know I'm not different from anyone else except I have greater needs. So I receive more help."

Tara: "I'm afraid I have painted a rosy picture. Well, it is not easy being a widow, not any part of it. But I am not angry anymore. I trust my Heavenly Father. I feel much more dependent on him than I used to. In that way, it has been worth all the grief and pain and trouble. I am in his hands. If we had been separated because of a miserable divorce, that would be a tragedy. But we are just separated for a time. It is not a tragedy, just an awesome inconvenience."

Marcie: "One night I was so desperate. I had never struggled with prayer before. I admitted to Heavenly Father that even though I had so many blessings, I had so many weaknesses and was having such a difficult time adjusting. I was very specific. I had been given so much but I was struggling. That night, on my knees, the Spirit came to me so strong. It was total friendship, total love. I'd never experienced anything like it before—but then I never had had the urgency and need before.

"The things he told me that night were to press forward. Then I was told seven things I was to do, that I should accomplish. I remember mentally writing them down. The prayer was really long. The Spirit was so strong. I didn't want to say amen because I knew the Spirit would leave and it would be reality again.

"I wrote down the seven things the next day. They were the things the prophet has told us over and over. I remember when I received them I thought, `This is so personal, so significant.' But then I saw they were what I knew all along: saying daily prayer, reading daily scripture, eating right, exercising, having family home evening, getting to Church meetings, and having special activities and vacations with the children. So the gospel applies to everybody. The principles work for everybody no matter what the situation. I am grateful Heavenly Father saw fit to reveal them to me in my time of greatest need."

I asked each of the women I interviewed what advice they would give to women who were newly divorced or widowed. Here are their responses:
