Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Today Is the First Day of the Rest of Your Life

JOYCE BACA

It's really true—today is the first day of the rest of your life. And like everything else in life, it comes to you with multi-faceted potential. You can make it a wonderful, positive day, or you can allow it to be negative and painful. Or, even worse, you can be indifferent to it.

Divorce has the same potential. It can devastate you; it can bring freedom from old pain yet bring in new pain; or it can become one of the most powerful growth experiences of your life. This is illustrated in the example of a friend who spent several months of her life caring for a bedridden woman with a broken leg. When she asked the woman how the injury had occurred, the woman related the experience of being told by her husband that he was divorcing her. In the tradition of the Middle Ages, she "took to her bed." Unfortunately, she was wealthy enough to stay there for twenty-three years while her children grew up around her. After this period of time, she decided to end her period of mourning and self-pity. When she got out of bed for the first time, her legs were unable to support her weight because of long disuse. She fell, and one of her legs was seriously injured.

My friend, herself recently divorced, saw the obvious lesson (as well as the humor) in that experience. She committed herself to "get up and walk" through her divorce.

My own experience wasn't so much a demonstration of strength as of survival. I crawled. Almost literally, I dragged through nightmarish days and faced a wall of almost unbearable hurt. I learned that many others who are capable of deep and intense emotion shared my depth of pain. Others, however, responded much less traumatically. Some even experienced very little suffering at all. I learned that people respond to divorce in different ways and also that growth from divorce, like most growth, is developmental in nature.

In physical development we crawl, we walk, then we run. In spiritual development we exercise faith, in time it is rewarded, then it increases. In divorce, too, I believe that there are certain stages we work through to reach the point of healing. We can experience, for instance, bare survival, anger, learning, and healing, though everyone does not experience all these stages. For many there are periods of euphoria, however short lived, that affirm the sense of freedom, joy, and removal of heavy responsibilities. Furthermore, for many, emotional states may fluctuate so often that the person experiencing them feels he or she is on an emotional roller coaster.

One of the most difficult emotional experiences one can have in this life is to feel that emotions are brought about by outside forces. The loss of the sense of agency can be one of the most traumatic effects of divorce. We may feel that other people or circumstances are in charge of our lives and that we are at their mercy. That in itself can be turned to a positive: it can help us develop a deep appreciation for free agency and its role and purpose in our eternal progression.

Psychologists have identified several stages that people who experience deaths of loved ones must work through. People experiencing divorce will often work through the same stages. There is, however, one main difference. The person experiencing death usually has a large support system. Culture, family, church, society—all reach out to help the widow or widower. The rites and customs help the person to make the adjustments and allow and encourage mourning.

The divorcée is not so fortunate. People don't usually respond at all because the situation itself is awkward. If they do respond, they're faced with the problem of what to say—congratulations? I'm sorry? Jason Towner, in his lecture at a seminar for divorcées at Glorietta, New Mexico, August 1977, made this statement: "Divorce is the only painful human experience for which society has no rite and Hallmark has no card." Actually, a card for divorce would be very simple to make; it would have to contain only the five magic words: "How can I help you?"

Many people feel that the party who sought divorce has solved all her problems and needs no help. Experience shows, however, that many who sought the divorce share at least as much, if not more, pain than the one who was divorced. The person who sought the divorce tends to experience greater guilt than the partner, while the person who was divorced by his spouse tends to experience stronger feelings of rejection. When children are involved, guilt may increase throughout the years as the parents see the children suffer the consequences of their choice. Divorce frequently arouses guilt, anger, and other strong, negative emotions.

As with many things in life, recognizing patterns in divorce is important. These patterns may require us to seek the help of others. One woman who was in favor of the divorce when it happened was unable to deal with the trauma she felt afterward. This led her to seek the help of a psychiatrist. She felt guilt about having to turn to someone she had considered to be only for those whose "minds need help." Had my own financial resources permitted, I would have sought the same means of help.

Most people who suffer severe physical trauma, such as loss of a limb, would immediately seek medical help without feeling any guilt whatsoever. Those experiencing divorce, which involves a tearing in half, especially in cases where a couple have been trying to follow the scriptural admonition to become one with their spouse, should not feel any guilt either about seeking professional help. Though the marriage may have been a fragmented one, the fact remains that every marriage consists of some measure of togetherness and dependence. Sooner or later, divorced people must learn to live without part of themselves, and usually, the longer the marriage, the more ingrained are the habits and the greater the degree of pain.

Seeking help in difficulty is wisdom. Our Father in Heaven does not intend for us to be alone. In Moses 3:18 the Lord God says, "It was not good that man should be alone." In Eccl. 4:9-10 we are told, "Two are better than one. . . . For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow." One powerful witness we have that Heavenly Father does not intend for us to walk through life alone is his gift of the companionship of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost will comfort, guide, and direct us.

People can deal much more effectively with the patterns experienced during divorce if they understand them. The psychiatrist mentioned earlier described divorce as a roller coaster. There are periods of high emotions and low emotions, with few plateau periods initially. The emotional cycle could be graphed in this manner:

Gradually the peaks and valleys become less sharp, and there are longer time periods between them. The pattern now resembles a roller coaster track:

As time progresses, the lows become periods of depression rather than intense anxiety and are less frequent. There are longer, more "normal" times. "Time heals all wounds" is considered by many to be a cliché. However, in the case of divorce, that statement holds much truth. Time helps damper the pain, decrease the intensity of emotions, and bring about healing.

We are also blessed to be able to seek the help of the Church and its members during times of need. Joseph Smith compared the function of the Church to a wheel, admonishing those at the top to help elevate those at the bottom. We are to help and serve each other.

One day during a Relief Society lesson that dealt with helping the single parent, the teacher asked me to take a few minutes to answer this question: "How has the Church helped you deal with the problems of being divorced and being a single parent?" I did not know in advance that I was going to be asked to respond to this question, so I was brutally honest. I said that most of my help came from outside the Church. Because divorce is foreign to the LDS community, many people do not know how to help. I have learned that it isn't because they don't care; rather, it is because most members don't know how to respond to divorce.

I expressed the resentment I felt because, in the six years I had belonged to the Church, there were four visits from home teachers. I tried to express how it was to live in a home without the blessings afforded by the Melchizedek Priesthood. I tried to help these women realize that, if their husbands were assigned to homes without the priesthood, their husbands' priesthood would be the example to the sons in those homes of what the priesthood is. I tried to express the anger felt when a twelve-year-old boy raised in the Church asked, "what do we do when the home teachers come?"

I expressed the pain felt by the divorced member in a church that is family-oriented. My son's feelings about a father-son outing when his father lives four thousand miles away were difficult to deal with. I also expressed gratitude to a bishop who was thoughtful enough to invite my son to accompany his family to the activity.

Another sister in the Relief Society meeting similarly expressed her own and her children's experiences. Because member teenagers rejected her children and excluded them from social activities, her children's needs for peer acceptance led them to associations with nonmembers. Because of those associations her children are no longer active, and she fights feelings of resentment because of this.

In each of these cases, the Church helps. The Church has designed programs to meet the needs of its members. But if the youth of divorced parents are excluded by Church youth, the programs themselves cannot provide the necessary help. The Church wisely provides the home teaching program. But if members choose not to honor, let alone magnify, their callings as home teachers, then the program cannot help others. Church programs can be only as effective as the members allow them to be.

Wallace Ashcroft once taught my four-year-old son a great lesson about home teaching. My son wanted very much to see what home teaching was like and pleaded with his father to be allowed to go. He was told that if the companion, Brother Ashcroft, consented, he would be allowed to accompany them. My son very carefully dressed himself and stood by the door, eagerly awaiting Brother Ashcroft's arrival. When he came inspiration prompted him to say, "This boy needs to learn the importance of home teaching." Later he said, "In this church we would have no trouble getting many men or women to go to Jackson County to build New Jerusalem. But we can't get everybody to do their home or visiting teaching." We should realize that the power to build the New Jerusalem comes by making the sacrifices involved in the little things like home teaching.

Many divorced people have had experiences with one or more Church members who did not accept the divorce situation and who responded to them and their children with unkindness and lack of understanding. But is it fair to blame the Church for such actions? After all, doesn't the Church teach us to practice love and compassion?

Jesus Christ himself warned us about judging others. In Matt. 7:1, he said, "Judge not, that ye be not judged." If we resort to criticism and condemnation, we hurt only ourselves. The better way is to treat others with the compassion we need so much ourselves.

Divorce and its consequences have a lifetime effect on the people involved. The consequences are real and cannot be ignored. Divorce is not an end, especially when children are involved, but is instead a drastic change in the relationship between two people.

Just as we can't really have an exson or an ex-daughter, perhaps we can't really have an ex-wife or an ex-husband. We can have a former husband or a former wife, which indicates that a previous relationship has ended or changed. But the depth of emotions and feelings that accompanied the courtship, the marriage, the problems and the couple's inability to solve them, and the divorce itself all continue. They have to be either neutralized or converted to the Christlike love we know as charity. If they remain unresolved, they can become spiritually destructive.

This is why divorce holds so much potential for growth. Coping with those feelings can generate actions that will lead to developing our celestial potential. Forgiveness, patience, compassion—these are only three attributes required for our exaltation that can be developed through a divorce experience. Divorce is not positive and is certainly not an experience to be desired, but if it comes, we can turn it to our advantage by growing meaningfully through it. I am grateful to a Heavenly Father who taught me how to make it a positive experience.

Today is the first day of the rest of your life. It has unlimited potential for growth. It offers you the opportunity to begin again. It offers a road to Jesus Christ, who waits to show you the deeper meaning in words like comfort and strength during adversity, and it offers you his word, his experience, and his love to rely upon. It offers you the support of a church full of brothers and sisters waiting to help you. As soon as you open your arms and heart to them, Christ uses them as his agents to help bring about healing. Divorce may be an end, but it is also an opportunity to grow.
