Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Peace after Divorce

ELAINE S. MARSHALL

I have put aside traditional self-help lessons on how to live happily ever after divorce. I, like all of you, divorced or not, do not live happily ever after, but I have begun to find peace.

My problems in dealing with divorce include an aversion to the word itself. I have been divorced almost eight years and still find great difficulty in saying the word divorce. Instead, I usually say, "I am alone," or avoid comment. This is the first time that I have publicly and directly addressed the issue of my divorce. The word is still difficult for me to face.

My divorce languished legally for nearly two years before a two-day trial. Just as I hoped it was over, the decision was appealed to the Utah State Court of Appeals and then on to the Utah State Supreme Court. The entire litigation process lasted almost eight years. It was heard by two domestic commissioners and nine judges, two of whom were women. I have often wondered what might have happened if four or five judges had been women, or even if the proportion of men to women had been reversed, and nine women had heard our case. I have wondered if a larger perspective from women might have changed the focus from property to personal welfare, from hearings to healing. As the years passed, similarity between the legal "facts" and "arguments" and our lived reality diminished, numbing my perception of the outcome. The final settlement seemed fair enough. It is hard to remember who "won."

When the divorce began, I was vulnerable and exhausted, almost extinguished, as I was forced to face the end of the most significant part of my life. Seeking employment, I went back to a nursing friend for whom I had previously worked. She had been good to me, and she knew a little about my situation. She had experienced her own divorce two years earlier. This time my interview with her was more serious than before. I wasn't looking for a part-time job to help pay for summer vacation. I now needed a career.

I was wounded, weepy, and philosophical—consumed by fears and burdens in trying to hold my children together emotionally and spiritually and simply trying to survive. Uncharacteristically aloof to my tears, my friend said something like, "Elaine, what you need is money." I was shocked. Her statement seemed irrelevant and brutal. At that point, money meant little to me in comparison to my overwhelming emotional and spiritual hurts.

She continued, "I can see you are not getting the message." She then drew a dollar sign on a sticky note and pasted it to my chest. I left her, thinking that for the first time since I had known her she really did not understand. I soon revised my opinion, however, as I discovered the harsh reality of supporting a family on significantly decreased resources while also facing the major costs of divorce recovery: legal fees, school tuition, a car, selling a house and buying a house, child care, and a hundred other things.

Another surprising shock of divorce was the adversarial nature of the legal system itself. I am a nurse, so the sensitive care of sick or hurting people had been my professional obligation. I had anticipated that the judicial system would treat me and my family with similar careful concern. I was wrong. I was stunned to find the process to be absolutely—and requisitely—adversarial. My hopes of achieving any semblance of conciliation, resolution, or equanimity were out of step with the legal process. Being thrown into a costly public arena left me reeling with the sudden need for another difficult adjustment for survival. The requirement of the system for me to prepare and represent myself as an adversary against husband and father, rather than as advocate for the relief and healing of my family, impeded my early hopes for peace.

There are a few other things that those of us who are divorced wish were more widely understood. First, divorce is neither the beginning nor the end. It is only one chapter in the story. Divorce usually follows some very long, painful passages within a marriage, of which others are often unaware. Divorce often follows a long, draining history of hurt or betrayal. The divorcing person then must enter a threatening, new, life-changing scene at a time when he or she is already depleted, vulnerable, and suffering. The people who knocked at my door with offerings of help at the time I faced divorce came very late in the trauma chapter of my life story. I am grateful to such friends, but I wish that I had reached out to them earlier.

Second, healing and peace after divorce take time. Divorce is the loss of a dream, survival from trauma. Much time must pass before emotional, spiritual, physical, and social healing is possible. Be patient with us who divorce.

On the other hand, time alone will not heal. It is what you do with that time. For a divorcing person, most of that healing is done alone, but another part is done at the side of good friends. You need friends who will listen, people whose simple presence nurtures. Some friends do not need to do or say anything—they nourish by simply being there. Two friends walked with me for an hour every morning during the first year of separation. My memory is that I talked for the entire hour. We walked, I talked, and my friends listened. That was one of the greatest gifts of my life.

Finding peace after divorce requires life changes and some new areas of family focus. I was amazed at the resilience of my children and at their hunger for our recovery as a family. We started new, healing traditions. We had regular sleepovers in my bedroom, with one of us in the bed and the rest on the floor, rotating on different nights. Once forbidden territory became a campground for renewal. We now have regular prayer and family home evening. Such activities say, "We're still together and we are okay. We can grow through this together."

In divorce you need to face the reality of the situation, without denial, without trying to change or hold back the truth. I don't think children need to know everything about the process of divorce, but what they are told always needs to be true. Their questions need to be answered.

Understanding and using resources appropriately can be critical, especially in divorce. The confidence and support of a bishop or stake president are important for spiritual counsel, of a lawyer for legal counsel, of a therapist for emotional help, of an accountant for financial guidance, of friends and family for love. But it is equally important not to confuse the roles of such valuable relationships. The bishop is not the accountant; the lawyer is not the therapist. Under emotional stress, a divorcing person will often mistakenly want all needs met by each resource.

Don't be surprised when other realities continue alongside divorce. Children still get chicken pox, the car breaks down, the family reunion is still scheduled. Sometimes divorce seems an unfair complication to such events. The world should stop during a divorce. Nothing that taxes mind or spirit should be allowed to occur in a life coping with divorce. But life continues, with floods and snowstorms, with flat tires on the way to work, and with the school carnival needing cookies. Your divorce does not cause such events, make them worse or better, include or excuse you. Such things just happen.

Forgiveness is always an issue on both sides of marriage and divorce. But not distinguishing between what is and what is not forgiveness prevents healing. Tolerance of abuse is not forgiveness. If you need distance for safety, then get it. Excusing and rationalizing are not forgiveness. Sometimes the hardest thing you do is face up to the reality of assault and then forgive. Only then will forgiveness be a freeing release rather than unrealistic hope for change. We need to honor the truth of our own experiences and feelings, whether they be fear, betrayal, or relief.

I am also bothered by conversations about women who work or women who do not work, though my situation is accepted as exceptional and therefore "justified." I don't like to feel I am living a life that needs to be explained, excused, or justified. For one thing, if I am in an exceptional situation, I feel pressure to perform exceptionally. In other words, my children must behave better than my neighbors' children who live with two parents, my house has to be cleaner, my yard must look tidier. At work, I have to be smarter, quicker, and more productive. When there are only twenty-four hours in my day, it becomes a trap to think that because I feel different, I must always perform beyond the norm. I must try not to do that to myself—and we ought to not do that to each other.

When I told my family I was writing about peace after divorce, they laughed and said, "Tell them there isn't any!" I'm not telling you that. There is peace. Peace after divorce comes in the process of living. It happens after learning hard lessons. It occurs over time alongside family, friends, and professionals who care. It happens privately but also with many others who share the experience and understand. Peace emerges from pain and accompanies healing. It comes from confronting and accepting truth, from being willing to live and love and forgive and move forward. Divorce is still hard to say, but it has not closed the gate on my own path to life, love, and peace.
