Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Single Again

JANETTE HALES BECKHAM

As I anticipated speaking tonight, I thought how much I would rather talk with each of you one-on-one. Although most of us gathered here are single, our experiences are so varied that a private setting might be a better way to share. We do, however, have much in common. Singly we were born into this world, and singly we will depart.

Single members include individuals in countless circumstances. Yet when we realize that about 35 percent of the adults in the Church are single, we shouldn't feel so different.

I became single again when I was quite suddenly widowed some years ago. I can speak only from my own experience, but I have learned a good deal, and I have a few pet peeves. For example, as a single person I can make up my mind to go to a banquet alone, but why don't they ever set a table for five or seven or nine? And who started the false notion that single people have twice as much time when they have to do everything for themselves? I relate to your frustration and occasional anger, for some of the experiences that have brought us together are painful. You have helped me and taught me. I have loved your letters, your humor, your courage, your patience. You are helping me understand your experiences. You are helping my love for the gospel to become deeper and richer.

While visiting my son one summer, I appreciated an interpretation a ward member related of the parable of the Good Samaritan. You remember in Luke that a certain lawyer had asked the Master what he must do to inherit eternal life. After being told, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart . . . and thy neighbour as thy thyself," the man asked, "Who is my neighbour?" Jesus told of the man stripped of his raiment who was left wounded, even half dead. Those who might have helped passed him by. In this interpretation, the Good Samaritan who rendered service is our Savior, Jesus Christ. It was He who was unaccepted, even despised, by the Jewish people. We then are the wounded. He picks us up and ministers to our wounds and then takes us to an inn. He lingers long enough to be sure there are others to assume our care. He compensates the host for his effort. And then my favorite words: "Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee." In other words, whatever it takes to help those in need, it is not too much and He will repay the debt.

Many of us have had a time in our lives when we felt stripped of our security, left alone, wounded. Many too can testify that in times of devastation, they feel surprisingly supported, even suspended in love. When that feeling of support starts to leave, it could be a letdown, but perhaps that can be a reminder that a time of healing is a temporary time and soon we need to start taking more responsibility for ourselves.

The inn is a wonderful symbol. It is a temporary place—a place of transition. How many of us want to take up permanent residence as a guest of life? But if we make that choice, we would not as likely realize our potential or reach that destination of eternal life. No matter what our past experience, it is important to realize that we must prepare to move on.

After a major change in our lives, the journey seems different, even dangerous. Perhaps loving, even trusting, others is too much risk. At one point, I felt my heart was so covered with Band-Aids that I feared I might bleed to death in public.

When my husband was a medical student, he told me of a wise professor who said to a group of interns, "Remember, you put the stitches in to close the wound, but you don't knit the skin together. The miracle of healing takes place from the inside out." In this sense, the inn is a caring environment where healing can take place. The healing is a miracle. This is a time when we are open to new spiritual insights. A friend wisely told me not to be afraid of the wide range of my emotions as they would enlarge my heart and my understanding. Gradually I have learned that experience, even difficult experience, can increase our appreciation and our ability to understand and to care.

As I resumed my journey as a single parent, I had to make some new decisions. For years while my children were growing up, I had boldly said to them, "I would never ever miss something that I really wanted to do just because I didn't have a date." Those words came back to haunt me. I remember so vividly the fall of 1988, less than six months after becoming a widow. The football stadium that had been so exciting and so friendly looked so big and so lonely. I felt like a child standing alone in a coliseum in a foreign country, but you know about those feelings. Perhaps there was a place that was hard for you.

After considering the alternatives, I made a conscious decision to live as generously and courageously as I could until this life is finished. I went to ball games. I decided to run for the state legislature. When I wavered, my daughter Karen said, "Mom, wouldn't you rather have people ask, `How is your campaign going?' instead of, `How is your grieving going?'" Her wise words kept me going.

As a single person, I am aware of couples holding hands as they journey forward. I miss that companionship. I often long for someone to care about who cares about me and what I care about as much as I care about him and what he cares about. But how much of life we waste wanting things to be other than how they are. What really matters most is what we are doing with what we have. How gratifying to learn that life can be happy and fulfilling even when our first choice is not one of the options. Staying in the inn is necessary at times, but much of our learning takes place as we move on and try to move closer to our Heavenly Father. There are some things that I understand better because of experience. In order to have a productive and responsible life, I know I must avoid the natural tendency to be selfish or to relish comfort. I must avoid the tendency when hurt to turn inward and become afraid to continue. I am learning to accept the fact that suffering and misfortune are a part of the human condition.

Each of us is at times in need, but we don't need to be counted among those who pass by the needy.

Progress involves work. There is some work, whether we are married or single, that each of us must do alone; but we can be grateful that we can also work together at times, and we can support one another. As we move on with our lives, we must learn to see ourselves honestly and be aware of obstacles that will hold us back. We cannot always progress according to the expectations of others. Occasionally that means slowing down to be sure our footing is secure and even to eliminate a little baggage. Carrying old hurts or disappointments may keep us from our destination.

Wherever any of us are at this time, could we begin to have greater appreciation for the gospel of Jesus Christ and the gift of peace that passeth our understanding? The "wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable." (James 3:17.) I believe the joy that is available in this life is available to every man, woman, and child, for happiness is the "state of those that keep the commandments." (Mosiah 2:41.)

As we work to move forward and strengthen our lives, may we each in our own way become innkeepers—willing and able to do the work of the Master. What does He ask of us? That we love one another, as Paul taught the Corinthians, "that the members should have the same care one for another. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it. Now ye are the body of Christ." (1 Cor. 12:25-27.) I pray that this might be our common bond, that in this we may be single.
