Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

In the Covenant of Grace

CAROL CORNWALL MADSEN

An old Hebrew legend relates a conversation that Moses had with the Lord. In the story, Moses asked God to grant him three wishes, one of which was to explain by what law He governed the world. Why, Moses wondered, did He allow the just to suffer and the unjust to enjoy happiness or, at other times, permit both to be happy or both to suffer? In answer, God showed Moses His great treasure troves and explained the destination of each, including the various rewards for the good and the just—those people, He said, who give alms to the poor and care for widows and orphans. "But for whom is this treasure?" Moses asked when they came upon one of immense size, and God answered: "Out of the treasures that I have shown thee I give rewards to those who have deserved them by their deeds; but out of this treasure do I give to those who are not deserving, for I am gracious to those also who may lay no claim to My graciousness, and I am bountiful to those also who are not deserving of My bounty." Then he said to Moses, "Thou canst not grasp all the principles which I apply to the government of the world, but some of them I shall impart to thee. When I see human beings who have no claim to expectations from Me . . . but who pray to Me and implore Me, then do I grant their prayers and give them what they require for subsistence."<#>1

Moses expected an answer expressed in terms of logic and law, but the Lord answered him with spiritual truths that defied logic and transcended law. "I will meet the demands of justice and reward the good for their deeds," the Lord was saying to Moses, "but I will also serve the claims of mercy. My love extends to all, deserving of it or not." We can recognize the truth of this legend as we begin to understand the place of grace in our lives.

We have probably at times asked the same questions Moses asked. Like him, we tend to be justice oriented, programmed to expect rewards for good behavior and punishment for bad. But the equation begins to break down, and with it our sense of certitude, when our good efforts seem to go unrewarded and the undeserving seem to prosper. Only when we recognize that we ourselves are often undeserving of God's goodness do we begin to see the blessing it is that life is not wholly governed by our concept of justice, that there is, thankfully, a superior law by which God governs his world.

Paul explained to the Romans the transcendent power of this higher principle. "As by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all. . . . For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. . . . Where sin abounded," Paul concluded, "grace did much more abound." (Rom. 5:18-20.) Christ's sacrifice, he explained, allows grace to rule our destiny.

I believe we can learn something about this free gift from the parable of the prodigal son. (See Luke 15:11-32.) Our attention and empathy frequently focus on the faithful older brother, who stayed at his father's side, tending his own inheritance but receiving no celebration and feeling that his erring brother was unjustly rewarded. Perhaps we even tend to identify with him as we seek to live good lives ourselves. But who of us can claim to be the older son? Who of us has not left the Father's presence to tarry awhile in a sin-filled world, succumbing to our own weaknesses but yearning to return one day to our Father's house, even as a servant? The operative power in this story is grace, not justice. The parable is a reminder to us of the limitless reach of God's grace, and God's grace is our hope.

We are rightly taught that most blessings are earned, but as a result we sometimes come to see them as our "right." Such a concept, Lowell Bennion has cautioned, blurs our "vision of God's grace," so freely given.<#>2 We learn in Eph. 2:8-9 that "by grace are [we] saved through faith," but "not of [our]selves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast." "What we do by our own effort," Brother Bennion has suggested, "is to prepare ourselves to receive the gifts of Deity. . . . Grace," he says, "precedes, accompanies, and completes individual effort and merit."<#>3 Our faith is manifest in our works, in both our acceptance of the saving ordinances of the gospel and our Christian service. Our efforts show our willingness to follow God's plan for our salvation and to heed his word to "be not weary in well-doing." (D&C 64:33.) They are expressions of gratitude for his blessings, for that unmerited gift of life itself, which he has so graciously given us. They are opportunities to return good for good.

Remember the story of Jean Valjean, the major character in Victor Hugo's Les Miserables, the novel that has become such a moving musical production in recent years? At the beginning of the story, Jean Valjean has been released from prison after serving nineteen years for stealing a loaf of bread. As a former prisoner, he is unable to find a place to stay but is finally given refuge in the home of the bishop of Digne, who kindly offers him food and rest. During the night, however, Jean in desperation steals the bishop's silverware and flees. He is immediately captured and returned to the good bishop. Without any censure, the bishop not only gives Jean what he has stolen but also adds his silver candlesticks to the gift, asking only that he use the silver as a means of living an honest life. After nineteen years of undeserved punishment, Jean is given a new life through undeserved mercy. He commits his life thereafter to proving worthy of that merciful act. Grace begets grace.

There is a beautiful symmetry in the doctrines of grace and works. Balancing the Lord's counsel to be engaged in good works are comparable scriptural reminders that "it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Ne. 25:23.) The two are complementary. God's grace unlocks the door to salvation, and our faith and works lead us through it and take us closer to him. Both grace and works are freewill offerings—doing for others what they cannot do for themselves: God for us through his grace, and we for others through our works.

Sometimes, in our zeal to do well, we upset the symmetry. We tend to magnify works and forget grace. By defining well-doing as something beyond our daily commitments to family, work, and Church, as many of us do, we diminish the meaning and value of our good works on behalf of those nearest to us, our first responsibilities. In a recent reading of Prov. 31, which describes the virtuous woman, I found that out of sixteen verses that enumerate her qualities, fifteen praised her good works in behalf of her husband, her children, her servants, and the household for which she was responsible. (Prov. 31:10-31.) Whether our primary duties are in or out of the home, or whatever the makeup of our families or households, each of them makes its own claims on us, often leaving us little time and energy for additional well-doing. But life continually changes, and opportunities to serve beyond the needs of our immediate circle really do knock more than once. Were we to look in on our lady of Proverbs some years later, with her children grown and her household cares lessened, perhaps the ratio would be reversed and most of the verses would praise her good works beyond her household.

What I am suggesting, sisters, is that we remember that in our cycle of life there is a season for everything, and whatever we do that produces good, at home or abroad, can be counted as good works and well-doing. Even Eliza R. Snow, who continually urged the sisters to attend to their "social duties," also cautioned them to "let [their] first business be to perform [their] duties at home." "But," she promised, "inasmuch as you are wise stewards, . . . you will find that your capacity will increase, and you will be astonished at what you accomplish."<#>4

I would hope that when our need to be engaged in well-doing outpaces our physical capacity, the feelings of guilt that often beset us at those times would surrender to feelings of peace and gratitude for the place of grace in our lives. How often has God told us, My grace is sufficient for you? (See Ether 12:27.) Do we ever really ponder what that means? I think he wants us to give grace its due in our lives, to yield ourselves to that unearned blessing more often so that it might lighten our spiritual load and diminish our sense of inadequacy. I think it means to depend more than we do on the enabling power of God's grace to accept and meet our daily commitments, to realize, in short, as the popular hymn tells us, "Grace shall be as your day."<#>5

I also think that the Lord would have us remove the emotional and spiritual impediments we create for ourselves that hedge up our souls and deprive us of his Spirit. Perhaps you recall the dream of Martha Cragun Cox that was included in a Relief Society lesson some years ago. Martha was a plural wife and a schoolteacher in St. George in the 1880s, forced to support her children herself because of the federal prosecution of polygamists during that period. In her dream, Martha was bowed down by a heavy chain about her neck from which hung bundles containing the sorrows, disappointments, and resentments that she had allowed to grow and weigh so heavily upon her. Martha was told to place the heavy chain on a rod above the fireplace; then she removed the bundles and examined them one by one. She began to see how embittered she had become and how her resentments had grown far out of proportion to the wrongs she had sustained. She began to realize that the federal marshals, whom she had so bitterly resented, had not done nearly as much harm as they had the power to do; that the mail delivery service that had been imposed on her family to provide, though hard on her young sons, brought them needed income; that those who owed her money were just as poor as she was; and that the 10 percent of her students' tuition kept by the attorney who collected it for her was a small price to pay for relieving her of that burden.

One by one, as she examined them, the bundles began to disappear until she came to the last one, which held her unrelieved sorrow at the loss of her infant. The bundle reminded her of how she often spread out the little baby clothes "on [her] bed on lonely stormy nights when there was no one there to see or hear [her] weep over them." But that bundle also disappeared as she took it from the chain. At last she felt free. When she awoke, she resolved to be truly free. "I made it a rule [from that day on]," she wrote, "to sing a song to the little children on my lap. To the little Indian boy who shared a scolding with [my son] Edward one night and went supperless to his camp, I gave a handsome new shirt to make amends. One day," she noted, "when an Indian woman came to my door with an almost naked child held under her fur robe, I got out the box [of baby clothes] and a feeling of shame came upon me as I gave the little flannel dress and other things to put upon the child, a shame for the tears I had shed over it. I told her to tell the others who had babes to come and get the rest of the things—all but the little shoes—I felt I must keep them. But when I saw the blue feet and legs of one of the little babes I said, `That bundle must come, all of it, from my chain.'"<#>6

When Martha no longer demanded justice from life, she reached a pivotal point in her spiritual understanding. Often forgiving is as difficult as repenting, but Martha experienced a spiritual rebirth when she let go of her catalogue of injustices and allowed herself to forgive. She had made room in her soul for grace when she exchanged bitterness and resentment for kindness and understanding. Through her change of heart, she experienced the transforming power of grace. As she extended it to others, she invited it into her own life. As the Lord said, "You shall receive grace for grace." (D&C 93:20; emphasis added.)

May I mention an experience of my own. Some years ago, a series of unfortunate circumstances came my way. I could have coped with any one of them by itself, but collectively they overwhelmed me. I had known discouragement and despondency before and thought that time would be the healing power once again, but as days turned into weeks and weeks into months and more without a change, I knew I had begun to slip into a depression I could not wholly manage. My mind could not let go of the "what ifs" and "if onlys," and the regrets immobilized me. Though my mind told me I had to adjust to what I could not change, I nonetheless felt undeserving of these misfortunes and entitled to some resolution, some compensation, and certainly, at the very least, some comfort or peace of mind. But my demands brought no relief, and I became bitter and resentful.

Through it all I mechanically met the requirements of each day, thinking I could hide my growing sense of helplessness behind a veneer of everyday busyness. But one day my astute daughter asked, "Mother, how long do you intend to go on this way?" I was stunned. My secret, I discovered, was not as secret as I had so foolishly assumed. But more than that, her piercing question let me see, through her eyes, what I had become. I had been broken in mind and spirit by circumstances I could not control, but I had responded with self-pity and, worse, self-righteousness. I was yet to learn that in the Savior's lexicon, self-pity is not the same as a broken heart nor is a bruised ego the same as a contrite spirit. Her question began a long, hard journey in which I learned much about the Savior's patience, love, and efforts to keep us close to him.

Like Martha, I had let bitterness and pride create a barrier between me and the Lord. There was no way that his Spirit could break through that barricade and bring the comfort and strength I so longed for. Only with my daughter's question did I really begin to understand myself, my dependence on God, and especially on his mercy—his forgiveness of my pride and self-righteousness and his willingness to help me find the way back. Each step became an act of faith, of reliance on his guidance and help. I made no more demands, no defiant indictments of the Spirit, no self-righteous outbursts. I had, in a miraculous way for me, experienced a change of heart and, like Martha, felt the transforming power of God's grace. I came to know that in the end, whatever our store of good works and pile of accomplishments, or whatever our weaknesses, mistakes, and unfulfilled intentions, God looks on the heart and knows us by what he sees there.<#>7

When we feel inadequate to meet the challenges life throws our way, we ought to consider this passage from Ether: "I give unto [you] weakness that [you] may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all [who] humble themselves before me . . . and have faith in me." (Ether 12:27.) God knows we are weak. He gave us our weaknesses. And he knows that most of us will demonstrate our weaknesses many times over before we leave this life. This is the risk of agency. But as he so wisely knew, it is through our weakness that we discover humility, and it is through humility that we find God.

We are probably never more humble than when we reach the point of acknowledging our weaknesses in that process we call repentance. Repentance means swallowing our pride, acknowledging our failures, admitting our mistakes, and recognizing our dependence on the Lord. This is not a very easy task, especially at a time when society extols independence, self-reliance, and individual rights. True humility, the scriptures tell us, is a broken heart and a contrite spirit, the elements of repentance, and repentance opens our hearts to receive God's grace. The power of God's grace, in turn, enables us to overcome our weaknesses. Christ's atonement broke the tyranny of justice and opened the way for God's mercy to claim "all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered." (2 Ne. 2:7.)

Let me tell you about the transforming power of humility and grace in the life of Waltrout Jeromin of Hamburg, Germany. A child of the war displaced from her home and left without material resources, and worse, without faith, she eventually married, only to lose her husband several years later in an accident. Her sons helped her as they grew older, but life was never easy for the Jeromins. One day Waltrout reached a point where she saw no solution, felt no hope. For the first time in her life, she turned to prayer. In one of those missionary miracles, two elders just happened to be on her street that day. Within the hour of her prayer, they rang her doorbell. When she looked out the window of her apartment, she saw two young men, their figures clearly visible in a glow that set them apart from the gathering darkness of the evening, even though the porch light was not on. When the missionaries told her they had come to bring a message of hope and peace, Sister Jeromin brought them into her small apartment and with unabating tears listened as they taught her of God's love for her and the atoning sacrifice of his Son. As the missionaries later explained, "We were not sure she heard anything we said; she just cried through the whole lesson. But she accepted the gospel right from the beginning, and her life changed completely."<#>8 A broken heart, a contrite spirit, and a life touched by grace.

We are living in a time of dramatic social change, much of it directly related to women. It has raised unanswered questions and unresolved issues for many of us, leaving us at times angry, confused, frustrated, and even discouraged. Each of us, I believe, must seek our own answers to the troubling questions and find our own peace. Mine came as my son and daughter went into the mission field. As I saw through them the gospel's power to transform lives, like Sister Jeromin's, I began to rediscover the central place of the gospel in my life. I began to reassess my hierarchy of spiritual needs and to let go of those issues that seemed to me to be secondary to that basic truth. I felt a few of the bundles begin to slip off my chain.

We may not fully understand the theology of the Atonement nor completely comprehend the depth of God's love and mercy for us in giving us the free gift of life by the sacrifice of his Son. But I think we all yearn to feel the touch of grace in our lives, moments that capture the soul and hold it, a willing hostage, away from the assaults and demands of the unjust world in which we live.

My missionary daughter discovered that the moments may be fleeting and unexpected but powerfully moving and life changing. New to the town of Newport, Wales, she and her companion were asked to accompany the elders in their district to visit a man named Brian. Brian was sixty-five years old, a former army surgeon who had served in the Persian Gulf War. He told the missionaries that his only child, a daughter, had been brutally raped and murdered by a man the family knew. A few weeks later, he had been diagnosed with acute leukemia. His wife, unable to cope with such overwhelming tragedies, took her own life. In the year since then, Brian had given up their home, distributed his belongings among relatives, and moved into a housing development for the poor. He spent most of his time in the hospital undergoing painful treatments for his disease. In the evenings he read the Bible, often taking it with him as he walked along the road, standing under a streetlight to read, mainly to help keep his mind from the constant pain. That was where he met the missionaries.

"So much happened that day in his room," my daughter Marianne wrote, "but basically he just opened his heart up to us. He was finally able to be honest with someone about his pain because the Spirit so strongly touched him. He said that he felt as though we had brought Jesus into the room with us. He is such a humble man, and I just cried as he told us about his life. He has such a strong belief in God and Jesus, and he is so forgiving. He is praying for an opportunity before he dies to see the man who murdered his daughter and to be able to forgive him face to face. As we sat there listening to him, he said to us, `You are truly disciples of Christ, and I know you are an answer to my prayers. Each night I pray to God to ease my pain, and today you have done that. My body still aches, but my heart has been lifted, and my burdens are gone.'" My daughter concluded, "I saw the Spirit change a suffering man's life . . . for a few hours he had peace, and I was able to be a part of that." Brian had eased his emotional pain through his tremendous act of forgiving, and God had lifted his spirit through the power of His grace.

I believe that our need to feel those moments of grace is like Susan Greene's, who, after a long, hard winter in Cache Valley in 1874, wrote: "I begin to feel almost impatient for the snow and frost to quit the earth, and let the sun warm and prepare it for the labors of the husbandman and the reception of seeds and plants. You know I must have my little flower-garden if there is the least chance for such a thing, wherever I am."<#>9

Moments of spiritual connection are like Susan's garden. They comfort, inspire, and refresh the spirit, and we must have them wherever we are. They are the power that lifts us from the bench to bear testimony, the feeling of wholeness that follows honest prayer, the sudden illumination when we recognize spiritual truth in words we hear or read, and they are the healing of our souls when we can truly forgive those who have wronged us. But, like the garden, they are not always self-generating, and they have need of constant nurturing. We can be catalysts for such moments in each other's lives if we follow the counsel of Peter to the Ephesians: "As every [one] hath received the gift," he said, "even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God." (1 Pet. 4:10.)

If I have learned anything from my study of our Latter-day Saint foremothers, it is that they were good stewards of that gift. They exhibited through the most ordinary acts of their daily lives an abiding consciousness of the blessings of the gospel. It was their defense against adversity and their impetus to serve. Such simple things as a Sunday sermon, a neighbor's testimony, a friend's visit, a gathering of sisters, their diaries attest, were moments of reaffirmation of God's goodness in bringing the gospel to them. As good stewards, they ministered to one another in a myriad of ways because they needed each other, drawing together in a community of faith, love, and support. As Emmeline Wells said of the women with whom she had worshipped and worked throughout her long life, "I loved [them] as much as if bound by kindred ties, closer, perhaps, because our faith and works were so much in tune with our everyday life."<#>10 Their problems are our problems. They worried about their children, struggled as single parents or working mothers, battled crises of faith, and often felt lonely and overwhelmed with work and responsibility. But they were linked together as sisters in the gospel, willing to share one another's burdens as well as joys in whatever way their circumstances permitted.

I think of the women who donated their Sunday egg money to send their sister saints to medical schools, or to pay the publishing costs of a friend's book of poetry, or to send their beloved leader, Eliza R. Snow, as their proxy on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land.

I think of those women who ministered to one another through their Church callings. One of the most memorable times in Mary Ellen Kimball's life was the day she received the temple ordinances from her sister-wife Vilate in the Nauvoo Temple. "I was overwhelmed by love and admiration for her," Mary Ellen wrote. "I knew her to be a Saint. No one could fill that position so well without the Spirit of our Saviour to assist them to do it."<#>11 The Logan Temple was the setting for another spiritual exchange. On Mary Ann Maughan's birthday in 1894, seventy of the Logan Temple and Relief Society sisters commemorated the day with her by acting as proxies for her kindred dead.<#>12 What an act of love that was, not only for Mary Ann but for the seventy deceased women who were given a gift of eternal value that day.

I think of Elizabeth Ann Whitney, who opened her home to Emma and Joseph Smith, total strangers to her, when they arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, in the harsh winter of 1831, a home that would become the setting of some of Joseph Smith's most significant revelations. It was the beginning of a relationship of loyalty and love between Emma and Elizabeth Ann. And I think of Sarah Cleveland, whose home in Quincy, Illinois, provided a place of rest and refuge for Emma, a stranger to Sarah, when she fled Missouri with her young children, leaving her husband behind in Liberty Jail. Is it any wonder that Emma Smith chose these good women to be her counselors in the Nauvoo Relief Society, the organization devoted to compassion and caring?

Ministering one to another as good stewards, even in such modest ways, became a binding act for both giver and receiver. Martha Needham was only one of many who relished these intimate and spiritual experiences with the women she served and declared that she "wanted to spend the rest of her life in doing good to others and blessing and confirming them."<#>13

These were not extraordinary women, and their lives, like ours, unfolded against all the exigencies of daily living. But their faith in the reality of eternal life and their understanding of God's mercy as the operative power in this life gave transcendent meaning to each day's experience. Indeed, like the Savior, in whom their lives were centered, they lived from grace to grace, growing in knowledge and faith through their daily struggles and depending on the enabling power of grace to meet the challenges that always lay before them. Each said in her own way, "I have done the best I can and leave the rest to the Lord."

The words of Zina Young, taken from her testimony at a women's meeting in Salt Lake City in 1874, are for me the consummate metaphor for Peter's admonition. "It is a blessing to meet together," she said to the sisters assembled. "The Spirit of God is here, and when we speak to one another, it is like oil going from vessel to vessel."<#>14 All of the comforting, healing, and empowering qualities of consecrated oil are invoked in that image of woman ministering to woman.

Now, let me return to the Hebrew legend. In his dialogue with the Lord, Moses had hoped to penetrate God's inscrutable ways. The Lord's answer, however, was just as inscrutable to Moses. But the answer revealed the nature of God, and if Moses was listening with spiritual ears, he heard a clear and indisputable message in the unspoken words of God's answer. The Lord said to Moses in words he could hear: "I am gracious to the deserving and also to those who make no claim to my graciousness. I extend my love, my forgiveness, and my compassion to all, and give them what they need for their sustenance." His unspoken words were "Now go, and do thou likewise." (See Luke 10:37.) That is the covenant of grace.

NOTES
