Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Knit Two Together

BEPPIE HARRISON

Men and women are different, and we can't be the first ones to have noticed. Exactly how different we are is something people have recently spent a good deal of energy arguing about. At the moment, their conclusions range all the way from the unpopular point of view that gender is destiny to the assertive claim of some feminists that there are no significant differences between men and women that are not culturally determined, except for the obvious biological ones.

The gospel position is, as it always is, elegantly simple and commonsensical. Of course men and women are different, we are taught. Our gender identity was, is, and will be a part of what we are. The possession of gender roles is not a peculiarity of our life on this particular earth. It is simply a fact of existence. Females are females, to accomplish certain tasks, and males are males, to accomplish others.

So far, the gospel and the traditional philosophy of many societies sound pretty much alike. Where those philosophies differ from the gospel is where they go on to conclude that one set of tasks is more important, or more powerful, or more generally worthwhile than the other set, and therefore the doers of the one set of tasks have the God-given right to dominate and be served by the doers of the other set of tasks. It's at that point that the feminists begin yelling, and we in the Church politely part company with the traditionalists.

We agree that there are differences. In the broadest sense, men have been given the responsibility of the outside world. Through the priesthood, men have the responsibility of overseeing the day-to-day organization of the Church. As husbands and fathers, they have the responsibility of directing and providing for their families. In the same sense, women have been given the responsibility for the inside world. We are the keepers of relationships and have the responsibility of the home. We are the childbearers and nurturers and the earliest teachers of our children. Our attitudes establish the emotional tenor of the places we and our families live—which sounds splendid in the abstract, but can be a pain in the particular when you are having a bad day and feel crabby and disagreeable and the entire family with a single impulse gazes into the mirror of your mood and one and all become equally crabby and disagreeable. On the other hand, shouldering the Sunday-to-Sunday organizational responsibilities of the wards and stakes of Zion and enduring countless meetings, some of which are efficient and to the point and a lot of which aren't, is not necessarily a barrel of fun all the time, either. Different responsibilities, with different pluses and minuses, but the important point is that in God's plan for us, neither is more important than the other. You have a whole grasp of the plan only when the two halves are combined, as proud and equal partners.

Which is how we arrive at the interesting arrangement we call matrimony, in which two individuals who are different by nature (as we understand it) and cultural training (which is absolutely obvious if you look around) attempt to create a shared life in which they live in the closest possible emotional, spiritual, financial, and physical intimacy. No wonder so many of us discover potholes in our road to bliss and harmony! It's a good thing that the system is fueled by love, which gives the whole process its unique element of purest delight as well as exasperation and befuddlement.

Knitting is a whole lot simpler. You simply take two stitches, which look very much alike, and knit them together—presto, you have the beginning of a pattern. In the same way, a man and a woman, when they decide to marry, join together to start a pattern. But whereas what the finished knit item is going to be is precisely defined and illustrated in the knitting book, in the real-life world of marriage, the man and woman most closely involved probably have no idea whatever of what their eventual pattern is going to look like—or even more, feel like. When we start out, few of us imagine that there are ever going to be any changes from the way we are right now.

What do we expect when we marry? A lot depends, I suppose, on how young we are. If a bride is young and full of ideals (but inexperienced in calculating the price she will have to pay for maintaining them), and particularly if she grew up in a home where her parents were making a reasonable success of their own marriage, the most obvious thing to assume is that marriage with someone she loves is easy. It's like playing house with a beloved playmate who makes her pulse race, with nobody to step in to send them both home or dictate "so far and no farther." And she will do all the things her mother did to please her father, and they will live happily forever after. Except maybe the things her mother did will drive her husband absolutely wild, since he arrived with a different agenda and marital expectations, and instead of two lovers purring with pleasure there are suddenly two young unhappy kids staring at each other with defiant bewilderment. Nobody expects that kind of forlorn impasse, but it happens to almost all of us over issues major or minor. It doesn't mean the marriage is over or doomed to the doldrums or that the bride and groom have fallen out of love with each other. It just means they have stopped dreaming and now have to cope with life.

For those who are older or have less happy experiences with the marriages of others, the scenario is apt to be different only in that our bride is less surprised. If she is older, she is likely to have a somewhat more developed sense of herself, which may prevent her from concluding instantly that the whole thing is entirely his fault or entirely hers. To the extent that greater maturity and wider experience encourage balance and a more sensible, less emotional approach to problems, it is unquestionably an advantage. If, however, our bride chooses to see the first difficulties in her marriage as validation of her observations that marriage is too often a disappointing, embittered arrangement, she may well be launched on a self-fulfilling prophecy and, perhaps, tragically give up at the very beginning rather than settle down to the unromantic job of building a functioning relationship.

So many of our first disagreements are really just defining what those functioning relationships are going to be like! Obviously, a lot of that work can be done harmoniously—and there are couples who seem to glide through the initial stages—but most of us find that no matter how much we are really in love, we get seriously annoyed with each other while we're settling down to being everyday married.

Well do I remember a simmering series of rows with my brand-new husband which on the face of it concerned how warm we were going to keep the apartment, whether Saturday morning was going to be spent housecleaning, and what happened when wet glasses were set down on the glass-topped table in the living room. Looking back on it, I can see that what we were really doing was establishing (a) our style of arguing: neither of us feels comfortable with shouting at the other, so we tend to communicate with icy glares and very carefully modulated tones of voice, a technique which over the years we have become so proficient at that we can conduct a spirited quarrel during which an outsider would probably be only vaguely aware that anything was wrong—but by golly we know what's going on; (b) that under normal circumstances I am the one to decide what level of tidiness is going to be maintained, but then I am also the one to maintain it; and (c) that one high priority will be spending leisure time together, even if that means that household chores get neglected. At times this means I wonder gloomily whether our neighbors are going to organize a petition about the state of our yard, but we have had some very pleasant Saturdays together, sometimes just the two of us and sometimes the whole family. None of these are conclusions I would necessarily urge on anyone else, but they are our conclusions, and, reasonable or not, they suit us. Maybe there was a way to come to those conclusions with less emotional wear and tear in the early stages, but I don't think we really understood that we needed to work out that kind of thing in the early stages. We just blithely assumed those arrangements fell into place of their own accord, and when they didn't, we crashed into each other and reacted indignantly.

Every couple has to work out its own arrangements. One troublesome element of present-day life—heightened by the chorus of voices trying to offer advice on how virtually any relationship can and should be handled—is the prevalent idea that there is one pattern for successful marriage: one kind of perfect wife, one kind of sterling husband. Of course, not everybody agrees on what kind that is. There are those who hit the best-seller lists by decreeing that the perfect wife greets her husband at the door wrapped in see-through plastic wrap, and those who feel that in the long term cozier domestic qualities are more to the point. There are traditionalists who maintain that the sterling husband is strong and stalwart, a tower of strength in all circumstances, and trendier souls who advocate that the ideal is a sensitive husband who is as comfortable as a woman with communicating feelings and is willing to share the grunt work of sorting dirty laundry and changing the baby.

The fact is that real people seldom fit into anybody's arbitrary pattern. Real people have idiosyncrasies and glitches and virtues and awkward shortcomings, and no matter how hard we may try to reach the ideal, on the days when the plumbing backs up and the baby has an earache and the left rear tire goes flat and the mail is misdelivered, we are likely to care less about having or being the perfect marriage partner than we care about having someone around who will help get us out of the mess, even if our style of getting out of messes includes being less than totally charming to each other for the time being. Perfect people don't marry each other. Undeniably imperfect people do, and the colliding and stumbling of everyday marriage is one of the ways we are polished into perfection. But that's where we get to, not what we start with.

What we start with is two people who are completely unique separately and who will form a completely unique union. Once we get away from theory (and look beyond the shelf of self-help books), it is perfectly obvious from the most casual observation of reasonably successful marriages that there are as many ways to have one as there are marriages.

There are husbands who notice everything that goes on in the home, and husbands who seem to wander in and out in a benevolent fog and focus only when something really remarkable happens (such as stepping on the cat's tail or discovering that there is really no more milk in the fridge). There are wives who do the bills, and wives who get an allowance. There are couples who argue noisily and make up enthusiastically, and couples who are pointedly silent at each other and ooze into reconciliation. There are couples in which he does the wage earning (all of it) and she does the housekeeping (all of it). There are more and more couples in which she does some wage earning and he does some housekeeping, although most surveys suggest that typically she does more wage earning than he does housekeeping. There are couples who read together, and couples who fish together, and couples who do their own things at opposite sides of the family room but look up and beam companionably at each other.

However different the styles, there seem to be lessons that we all have to learn, and marriage seems to be a remarkably efficient schoolmaster. We all have to learn patience, for example. Rome was not built in a day, as they say, and neither was a marriage. Nor is a spouse, with all the good will in the world, going to be able to abandon an irritating habit or learned pattern of response overnight, no matter how sincerely you have both agreed that it has to be abandoned. Some may never be, which brings us to the second lesson we all have to learn: tolerance.

During our courtships, most of us are intoxicated by our similarities—that there really is one other person who feels exactly as we do. Marriage is the arena in which we work out our differences and how they are going to fit together and face the fact that some of them are going to involve lifelong accommodation. He loves sports. In the early flush of love, being anywhere with him was marvelous, even shivering in the bleachers. Once you can be together with him twenty-four hours a day, you discover you have a pronounced preference for being together somewhere that is dry and warm, and you couldn't care less what those sweaty men running around on the field are doing, not even if one of them is your beloved.

Or perhaps you discover that your mother-in-law is going to play a larger part in your marriage than you ever imagined. She's a fine woman (or maybe she isn't) and now that she's widowed, it is only reasonable that the gentleness and compassion that makes your husband so lovable means that he refuses to exclude her, and you're prepared to see more of her but the more you see of her, the more irritating she becomes and the more shrewish you feel. But when you try to explain it to him, you can't bear the expression of puzzled disappointment in his eyes. Or maybe it's you and your mother.

Or maybe one of you has a need for financial security that feels to the other like miserliness, which may be adjusted over time but never overcome. Or maybe it's—but there are hundreds and thousands of possibilities. I very much doubt that any woman who has been married more than six months could not produce a short list of qualities her husband possesses that she wishes in her deepest heart of hearts might be different, but in view of all his other splendid qualities she is prepared to put up with them. Her husband could unquestionably produce a corresponding list. That's what most of the everyday work of marriage is all about: coming to agreement on large issues and learning tolerance on the minor ones. And nobody but the two who are actually in the marriage can decide which issues fall in which category.

Above all, we all have to learn unselfishness, a lesson that is raised to the virtuoso level when we add children to the blend. Before my husband and I were married, my bishop told us that often in marriage you need love most when you deserve it least and a large part of unselfishness in marriage seems to involve leaving deserve out of the equation altogether. Marriage should be 50-50, we are told: a nice comforting proportion. The trouble is that 50-50 overall usually means 20-80 and 60-40 and even 100-0 from time to time. During bad speels, it can feel like 100-0 a lot of the time. Obviously, no marriage is going to survive in a healthy condition if it is 100-0 or even 90-10 most of the time, but our memories tend to fix on the periods when our contribution was measurably greater much more often than we remember the times when our husbands were nobly enduring us. Often, unselfishness demands that we simply say, "I will continue to love you because I love you," whether or not there is any logical reason why either one should love the other right then.

Unfortunately, that is not a position that carries a lot of societal support at the moment. The more popular attitude appears to hold that hanging in there with a marriage that's having difficulties shows a lack of gumption and is probably psychologically unhealthy. Sometimes when I am standing in the checkout line absentmindedly staring at the scandal sheet display or when I hear the hot news that yet another couple of my acquaintance is splitting up, I get the feeling that marriages are now unraveled in the same matter-of-fact way that you would unravel a stretch of knitting because it looked bumpier than you'd like. It used to be that divorce was unthinkable, and a divorced man or woman carried the heavy burden of social ostracism. Divorce was taken as an indication of personal failure. That attitude is now seldom found outside the Church at all and only occasionally inside it. The good side of the new permissiveness is that partners are no longer confined by social pressure to a wretchedly miserable marriage—and let's be realistic. There are wretchedly miserable marriages, and divorce can be a merciful solution for everyone concerned, especially the children. The bad side of having divorce be an easily accessible option is that a lot of marriages that could have been workable if both partners had hung around to work on them now fall apart because there is a great big escape hatch and it looks a lot simpler to try something else instead.

One of the great strengths of marriage is its permanence. If it is taken as a given that the two of you are going to be together forever, it is worth putting up with one unsatisfactory part of the relationship because you are working on another—you have plenty of time to get around to both. If you are evaluating your marriage on a day-to-day basis, everything pretty much has to be in line all the time. If we take our attitudes from what we hear on television and read in the gossip magazines, then if it isn't working, hey, why bother? It seems kind of masochistic to put up with that 70-30 or 60-40 stuff, much less the 100-0. We don't think about it as an issue of unselfishness. All the pop psychology encourages us to make our evaluations on what they present as the practical angle: what's good for you now. Sticking around when things are tough, in that light, is plain stupid. "Are you going to let him get away with that?" the voices challenge you.

The problem for those of us who are willing to hang in there and work to get through the rough patch is that the impermanence of modern marriage is there, all around us. Even if you are determined not to use it lightly, you know the way out is there—and you know your husband knows it too. Maybe, in an ironic way, it was easier back in the hard days when marriages were only dissolved in cases of utter desperation. The walls held you in, true, but they held you in together, and you both had to stay and fight it out. And sometimes you discovered what you were fighting about were mere trivialities, just as sometimes now-divorced couples look back at what precipitated the final collapse and regret that they didn't just give it one more try.

Not all the marriages that are dissolving around us in such depressing numbers fall apart because of trivialities. Reasons for getting divorced are, after all, almost as individual as the reasons for staying married. In these days of redefinition of a woman's role, some among us come to grief because of the disparities between the Latter-day Saint view of the interlocking relationship between men and women and the present fashion outside the Church in which women are applauded for putting their own fulfillment ahead of everything else. To put your own ambition on the back burner, even temporarily, is castigated as hollow martyrdom. A woman should be free to be whatever she can be, the argument goes, and if her husband can't or won't accept that, that's tough. When you're having problems figuring out how to make room for what you want to be in your marriage, the voices urging you to keep your eyes fixed on your own goals can be tempting sirens. The plain fact is that unselfishness isn't easy. Deciding to wait to do your own thing and help your husband do his instead isn't a once-and-for-all decision. It has to be made day after day, and when there are a lot of people around you who clearly think you're nuts, that doesn't make it any easier. We were never promised a world in which all the frustrations would be conveniently removed as soon as we have embarked on an unselfish course. (It often feels as if they get even worse!) It is hardly surprising that some sisters figure it's not worth it and bail out to try their own wings. Some marriages creak with the strain and survive, and some marriages don't.

Even for the women who choose to embrace the traditional role of wife, there are pitfalls. There is a temptation for some Latter-day Saint women (and, quite honestly, some men as well) to believe that patriarchal authority in the home implies a master-serf relationship in the marriage, and since few women are really happy as serfs, this attitude leads inevitably to discontent with the self, the marriage, and, unfortunately, sometimes with the Church. The truth is, there is nothing in the prerogatives or responsibilities of the priesthood that entitles a man to have his socks picked up off the floor. If you don't want to do it, that's a gripe for you to work out with your husband, not with the Church. There are a lot of sensible, bright women (Latter-day Saint and otherwise) who do pick up the socks. But that's because they choose to do so. They aren't obliged to do it. Picking up the socks (if your husband happens to be the kind who drops them instead of neatly placing them in the hamper) has its advantages. For one thing, it keeps the bedroom tidy. Not arguing about it keeps your powder dry for more important engagements—working out with whose family you will spend Christmas or Thanksgiving, for example. Or sometimes you may be picking up the socks as a way of cherishing him because of all the private ways he cherishes you.

But marriage isn't always tit for tat. When we are young and our concept of relationships still immature, everything has to be evaluated as fair or not, as our children endlessly remind us. "It isn't fair!" is the clarion cry of the offended party. Theoretically, we grow up and look at things with a longer perspective. But when we consider how childish we can be about such crucial marital issues as who pulled more covers over to which side or who ought to go out and get the mail out of the mailbox, it is hardly surprising that we find ourselves muttering "It's not fair" about other problems.

Well, it may not be fair, but it seems to be true that women (in general) are more sensitive than men (in general) to the subtleties of maintaining a relationship. There are those who claim we had to learn those skills because we have always been in the subordinate position and it behooves the prisoner to learn to interpret the moods of the jailer. Well, maybe. But however it came about, women seem to be the ones who know what's happening in the marriage. (Divorce lawyers are all too familiar with the sad stories of husbands who had absolutely no idea that their wives were discontented before the day they walked out.) Looking after the marriage relationship itself has always been women's work. We are the talkers, the soothers, the ones who notice tones of voice, the significance of expressions, the body language indicating happiness or annoyance or any of the way stations in between. One of the things that is undeniably hard on marriage today is the reality that we are all time-poor. We are all, both husbands and wives, so locked into outside activities, whether paid or not, that too often nobody has the time to tend the marriage. Some men can't, or don't, and some women carrying household responsibilities and mother responsibilities and Church responsibilities and job responsibilities are understandably just plain too tired to see those things any more, and some women have bought into the "Why me? It isn't fair" argument and refuse to play.

Looked at in me-terms, it doesn't make sense. Why should it be up to the woman to nurture the marriage? Why shouldn't men be brought up to be as perceptive and sensitive as women? (Possibly some improvement along that line would be a splendid thing under any circumstances and we should go to work on our sons, but we might be starting a bit late in the day for our husbands.) Practically speaking, whether on the short-term or the eternal basis, there is one pertinent question: if you don't tend your marriage, who will? How much do you want that marriage to endure? Would you rather be mathematically fair and insist he does his part right now, or would you rather do a bit more giving and a bit less taking and build the kind of relationship that lasts for decades (and probably balances a whole lot better over the long run)? Do you want to have a marriage that warms and shelters your mutual old age and goes forward into eternity?

Love helps. It is no accident that the primary commandment Christ gave us was to love one another. It's unfortunate that in talking about marriage we always seem to concentrate on the difficulties and not on the enjoyments. Love is fun. Love is splendid, and love doesn't stay exactly the same from day to day and week to week. One of the comforts of marriage is discovering that you can be reasonably fond of each other in February and passionately in love in July and get along okay in September and have the passion flare back up for no good reason to warm you in a bleak and windy November. One of the scary parts of early marriage is discovering that the first wild enthusiasm of fresh love doesn't last, and one of the reassuring parts is sticking around to discover that the mature warmth of intimacy does, and it goes on through all the fluctuations in your enthusiasm about each other. We don't admit often enough that there are pleasures in realizing on an absolutely routine Tuesday that you are as excited to see him walk through the door as you were the first week you were married. Or that there is special felicity in knowing everything about each other's bodies, or that one of the particular delights of being a human being is retaining the capacity to surprise each other, even after years and years of living side by side. Making each other laugh gets better as your shared vocabulary grows deeper and more resonant, and there is nothing comparable to the knowledge that he has seen you at your best and at your absolute worst and still considers the whole package worth keeping at his side.

None of those strengths shows up well in a half-hour sitcom or even in a full-length movie. One of the elements that made On Golden Pond so popular with audiences was that it managed to show that kind of relationship successfully. New love is usually a lot more interesting to an audience because what's going on is clearly visible to bystanders. Almost universally we underestimate our parents' marriage (unless they and we live long enough to look at each other with the distance of adulthood) because the most important part of it is private and ripples away quietly under the surface. We are geared to rapid action and the visible drama of separation and reunion and dancing until dawn. Twenty years later dancing until dawn still might be fine (if you can sleep late the next morning and have been taking your vitamins), but there is a lot to be said for sitting quietly on the stand in the full view of the congregation and listening to your husband speaking at your son's missionary farewell—and little of that could you ever hope to explain to those shinyeyed girls sitting with their parents.

None of that richness comes along without the everyday work of tending a marriage, and when you consider the rewards, the whole question of what's fair and who has done the most of it becomes much less important. When you've mellowed from the excitement of exploration through the ordinary routines of working out budgets and dishing out casseroles into the comfort of loving intimacy, spent long years of flexing around each other, shaping your bulges to fit his hollows and vice versa, you've gone on a long journey that nobody else could ever come close to evaluating. To give yourself to that kind of marriage means that each of you will inevitably be a part of what the other person grows into being. After twenty or thirty years or more of living together, the long interplay between you will mean that in the most literal sense you would both be different people if you had never married each other. If that's what you're going for, a bit of sock-picking-up (if that's what it is at your house) or sticking it out through the 100-0 or 90-10 patches is neither here nor there.

The way you knit your two together probably wouldn't work next door, or for your Relief Society president (unless you are your Relief Society president), or for your kid sister. They have to figure out their own way of knitting. Even your method is almost certainly not what you thought it would be in the beginning. For one thing, you didn't know nearly as much about the boy who turned into your husband as you do now, and for another, you sure didn't know that much about you. Nor could you have predicted what would happen when the pair of you were buffeted by outside circumstances in a world where few of us live under golden umbrellas and bad things certainly do happen to good people.

Marriage isn't easy, and if it is to play its part in preparing us to move along to a life in which even more will be expected of us, I don't see how it ever could be easy. Getting along with each other and simultaneously progressing in the same direction is the most complicated job any of us will undertake. Compared to that, raising children is a part-time job. They grow up and go out and take responsibility for themselves; husbands and wives have to go on getting along as working partners for the rest of our lives here and hereafter. Marriage takes all the possibilities and problems of all the rest of human relationships and compresses them into a nutshell. You respect and obey your parents, and there is an element of that in your relationship with your husband. You tend and nurture your children, and when you or your husband are ill or feeling defeated, you tend and nurture each other. You have the pleasures of companionable equality with your friends, and you have exactly the same relationship in your marriage.

When you knit two together with yarn and knitting needles, you do it once only with each set of stitches. When a woman and a man are knit together in marriage, the knitting together becomes a continuous process that is repeated daily in a thousand different ways. When two stitches are knit together, they lose their identity and become a single combined stitch. With marriage, the husband and wife also gain a new identity as part of a partnership, but when the marriage is working well, they each retain their own identity as well, enhanced and embellished by the interplay between them.

There are those in the world who won't see that. Those are the ones who insist on seeing marriage as a relationship in which a woman's identity is necessarily absorbed into that of her husband and his family. Look at the names, they say. Why should it be the woman who gives up her name and becomes Mrs. Somebody-else? Look at the job, which involves doing the grubbiest, least dignified services imaginable. Do husbands do that kind of stuff? Not very many of them. Not very often.

Well, the name business bothers some people and doesn't bother others. As the new legion of children of divorce who wind up in families with a miscellany of surnames can testify, it's a lot easier when a whole family has the same name—and since we see our husbands and fathers as the head of their households, it's only logical the name should be theirs. Perhaps the Hispanic cultures, which traditionally carry on both the maternal and the paternal surnames, have it about right. But is that important? A rose by any other name, and so forth. You can always carry on your family name as your children's middle name: it will certainly make your descendants' genealogy a bit easier.

It is also true that being a wife and mother is likely to include some fairly gross moments. Few of us would classify as the high points of our family experience the times when we have to clean up after somebody who has just thrown up; but Jesus washed the feet of his disciples, which in those days of bare feet and minimal sanitation must not have been markedly more appetizing. What he was teaching us was that whatever we do, if we do it with love, has dignity and importance. Among all the other things marriage gives us is the unavoidable opportunity for service. It is only in service that we discover who our truest selves are, that we gain our greatest dignity, whether the service is something as visible and gratifying as putting together a flawless company dinner for his important guests, or something as humble and ordinary as making sure that his socks match and there's a clean shirt available, morning after morning and year after year. Sometimes we serve the men we love; sometimes—and we mustn't let even the loudest cynics encourage us to forget it—the men we love serve us.

Marriage is too complicated to fit into any simplified formulation. It doesn't always work, but we have been given the promise that it can, that we can—that men and women, different as they are, are meant to give themselves wholly to each other to build a relationship of such depth and profundity that it can't develop any other way. Marriage is meant to be a relationship that transcends the whole issue of equality, a relationship in which one and one add up to something greater than the sum of the parts. It might not always be easy, but there's no other way to get to where we want to go. And if we get it right, the potential is breathtaking.

Knit two together? Absolutely. Day after day after day. And then again the day after that.
