Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Remembering My Better Half

JANENE WOLSEY BAADSGAARD

Couples with children in the home quickly find that they take a great deal of time and attention. But someday each child will leave the home to be married or to pursue his own life's work.

Our relationship with our children is important, but the relationship between husband and wife is the most sacred, the most intimate, and the most important human relationship in this life. Any effort we give that relationship will have eternal consequences.

Within a few years after our marriage, I recognized a craving to talk to someone over the age of four. My husband's response to my pleas for conversation was a brief glance above the newspaper or a polite nod during TV commercials. He simply couldn't see what was happening to our once adept ability to communicate and the spontaneous romantic experiences we had enjoyed early in our marriage. Drastic measures were called for.

When he walked in the door after work one night, I greeted him with "When will you ever learn to close the door behind you? Have you got mud on your shoes? Hang up your coat!"

When he sat down to supper, I interrupted him with "Go wash your hands!"

At the table, I poured him half a glass of milk and said "Now don't spill it. Where's your bib?"

I cut up his meat in tiny pieces and praised him when he managed to get a whole spoonful of food to his mouth without spilling. When he reached for his dessert, I caught his hand and said sternly, "No, no. You eat those yummy beets, or no dessert for you."

At bedtime, I tried to help him say his prayers. When we went to bed, as he put his arms around me, I turned to him and asked, "Did you go potty yet?"

"Janene," he said, "I've been thinking lately that maybe you and I could use a little more time to be alone together. How about a date Friday night?"

That was the beginning of our attempt to try to rekindle the old spark in our marriage. Every bit of effort we have put back into our relationship has really paid off.

Every couple owe each other continued courtship even after the babies start coming. A couple are first a husband and wife, then a father and mother. One of the nice things about putting each other first is that happy husbands and wives generally make better and happier fathers and mothers. That's a good recipe to remember: Happy Mom and Dad—Happy children.

Here are some of the creative things that couples have done to help them retain the romance in their marriages.

Expressions of Love

"My husband and I leave notes for each other. I'll put a note saying something simple, such as `I love you,' in his shirt pocket or on his dinner plate. I'll find notes from him, such as `Hang in there!' on top of the diapers. We're always trying to surprise each other with a new place to leave a note."

"My husband and I express our love for each other every morning before he leaves for work. We wish each other a good day and kiss and hug. Then I stand by the door and wave goodbye. Maybe this sounds common, but we sincerely take the time to give each other a good start for the day."

"My husband often calls me from the office just to tell me he loves me. It's so good to hear another adult voice after a day with small children. I hesitate to call him at the office because he's often busy with a customer. He knows that, so he takes the initiative to call me when he's not busy. It makes me feel really good."

"I try to greet my husband warmly and with a smile every night when he gets home even if I've had a bad day. He tries to walk in with a smile and leave his worries at work. Then he takes me in his arms. After that, I don't care what's happened. Irritations melt away pretty fast when I'm in my husband's arms. He says it works the same way for him."

Gifts—Tangible and Intangible

"My husband and I have very little extra money, but we like to give each other small gifts often. Once he bought me a set of colored pencils because he knows how much I enjoy using them. Another time he picked a bouquet of dandelions for me on his way home from work. Once I bought him a sack of penny candy and put it in his drawer to surprise him. It doesn't matter how much or how little the gifts cost: it's the thoughtfulness that counts with us."

"My husband likes to bring me flowers. Even though we're in school and every dollar is spent twice even before we get it, he still buys me flowers. It's his way of saying `I love you,' and I treasure that. We may eat rice for a week, but I have a vase full of roses in the middle of my table."

"I was feeling sorry for myself one day because my husband didn't send me flowers or candy or give me gifts. As I was thinking those thoughts, he walked in after work and cheerfully tended the children while I prepared dinner. He bathed them while I did the dishes and read the newspaper. He took out the garbage and put a batch of diapers in the washing machine, then went through the house and picked up the children's toys. And he read a story to the children before they went to bed. By the end of the evening, I was feeling really blessed. My husband gives me all these gifts every day without my asking for them."

Courtesy

"It isn't the big things in marriage that matter most; it's all the little things. My husband always makes an effort to be on time when we go somewhere or when I'm expecting him home. If he's going to be late, he calls. I try to do the same for him."

"My husband used to open the car door for me when we were dating, but after we were married, he stopped. I wondered why until I noticed that I wasn't letting him. I'd jump out of the car before he had a chance to get to my door. He had just gotten out of the habit because I quit expecting it. Now I sit a little longer in the car, and we both feel better."

Time Together

Time together and time alone are immensely important to a couple trying to keep the romance in their marriage. It is sometimes appropriate to be with friends and family and sometimes appropriate for a couple to be alone. Several couples said their time together was best used in weekly planning sessions and in a weekly date.

"My husband and I get together after the children are in bed on Sunday evenings and plan our coming week. We discuss the activities we are involved in and try to help each other accomplish what we need to do. We set individual and family, immediate and long-range goals. We also review our finances and make sure we both know where we stand. I don't know how we ever got along without our planning sessions."

"On Saturday mornings, my husband tends the children while I do whatever I want for two hours. On Saturday afternoons, I tend the children while he does whatever he wants. Then we spend the evening together as a family. We also have a date every Friday night, so we can spend some time together as well as alone each week."

"If my husband and I get away alone at least once a week, our relationship is enriched and grows. If we forget our weekly date or do separate things week after week, our relationship becomes either stale or strained."

Love isn't always hearts and flowers and lace. For as far back as I can remember, I loved to curl up with an afghan and a good romance novel. The Brontë sisters' mist-covered English moors were my second home. I brought many of those romantic ideals to my marriage. As the years went by, my husband didn't seem to measure up to those ideals, and I sometimes felt I was missing something.

Our neighbors, a young couple married about the same time we were, only reinforced my dilemma. I found myself wanting the same honeymoon-like relationship I thought they had.

One Valentine's Day, I decided to throw enough hints at my husband to instantly change him into the romantic hero I envisioned. Things didn't work out the way I planned.

"What are you doing?" he asked as he sat down at the breakfast table.

"Making valentine cookies."

"Why are you doing that?" He handed the baby his bottle and poured some cereal for our impatient two-year-old.

"It's Valentine's Day," I announced. "Happy Valentine's Day, sweetheart." I leaned over and kissed his cheek.

"Oh. Happy Valentine's Day. Where's the sugar?"

"Right here," I said, a little disheartened but not defeated. "I saw a florist's truck stop in front of the Anderson's house this morning."

My husband wasn't paying much attention.

"Seems as though Mr. Anderson is always giving flowers to his wife. Those Andersons are really romantic, aren't they?"

"What did you say, dear?" he asked, wiping up the milk our three-year-old had just spilled.

"Oh, nothing," I replied, feeling a little discouraged.

My husband hurriedly put three more spoonfuls of cereal in his mouth, then stood up and announced, "Better get." He tucked in his shirt and wiped the spilled milk off his pants. "I put the diapers in the washing machine and fixed the kids' music box," he said as he took me in his arms and planted a kiss on my forehead. "Oh, and if Mr. Haring gets drunk and locks himself out of his apartment again before I get home, call the police. I had a spare key made for him and left it down at the station."

Later, as I was washing the breakfast dishes, I saw another florist's truck stop outside the Anderson's house. I watched wistfully as the deliveryman delivered a second red rose. Every hour thereafter a truck stopped in front of the Anderson's house and another red rose was delivered.

The children were helping me decorate valentine cookies with icing and candy when the doorbell rang. My heart started pounding when I opened the door and saw the deliveryman standing there smiling, holding a single red rose.

He didn't forget, I thought. "Thank you very much," I said as I reached out for the flower.

"Oh, I'm sorry," the deliveryman apologized. "This is for the lady across the street. Would you mind taking it over to her when she gets home?"

"Oh, of course not," I said.

I put the rose on the kitchen table, where we were working on the cookies, and stared at it. The baby cried. Then I cried.

When I heard a car door slam across the street, I herded all my preschoolers together, and we marched over with the rose.

"Mrs. Anderson," I said as she opened the door, "The florist brought this by earlier and asked me to run it over to you."

She took the rose and, without even looking at it, put it on the floor of her entry along with the others that had been delivered earlier. She looked like a model who had just stepped out of a fashion magazine.

"May I hold the baby for a minute?" she asked.

I wiped his nose and let her take him.

"If you'll come in here," she said, pointing to the kitchen, "I have a surprise for you children."

They danced in front of her and nearly tripped her in their eagerness. She laughed as she regained her balance and opened the cookie jar. She pulled out several lollypops and handed them to my children. The baby greedily grabbed his candy, licked it, patted it, and put his sticky fingers in Mrs. Anderson's perfectly styled hair.

"Oh, dear," I said, embarrassed, "I'd better take him."

"I don't mind," she said, tickling the baby and smiling. "I don't get much chance to hold babies. My husband says children make him nervous," she added. "He says he wants it to stay just the way it is, just the two of us."

"Well, he sure is romantic," I said, pointing to the roses.

"I suppose he is," she replied as she reluctantly handed me the baby. "But I'm not the only woman he lavishes so much attention on. Sometimes I think all these flowers are just his way of making himself feel better about all the hours he spends away from me at the office or at the club."

That afternoon the baby grew fussy. He wouldn't nap, and he cried all afternoon. When I felt his forehead, he was burning up with fever.

"Where is your father?" I fumed as the afternoon grew into evening.

Finally my husband bounded through the front door, shaking snow off his shoes.

"Where have you been?" I said staring at him.

"Sorry," he answered. "A man on the road had car trouble. I stopped and—" Then he looked at the baby. "What's the matter?"

"The baby's sick," I said, "really sick. I can't seem to settle him down."

"It's late," he said lovingly. "Let me take him. You go to bed."

Just before dawn I woke with a start. I couldn't remember hearing the baby cry all night. I ran out to the living room. My husband nodded in the rocking chair, the baby sleeping peacefully on his shoulder. The vaporizer, hissing from a corner of the room, filled the air with a moist fragrance.

As I stood there, with my worn, wrinkled, flannel nightgown tumbling over my seven-months' pregnant stomach, I suddenly realized that love isn't the hearts and flowers and lace I had supposed it to be. At that moment, it was diaper pails being lifted into the washing machine, a stranded motorist who'd been befriended, a spare key at the police station, and a very red-eyed human being slouched in my squeaky rocking chair with a sick baby sleeping peacefully at his shoulder.
