Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

"Without Compulsory Means"

CARLFRED BRODERICK

As a result of her transgression in the garden of Eden, Eve was given a double burden. First, God told her, "I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children." Then he added, "and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." (Gen. 3:16.) Women have debated ever since which of the two burdens is the worst, for the simple truth is that most men have not mastered the principle of governing their family in the Lord's own way. The problem does not, I believe, lie in a lack of guidance from the Lord on the matter. The principles are very clearly laid out in the scriptures. Despite this, there remains a great deal of confusion, even among good Latter-day Saints, as to how to be a righteous patriarch and how to be the eternal partner of one.

As I work with families in the Church, sometimes it seems to me that most of them can be divided into two equally problematic leadership styles. In one group the father and husband is very insistent that his patriarchal rights be honored. Should his wife ever challenge one of his opinions or demands, he quickly reminds her of her temple vows and calls on her to repent and support the priesthood authority in her home. Any degree of rebellion on the part of the children is met with the declaration that the father is appointed by God to preside in his home as the Prophet is appointed to preside over the Church, and that to defy either is tantamount to apostasy. This style often leads to the very rebellion from wife and children that it seeks to suppress. Alternatively, it may lead to an overly submissive, dependent, and depressed wife and children. In their striving to be strong, worthy leaders in their homes, these husbands have slipped across the line from righteous to unrighteous dominion.

The second and larger group of families fall into the style of leadership that I call "patriarchy from the rear." In these families the wife is the one earnestly seeking to establish a proper patriarchal relationship in the home. Her husband, however, lacks the vision or the commitment necessary to fulfill his role so that she ends up constantly "encouraging" (he would say nagging) him to take his place as the spiritual leader of the family. Gradually her list of disappointments grows. He doesn't lead in family prayer; he takes no responsibility to structure family scripture reading or family home evening. He never interviews the children, and if it were left to him to organize things, the couple would never get to the temple or, for that matter, go out together on regular dates. In fact, he puts off his home teaching and other responsibilities to the last minute and often wouldn't get them done at all if she didn't prod and push and carry on about it. She hates the role of prime mover she has assumed. When she married a returned missionary, she assumed that he would be the leader, and she is bitterly resentful that he is not.

As one sister put it, "One time I purposely refused to take the lead in organizing family prayer or family home evening just to see how long he would let it lapse before he picked up the responsibility. After four weeks I finally gave up. If it were up to him we would never have those things."

On the husband's side there is also bitterness and resentment. Sometimes it is up front: "Get off my case!" More often it is passively expressed by postponing, forgetting, and making excuses. There may be promises and apologies, but rarely performance. When pushed to express their feelings directly, these reluctant patriarchs confess that they feel they could never meet their wives' expectations anyway, so why try; no matter what they did, it wouldn't be enough. The wives often feed this fear by being critical of any effort their husbands do make, seeing it as too little, too late, and not sufficiently self-motivated.

It seems to me that both groups of families miss the mark. For one thing, all doctrinal considerations aside, neither style of leadership works well. Each, however well-intentioned, leaves a residue of resentment and rebellion. Each, whether purposely or not, attempts to impose a degree of compulsion that, in the long run, simply never succeeds.

President Gordon B. Hinckley addressed these issues in a couples' fireside beamed by satellite to the whole Church on January 29, 1984. He said, in part:

To men within the sound of my voice, wherever you may be, I say, if you are guilty of demeaning behavior toward your wife, if you are prone to dictate and exercise authority over her, if you are selfish and brutal in your actions in the home, then stop it! Repent! Repent now while you have the opportunity to do so.

To you wives who are constantly complaining and see only the dark side of life, and feel that you are unloved and unwanted, look into your own hearts and minds. If there is something wrong, turn about. Put a smile on your faces. Make yourselves attractive. Brighten your outlook. You deny yourselves happiness and court misery if you constantly complain and do nothing to rectify your own faults. Rise above the shrill clamor over rights and prerogatives, and walk in the quiet dignity of a daughter of God.

The scriptures spell out three principles that must be observed if the blessings of smooth, satisfying family relations are to be enjoyed. First is the principle of order; second is the principle of unity; and third is the principle of agency. The three are so intertwined in the marital relationship that it is difficult to discuss any one of them without bringing in the other two; nevertheless, it is useful to look at the unique contribution of each to a harmonious marriage.

The marital union is not simply a relationship between a man and a woman; it is intended to be the leadership coalition of a family enterprise. The Lord has assigned to this unit several grave and important tasks, among which is the task of raising up children unto him. The relationship of husband and wife can be properly understood only in the light of the assignments given to them. The Lord's perspective on this is vividly and pointedly expressed in the revelation given in D&C 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The first half of the revelation is a remarkable outline of the nature and purpose of man. In that context the Lord saw fit to bring the general doctrine down to its most practical application and called the three members of the First Presidency (Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams) and the highest local authority (Bishop Newel K. Whitney) to repent of their negligence in performing their patriarchal responsibilities and to put their houses in order. It is worth pondering the pertinent passages from the Doctrine and Covenants:

The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth. Light and truth forsake that evil one. Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God. And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers.

But I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. But verily I say unto you, my servant Frederick G. Williams, you have continued under this condemnation; you have not taught your children light and truth, according to the commandments; and that wicked one hath power, as yet, over you, and this is the cause of your affliction.

And now a commandment I give unto you—if you will be delivered you shall set in order your own house, for there are many things that are not right in your house.

Verily, I say unto my servant Sidney Rigdon, that in some things he hath not kept the commandments concerning his children; therefore, first set in order thy house. . . .

And now, verily I say unto Joseph Smith, Jun.—you have not kept the commandments, and must needs stand rebuked before the Lord; your family must needs repent and forsake some things, and give more earnest heed unto your sayings, or be removed out of their place.

What I say unto one I say unto all; pray always lest that wicked one have power in you, and remove you out of your place.

My servant Newel K. Whitney also, a bishop of my church, hath need to be chastened, and set in order his family, and see that they are more diligent and concerned at home, and pray always, or they shall be removed out of their place. (D&C 93:36-50.)

My hunch is that these brethren were surprised and perhaps offended to be the ones called down on this matter. Why didn't the Lord address this rebuke to their wives? After all, these men were working night and day for the Church and trying to support their families at the same time. Their wives had by far the greatest involvement in the upbringing of their children. Why did the Lord come down so hard on the fathers?

Apparently, it is the Lord's view that the priesthood is given to men not just to bless and teach the Church at large but to bless and teach their families. These brethren were chastised because they were neglecting a crucial part of their priesthood responsibility. In the kingdom there is no place for disengaged or disinterested fathers who leave all of the childrearing to their wives. Husbands are to be active rather than absent or passive partners to their wives in these matters. Part of what it means to have your home in order is to have the patriarch in place at the head of the family.

I have discovered this over and over as a family therapist. It is not uncommon for a family to come in to see me that has a strong, hard-working, psychologically minded woman at its heart and a weak or abusive or disengaged husband at its periphery. Nearly always they are having trouble with one or more of the children. It is perfectly clear (at least to me and to the wife) that one of the problems is that the father is not playing his part well. The temptation, of course, is to become the substitute patriarch in this family, joining with the wife in setting the family's affairs in order. In such a plan, the father is either ignored or treated as one of the children who has to be reeducated on how to behave in the family circle. Frequently, he drops out of counseling after only a few sessions. In my experience this approach virtually never works. When I am successful in family therapy, it is because I have been wise enough to assign the father the task of finding the solution to the family's problems—no matter how wrong-headed or distant or irresponsible he may be.

I remember a family in which both parents were active but all five children had been "lost." The mother was a sensitive, self-educated woman who attended every Brigham Young University Education Week and read everything in the Church bookstore on how to raise a family. But her husband was a rough-cut man who got along well enough with most of the men in the ward but was ignorant of most principles of human relationships or communication. He had been physically abused as a child and had physically abused all five of his children. His four sons had run away from home as soon as they got old enough to find anywhere to run to. His youngest child, a daughter, had stayed home but became openly promiscuous despite the beatings and other coercive tactics employed to curb her immoral behavior. In the midst of all this the mother had a nervous break-down. On a bishop's referral I saw her in therapy, and then her daughter; but the father refused to come in, feeling that counseling was a "bunch of psychological garbage." However, when he learned that I was also a stake president, he agreed to come in once with his wife for a consultation on how to help his daughter straighten out her life.

As soon as they sat down in my office the wife started to lecture him through me: "Doctor Broderick, don't you think that we'd have better luck with Janice if we let up a little on her? I was so impressed with the point you made in your book about `emotional space.'"

I could see that the husband was feeling he had been ambushed (as indeed he had). His jaw was getting firmer and his body tenser. I interrupted his wife long enough to say, "Brother Jensen, you don't get much respect in your family do you?"

He looked at me sharply, wondering perhaps how I had figured that out. Then he looked down at his shoes and mumbled, "Not much."

His wife said, "Karl, how can you say that? You're an absolute tyrant at home. We do everything to try to please you."

He turned to her and said, "You think I don't know you're always on the phone with the boys [their runaway sons, then young adults living very worldly life-styles] after I've told you not to have nothing to do with them after all the pain they caused us? You think I don't know you sneak food up to Janice after I send her to bed without no dinner? You never respected me!"

"Well, I respect you," I said. "You are the head of your family, and neither I nor your wife have the keys of revelation for that Church unit. You do. So, what should we do to help Janice?"

His wife looked at me as though I had lost my marbles.

He said, "We've tried everything. Nothing works with that girl. I even locked her in her room, and last week I found out she's climbing out the window and shimmying down the rain spout after we're in bed."

I said, "Well, if you can't think of anything right now, why don't you go home and pray about it and come back next week and tell us how we should proceed. If this is going to work out, it will have to be in the Lord's way, and that is with you as head of your family."

He looked hard at his wife, then back at me, and said, "Okay, I'll pray about it," and got up to leave.

She said, "Dear, you go on out to the car. I want to stay a minute and talk to Dr. Broderick about a couple of things."

I said, "No, let's wait till next week and see what the Lord and your husband come up with," and I walked with them to the parking lot.

The next week's session started as the first week's had, with her trying to teach him correct principles through me, but as soon as I could get a word in I said to him, "Well, what did you come up with?"

He said, "I wondered if you'd remembered. Well, I got that we ought to have her read her patriarchal blessing."

That was not a very creative idea. They had been trying to get her to pray with the family and read her patriarchal blessing and the like for months without effect. The wife rolled her eyes to the ceiling and groaned. "Great idea," I said. "Try it and see what happens."

What happened was what had happened every other time they had tried it: the girl refused. "She wouldn't do it," he said when they came in the next week.

"Of course she wouldn't do it," his wife said. "I've told you over and over you can't just cram religion down her throat. Just last month I heard a talk on that at Education Week—"

"So," I interrupted, "what's next?"

"I don't know," he said, "I got she should read her patriarchal blessing and she wouldn't, so I guess we're stuck."

"Oh, I'm sure the Lord has more than one arrow in his quiver," I said. "If she had read her blessing, as you suggested, it doubtless would have been helpful, but she wouldn't, so you must go back to the Lord and find out what to do next."

The next week he came back and said, "I got I should walk and talk with her."

"Beg pardon?" I said.

"Walk and talk with her," he repeated.

Now this man had never walked or talked or anything like unto it with any of his five children. He was more of a yeller and hitter. So it was with some nervousness that I said, "Great! That's a wonderful idea. You walk and talk with her this week."

As it happened, I was seeing the daughter later that afternoon, and I told her what had happened. She said, "Walk and talk with me? That's not his style. He'll never do it."

"Oh, he'll do it," I said. "He may not do it well, because he doesn't know how, but I'll kick you around the block [I knew her well enough to tease her in this language] if you make it hard for him."

"Why would I make it hard for him?" she asked, her eyes tearing up for the first time since I had known her. "My dad has never cared enough about me to walk and talk with me in my life, and he won't do it now either."

But he did. When she came home that evening, he grabbed her by the elbow, dragged her out in the backyard, and said, "I need to walk and talk with you." After a few minutes of marching her around the yard and telling her how much she meant to him and how it hurt him to see her throw herself away, he stopped and said, "I think I'm supposed to listen, too," and they marched around some more while she tried to put her feelings into words.

Within six weeks they had become the best of friends (somewhat to the mother's chagrin), but the best part was that one day Janice told me, "Nobody in the world could have convinced me that my daddy could change, but he has. And if he could change, anybody could change. Maybe there's even hope for me."

I have had many such experiences. My conclusion is that there is no family strategy that is so likely to work as the father's exercising righteous patriarchal initiative to "put his house in order."

To summarize, the principle of order requires that the patriarch function in his family as the priesthood leader in his home. Without the other two principles discussed in this chapter, however (the principle of unity and the principle of agency), patriarchy can turn into its ugly counterfeit, tyranny.

Immediately after setting me apart as a stake president, Elder Boyd K. Packer sat me down to give me a few points of advice on how to succeed in my new calling. I was fully prepared to be receptive to his counsel, but I couldn't help being taken aback by his first admonition.

"Now, President, I don't want you treating your wife like you do the stake." I was mildly offended. I said, "I wasn't planning on treating either the stake or my wife badly."

"I know," he continued, "but you need to treat them well, differently. In the stake when a decision is to be made, you will seek the opinion of your counselors and other concerned individuals. Then you will prayerfully reach a decision on the matter, and they will all rally round and support you because you are the president and you have the mantle of authority. In your family when there is a decision to be made that affects everyone, you and your wife together will seek whatever counsel you might need, and together you will prayerfully come to a unified decision. If you ever pull priesthood rank on her you will have failed in your leadership."

I have thought a lot about that, and I believe it is true. In fact, I took that as the goal for my presidency also. We made all our decisions in the unity of the Spirit, and I virtually never had to "pull rank" on my counselors.

When Paul compared the unity between a husband and wife to the unity between Christ and the Church, he set a high standard for that holy union. After affirming the principle of order, he continued:

Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it; that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies.

He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church: for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church. Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband. (Eph. 5:25-33.)

Elsewhere the Lord has said to the Church (and presumably to every unit in it, including the family unit): "Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in honour preferring one another. . . . Be of the same mind one toward another." (Rom. 12:10, 16.)

The Lord has also said: "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.)

In the family that practices the principle of unity, the principle of order never chafes. But there is yet another principle that rounds out our understanding of the nature of decision-making and governance in celestial unions, the principle of agency.

There is an old saying that you can lead a horse to water but you can't make him drink. To me this is nothing more nor less than a homespun restatement of the principle of agency. Not only should we respect each other's agency, it is not really possible to destroy another's agency. But we try; we try.

I refer not only to patriarchal tyrants who attempt to impose their will upon their families, but also to wives who attempt to do the same thing in the name of righteousness. When I point out to these usually well-motivated and sincere people that they are violating the letter and spirit of the charter for the legitimate exercise of righteous authority spelled out in D&C 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants, they sometimes counter with verse 37, which says that "to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness," is condemned. (Italics added.) In their own case, they insist that the attempt to exercise "control or dominion or compulsion" is righteously motivated, and they often challenge me to fault the virtue of their goals. Their view seems to be that compulsory means are justified if the ends are worthy.

In this as in other cases it is wise to read the whole scripture. The chapter goes on to say:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever. (D&C 121:41-46; italics added.)

One day a young woman came into my office to protest the idea of patriarchal leadership in the home. She felt that such an idea gave her second-class status in the kingdom, and she had no intention of being "ruled over" by her husband. She was a recently married convert to the Church and was a very bright, independent, modern woman. She was confident that her judgment was at least as good as her husband's, and she could see no reason to defer to him or his ideas. She had a point; actually I felt that her husband was a shade "light-weight," if I may use the term, and that I would personally have valued her opinion over his on most things.

But I pointed out to her that I too had, on one or two occasions, felt that I was presided over by a bishop or quorum leader who was not as well grounded in either good judgment or gospel principles as I, but in each case I sustained him in his office. This had never required me to give up my free agency or to abandon my own resources of experience and wisdom.

Moreover, the only authority they had toward me, according to the Doctrine and Covenants, was to preside through meek and gentle long-suffering with unpretended love toward me. They were authorized to be kind to me and to seek and share pure knowledge from God on my behalf. It was permitted them to call me to repentance if they perceived through the Holy Spirit that I was straying off the path; but they were then obligated to show me even greater concern and affection lest I be offended by their warning.

I asked her if that kind of leadership would upset her. She answered that it would not offend anyone. I told her that I was grateful to belong to an organization, namely the kingdom of heaven, that authorized its leaders to preside only in that format and that I did not feel like a second-class citizen to be so presided over, even by someone less educated, less experienced, or less wise than myself.

"Yes, but that is the ideal," she said. "Whoever really achieves that? My husband sure isn't at that level."

"Right," I told her. "This life is a training situation. You also will have a chance to practice this style of leadership as a parent and in Church callings. Both of you need all the support from each other you can get to master this skill."

"But what if he tries to boss me around unrighteously?"

"I can tell from the tone of your voice that the scripture will be fulfilled that promises in such a case an `amen' to the authority of that man. That is, not only does God withdraw his approval and authority from such a leader, but those the person attempts to lead are likely to resist and rebel so that there is a natural `amen' to his leadership authority also."

Not only is obedience to the principles of order, unity, and agency required of us if we would be righteous leaders, but we simply will not succeed in our efforts to lead our families if we ignore them.
