Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Quality Time

ANN EDWARDS CANNON

One of my least favorite inventions of the modern era is quality time (see definition below). Quality Time: A concept invented in the early seventies by Phil Donahue, which suggests that busy parents can give their kids what they need by doing something really terrific with them for an hour after dinner. (See related articles: Meaningful Moments, Enlightening Discussions, Educational Activities.)

The reason I hate the whole idea of quality time is that my kids and I are no good at it. Every time we try it, we fail. Instead of having conversations like these—

Child: Why do things have to change, Mama?

Parent: Because change is a part of the Great Pattern. Could you imagine what would happen if nothing ever changed? What if every day were Christmas Day?

Child (understanding dawning like daybreak on his young face): Why, we wouldn't appreciate Christmas anymore!

Parent (smiling): Exactly, my son!

Child (embracing his parent): May I have something nutritious to eat now?

—we have conversations like these:

Parent: Where are your shoes?

Child: Can we go to Pic N' Save?

Parent: We're not talking about Pic N' Save right now. We're talking about your shoes.

Child: Oh (thinks about this for a minute). Mom, do you know where my shoes are?

Still, even though I'm not very good at it, every now and then I decide to give it another go, and announce, "Yessiree, we're going to have us some quality time today!"

The last time I did this was on President's Day. I woke up to a beautiful, clear, crisp day and decided it was the perfect time to take my four boys cross-country skiing for the first time in their lives. So we borrowed some skis, packed a lunch and a few field guides, and took off for Big Cottonwood Canyon.

Well, things didn't exactly go as planned.

To begin with, we had one of those low-level type discussions on the way up the canyon. For twenty minutes my kids kept saying a) "Why didn't you buy us those ninja turtle pies at the gas station?" or b) "we really wanted those ninja turtle pies at the gas station" or c) "All the other mothers buy their kids ninja turtle pies at the gas station."

Finally, I said, "Do you know why I didn't buy you ninja turtle pies at the gas station? Because I'm mean. Okay? I'm the meanest mom in the whole world. I majored in mean at school and I got straight A's. Did you know that? I'm so mean, in fact, that Tomorrow I'm going to make you guys all wear dresses to school if you don't stop bugging me right now!"

Not one of your better quality-time conversations, I think you'll agree.

Things didn't improve much once we arrived. While all the other families I saw seemed to be doing the quality time thing well, my own kids kept falling down, then blaming each other for it, even though nobody was touching anybody else because, of course, they didn't want to get each other's cooties.

A potential bright spot did come when Philip pulled out a field guide to identify some animal tracks. "At last!" I said to myself. "We're going to have a true quality-time experience here!"

Philip looked at the tracks, looked at his book, looked at the tracks again, then said, "Mom, this is definitely a grizzly bear track."

"There are no grizzly bears in Salt Lake," I told him. "The pioneers hired Jim Bridger to chase them out of town."

"Oh yeah, you're right," he said quickly. "I meant it belongs to a wolf. You know. The kind that kills people."

In the end it took us ten minutes to ski ten yards away from the car and forty-five minutes to ski back, and let me tell you there is no more lonely feeling in the world than seeing your warm, comfortable car just ahead of you and knowing You can't get to it no matter what.

So, I've been trying to figure out why I'm so lousy at doing quality time, and I decided it might have something to do with the way I was raised.

("Oh no," says my mother at this point, "are you going to write about me again? I wish you'd stop."

"I'm sorry," I say, "but it's your fault because you're one of the most interesting people I know. Besides, having a writer for a daughter is the Lord's little way of punishing you for that time you stole grapes at the grocery store when you were five years old."

"I never should have told you that story," she says. "I should have gone through your whole childhood with my lips taped shut.")

My mother and her children weren't pulled in so many different directions. They had time—lots and lots of time together—so she didn't expect each activity, each conversation, each moment even, to pay huge dividends. "The quality of mercy," Shakespeare once wrote, "is not strained." And neither, so it seems, should be the quality of time.
