Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Why Does My Mother's Day Potted Plant Always Die?

JANENE WOLSEY BAADSGAARD

For a few weeks before Mother's Day, kids all over the country start wondering what to get Mom for her special day.

It's only right that children should wonder about their mothers for a few weeks a year. After all, mothers are wondering all year long about the kids. Moms all over the planet continually ask themselves, "Why is it that a child who forgets to do his homework, who can't even remember to flush the toilet, can remember exactly how much allowance he got when he was in the first grade?"

When a woman has her first baby, she becomes a mother. Easy enough. When she lets emotion overrule reason and has baby number 2, she suddenly becomes a referee, only she doesn't get to wear a striped shirt, blow a whistle, or control the game.

The moment baby number 2 is born, baby number 1 approaches Mother in the recovery room of the hospital with "The Sibling Bill of Rights." Mother will never fully recover because of it.

From this time on and forevermore, Mother must count the M & M's to make sure each child gets exactly the same amount. For the rest of her mothering career, she is subjected to acute sibling attacks.

This strange malady works like this: If one child gets a present or treat or any personal attention, the other child immediately starts clenching his jaw muscles. His eyeballs flash red lasers and smoke shoots out his ears while a voice says, "Why is his ice-cream cone bigger than mine?"

This child cannot remember to bring his gym clothes home to get washed, but he can tell you exactly what Grandma gave him for his birthday when he was thirteen. Ask a child his multiplication facts and his mind may slip on one or two. But ask him whose turn it is to sit by the window in the car and you have bull's-eye accuracy.

The same child who is having trouble with measurement principles in math at school can tell you up to a micromillimeter who has the biggest piece of cake after supper. He can weigh bowls of cereal to see who got the most by balancing the bowls in both his hands while sticking out his tongue to test and allow for the wind factor.

There is really no way for Mother to win in this war. She began the losing battle when she allowed into her mind the naive thought, "Junior really needs a little brother to play with." From that point on, the only advantage she has in the fight is that she never has to employ spies.

"Mom! Jeff's been stuffing his dirty socks down the heat vents again!"

"Mom! Ann's hiding her snail collection in the toilet tank!"

Mothers never win. Just when you're finally starting to get used to waking up at 2:00 A.M. to feed the baby, the kid starts sleeping through the night. Just when you finally get diapering down to a science, the kid gets toilet trained. Just when you get really good at giving terrific birthday parties, the kid asks you to hide in your bedroom during his party so that you won't embarrass him in front of his friends. Just when your kid stops getting embarrassed when you come out of your bedroom, he moves away to go to college. By the time you finally know how to put on one heck of a wedding, all the kids are married off.

And don't be fooled. You can't pass along all that good stuff you learned when the kids have their own kids, because the in-laws think you're butting in where you're not invited if you give unsolicited advice. So you sit back and watch your kids make the same mistakes with their kids that you did with them, and you bite your tongue a lot.

Just when you think you're not going to worry about all this mother stuff anymore, one of the kids comes back home to stay and brings along the wife and seven kids.

On Mother's Day in church, people make you stand up and admit it. Then they give you a potted plant in perfect health, which you somehow always manage to kill in three days flat. You begin to wonder if that plant is somehow symbolic of your mothering abilities.

Always, without fail, someone will stand up in church on Mother's Day and say something like, "My mother never, oh, no, never, oh, not even one little time . . . raised her voice in our home."

You start to slink down in your seat and mumble something you hope no one can hear, but at the same time you want to jump up on your seat and scream, "What would she do if your pants were on fire?"

Before I became a mother, I always looked critically at other people's children and thought, "My children will never, no never, have unattended runny noses, limp bangs hanging in their eyes, or thumbs stuck disgustingly in their mouths." The other day I looked at my children. One had an unattended runny nose, one had limp bangs hanging in her eyes, and two others were disgustingly sucking their thumbs. Sometimes I wonder if maybe I should have been a nun.

When Rudyard Kipling wrote, "If you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs and blaming it on you; if you can trust yourself when all men doubt you but make allowances for their doubting too . . ." I think he had mothers in mind.

So while all the kids are wondering for a few short weeks what to get Mom for her special day, Mom is still, as always, wondering about the kids. No, she isn't wondering why she had you and your brother or sister. She's wondering why at one minute she feels such tenderness swell inside her, she can barely contain it without cradling you—then at another minute she hears herself yelling, "Why don't you grow up?"

She's wondering why after all the things she said that you didn't listen to, you chose to listen to that one—"Grow up!"—and you did.

She knows the love she feels for you and your brother or sister is complete. She knows her love can't be divided up like a pie, with everybody getting a piece exactly the same size.

Every child gets the whole pie.
