Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

For the Love of My Mother

HEBER J. GRANT

There have been many experiences in my life illustrating the benefits that come when we sacrifice our personal ambitions for that which we feel in our heart is our duty. As a boy I had an overwhelming ambition for a university education and a degree from a great school. I had very little hope of obtaining it, having no means and having a widowed mother to look after.

I met President George Q. Cannon, then our delegate to Congress, and he said:

"Heber, would you like to go to the naval academy or West Point?"

I told him I would.

He said: "Which one?"

I said: "The naval academy."

"All right. I will give you the appointment without competitive examination."

For the first time in my life I could not sleep at night: I lay awake nearly all night long rejoicing that the ambition of my life was to be fulfilled. I fell asleep just a little before daylight, and dreamed of what would come to me with an education.

My mother had to wake me, and when I came to breakfast, I said: "Mother, what a marvelous thing it is that I am to have an education as fine as that of any young man in all Utah. I could hardly sleep; I was awake until almost daylight this morning. Isn't it wonderful to think that poor as we are, I am to have this opportunity?"

She said: "Yes, it is." And as I looked into her face, I saw that she had been weeping.

I have heard of people, who, when drowning, had their entire life pass before them in almost a few seconds, and suddenly it flashed through my mind what it would mean to my mother if I were to go out into the world to make my record and be away from her. I was her only child, and I saw myself traveling all over the world in a ship, away from my widowed mother. I laughed and put my arms around her, and kissed her and said:

"Mother, I would not go to Annapolis for all the education and all the glory of all the world. I am going to be a business man and shall enter an office right away and take care of you, and have you quit keeping boarders for a living."

She broke down and wept and said that she had not closed her eyes, but had prayed all night that I would give up my life's ambition so that she would not be left alone.

Now, I have been rewarded for having that spirit in my heart as a boy, notwithstanding my burning ambition for education and for a place among the great names in the world. I sacrificed it all for what? For the love of my mother; and the love of my mother led me to live a life that has brought me to the position that I occupy.

Love God; love and honor your parents; honor your father and your mother that your days may be long; honor your country; live the gospel of Jesus Christ, and God will bless you, and I bless you, as His servant, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
