Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Mother

JOSEPH F. SMITH

I learned in my childhood that no love in all the world can equal the love of a true mother. I am at a loss to know how it would be possible for any one to love children more truly than did my mother. I have felt, sometimes, How could even the Father love his children more than my mother loved hers? Her love was life to me, it was strength, encouragement; it was a love that begot love or likeness in myself. I knew she loved me with all her heart and soul. She would toil and sacrifice herself day and night for temporal comforts and blessings to provide for and give to her children. No sacrifice of self—of her time, leisure, pleasure, or opportunities for rest—was considered for a moment, when compared with her duty and love to her children.

When fifteen years of age, I was called to a foreign country to preach the gospel—or to learn how, and to learn it for myself. The strongest anchor of my life, which helped to hold my ambitions and desires steady, to bring me upon a level and keep me straight, was the love of my mother. Only a young boy, with immature judgment, without the advantages of an education, I was thrown into the midst of the greatest temptations possible for any boy or man to be subjected to. Yet, whenever those allurements became most enticing to me, the first thought that arose in my soul was this: "Remember the love of your mother. Remember how she strove for your welfare. Remember how willing she was to sacrifice her life for your good. Remember what she taught you in your childhood." Mother always insisted upon my reading the New Testament—the only book, except a few school books, that we had in the family, or that was within the reach of us at that time. My love for my mother and the recollection of her teachings became a strong defense, a protecting barrier between sin, temptation and me. I became able to turn aside from evil by the help of the Lord, and because of the love begotten in my soul toward her whom I knew loved me more than any other living being could love me.

A wife may love her husband, but this love is different from the love of mother for her child. The true mother, the mother who has the fear of God and the love of truth in her soul, will never hide from danger and harm, nor leave her child exposed to them. But, as naturally as sparks fly upward, and as it is to breathe the breath of life, mother steps between her child and danger. She will defend her child to the uttermost. Her life is as nothing in the balance, in comparison with the life of her child. That is the love of true motherhood—for children.

I place a high estimate upon the love of mother. I have often said, and will repeat it, that the love of a true mother comes nearer to being like the love of God than any other kind of love. There are two divine personages that I can scarcely think or talk about without it softens my spirit, and brings me down to the similitude of a little child; and those two beings are my mother and my Lord Jesus, my Redeemer! You boys who are absent today, remember mother with a letter. She deserves it as regularly as the weeks come and go. In the pursuit of your duties, your vocations, as well as in all the vicissitudes and actions of your lives, remember her counsels, admonitions, and prayers. Honor and respect her as she deserves, and you shall be honored by the Prince of Life.
