Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

A Drink of Water

ANNIE PIKE GREENWOOD

When I was a child and used to wake at night, fearing the engulfing dark I would call, "Mama! Mama! I want—a drink—of water!"

No matter how faint my voice, she always heard and gave answering presence, dispelling the strangeness of the shadowy room as she came. I see her yet, sweet angel, in her long white gown there in the moonlight, or softly luminous through the starlit dark. No matter how tired, no matter how sick, she always came. And now I know that the thing which caused her death—cancer—was often stabbing under her heart even as she uncomplainingly held to my childish lips that drink of water. I wonder if she ever guessed that my thirst was really for her consoling presence? She brought me the drink of water—and she brought me more than that: love, and security, and peace. Yes, she brought more, even, than that.

When my first-born was about three years old he often woke me at night by his fretful cries for a drink of water. I was very tired, and it seemed to me that I would no sooner fall asleep than his little voice would rouse me with "Mama! Mama! I want—a drink—of water!" And more than once I spoke impatiently to him. I called him "Dearie," and "Sweetheart," but my voice was harshly impatient. I went back to bed and thought to return to sleep, but I found myself recalling the time when I, too, was a little child calling for water in the night, and I saw her (patient, lovely mother!) bending above me, the glass of water in her hand, breathing words of love. Had she answered my demand impatiently I would have cowered back into my little bed with sobs of despair. Oh, my little son!—that you should have had a mother so unworthy!—I slipped from the bed and went to look upon my darling's face. I remembered with a pang that he had whimpered when I told him to lie still and not bother me again. To what sad dreams had I sent the lonely little fellow by my impatient words? To whom on earth might he turn for that inopportune drink if not to his mother? I knelt beside him long with my arm about his little body. Oh, how I hope that the memory of that night will be blotted from his mind! But how can we tell what he will remember?

I shall never be the patient mother that she was, but I try not to murmur at the demands of my little ones even though I may be both tired and sick, for how can I tell at what moment is being impressed upon their minds the image of me which they will bear through life? How happy I would be if at some trying time in their lives they might be set upon the right path by remembering me, their mother, patiently and lovingly coming to them through the silent night with a drink of water.
