Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

On This Mother's Day

DAVID O. MCKAY

Some of us cannot put our arms around our mother on this Mother's Day and say, "I love you," because our mothers have gone, but over the years their influence remains with us.

To those who still have their mothers, now is the time to fill your life with incidents and treasured associations that will last you throughout life when you think of your angel mothers. It is not only on Mother's Day, but on every day that you should show your tribute and your love for mothers.

Mothers sow the seeds in childhood that determine to a great extent life's harvests in adulthood.

The noblest calling in the world is that of mother. True motherhood is the most beautiful of all arts, the greatest of all professions. She who can paint a masterpiece or who can write a book that will influence millions deserves the plaudits and admiration of mankind; but she who rears successfully a family of healthy, beautiful sons and daughters whose immortal souls will be exerting an influence throughout the ages, long after paintings shall have faded, and books and statues shall have been destroyed, deserves the highest honor that man can give.

Motherhood is the greatest potential influence either for good or ill in human life. The mother's image is the first that stamps itself upon the unwritten page of the young child's mind. It is her caress that first awakens a sense of security; her kiss, the first realization of affection; her sympathy and tenderness, the first assurance that there is love in the world.

True, there comes a time when Father takes his place as exemplar in the young child's mind; and in the latter's budding ambition to develop manly traits, he outwardly seems to turn from the more gentle and tender virtues engendered by the mother. But that ever-directing and restraining influence implanted during the first years of his childhood lingers with him and permeates his thoughts and memory as distinctively as perfume clings to each particular flower.

In more than one instance in the life of fiery youth, this lingering influence has proved a safeguard in the hour of temptation—an influence in its restraining power greater than the threat of the law of the land, the ostracism of society, or the fear of violating a commandment of God. In a moment of youthful recklessness the youth might defy one or all of these forces, and do what his hot blood bade, but at the crucial moment, the flash of a mother's confiding trust, the realization of her sorrow if he fails to be true to it, has given him power to refrain from indulgence that might blight his entire career.

We should give to every woman a high place of honor. To maintain and to merit this high dignity, she must possess those virtues which have always and which will ever demand the respect and love of mankind. To know what these virtues are, let everyone think of his own mother. With her picture in mind, each will agree that "a beautiful and chaste woman is the perfect workmanship of God."

A woman possesses power to ennoble or degrade. It is she who gives life to the babe, who wields gradually and constantly the impress of character to childhood and youth, who inspires manhood to noble ambition or entices and ensnares it to defeat and degradation, who makes home a haven of bliss or a den of discontent, who at her best gives to life its sweetest hopes and choicest blessings.

Motherhood is just another name for sacrifice. From the moment the wee, helpless babe is laid on the pillow beside her, mother daily, even hourly, gives of her life to her loved one. It has been aptly said that babes draw strength at first from her bosom but always from her heart. All through the years of babyhood, childhood, and youth, aye, even after her girls themselves become mothers and her sons, fathers, she tenderly and lovingly sacrifices for them her time, her comfort, her pleasures, her needed rest and recreation, and if necessary, health and life itself! No language can express the power and beauty and heroism of a mother's love.

The sweetness as well as the greatness of motherhood lies in the overcoming of self-love by mother for her children. She is ever giving something of her life to make another happier—a Christlike virtue that makes motherhood sublime.

My fellow associates, always do those things that will be happy memories—especially memories of the kindnesses that you have shown your mother. The fewer memories of forgetfulness or of neglect you have, the happier you will be.

Not only on one day, then, should we pay tribute to our mothers; but rather make that day the means of increasing our determination and ability to make every day a day in which to honor Mother in particular and every woman who desires to be like Mother.
