Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

A Deliberate Choice: Staying at Home

BEPPIE HARRISON

Free agency offers us much more than a decision between good and evil: it opens before us a splendid panorama of choices between an infinite number of alternatives, many just as good as others. Only seldom do we encounter pure black or pure white. Most of the time most of us make our way through an everchanging world of grays, trying to do the best we can. The choices are all there.

I suspect that we as women find this whole business a little intoxicating, particularly now in the last quarter of the twentieth century when all sorts of alternatives are readily available that our mothers or grandmothers would never have dreamed of. Opportunities that individual women had to spend their whole lives fighting for are there for our daughters to pluck as a matter of course. We can do anything, we can go anywhere, we can be anyone. Unfortunately, there's a catch involved. We do not appear to have developed nearly as spectacularly in generosity. For any choice we make, there is a vociferous minority determined to point out what a short-sighted choice it was, and how foolish we, in particular, are for having made it. If we go out to work, there is a legion reminding us that we are probably neglecting our children; if we stay at home, there is another legion reproaching us for having no spunk or ambition, and very likely not much brain either.

I have no desire to enter the discussion at this level. For one thing, I believe rather firmly in the principle of free agency, and who am I to say anything about somebody else's thoughtful decision? But there is something I feel very strongly about. I think that we as a society are letting our young daughters down. Those of us who deeply believe that it is important to do the raising of our children ourselves, that home is as valid a work place as any other, that we do not need to have a paycheck to give our efforts importance, are letting the advocates of a-job-for-everyone win by default.

I've listened to a lot of the go-out-or-stay-home debate, and it seems to me that all the advantages commonly cited are sort of vague and theoretical and sometimes downright patronizing. "Oh, of course it's fine to stay at home, if you want to." "It's good for a child to have the kind of one-to-one relationship he gets with his mother." "It's a good thing for society to have mothers at home—we've all heard about how many services depend on the volunteer hours they put in between and after childraising." But I haven't heard anybody talk about how enjoyable it can be. I haven't heard anybody reassuring restless girls and young women that they don't have to be Mother Earth Incarnate to have fun with their own children, even if they do see them all day long. Nobody seems to be saying out loud that there are real advantages in spending our workday unsupervised in our own homes, vacuuming or sorting laundry or planting petunias, if that's what we feel like doing that day.

On the other hand, when it comes to citing the disadvantages of staying at home, the debate is depressingly specific. I have heard about the drudgery of keeping house, the boredom of conversing mainly with preschoolers, the feeling of being trapped by responsibilities that last for years. And I'm perfectly willing to admit that all that can be true, and even that it is true, some days. But I want to let all these young women, forming their ideas and looking forward to their lives, into a very well-kept secret. Nothing they can choose to do will not have moments of drudgery or boredom, maybe even of feeling trapped. Unfortunately, that is what much of life is all about: making the best of being bored, getting through the drudgery, finding internal freedom when our circumstances have us trapped. It all happens anywhere. It happens at home; it happens on the job: it happens simply because we're human beings in an imperfect world, surrounded by other human beings.

Maybe we've fallen into this business of viewing home as a particularly unrewarding workplace without quite realizing it. Part of it comes from the new emancipation of being able to complain about our children and our families. When I was growing up, everybody sort of expected that girls would grow up to be wives and mothers. Maybe they'd do something else before they settled down, but nobody suggested that settling down wasn't the point of the game, unless one wanted a career, which was always something special and implied a mannish suit and the willingness to plow under family considerations. A sensible woman who had found a husband and produced children kept her mouth shut about any drawbacks she found in the arrangement.

Then came women's liberation. Women's liberation suddenly freed us to complain. And complain we have, long and loud. Mind you, I'm not saying there aren't things to complain about. As a fascinating conversationalist, a two-year-old has unavoidable limitations. If there is any one thing to be said about scrubbing the kitchen floor, it is that it will have to be scrubbed again—probably tomorrow, if we have small children. Few husbands are really ready for immediate translation into glory. (Neither are very many wives, but that's not the point at the moment.) So complaining felt good. It was absolutely lovely to say all those things out loud that we'd been thinking and to discover that we were not alone in feeling that way. And with joy and mingled voices, our complaining rose louder and louder until all of a sudden we found ourselves seeming to say to the young girls coming up that the transitory mood of a stormy or unsettled day is The Way Life at Home Is. All the time.

Staying home with young children is, like anything else, whatever we want to make of it. But being around young children day after day has the potential for more amusement, enjoyment, and satisfaction than practically any other job going. At seventeen months, my James does not discuss current affairs with me very well, but nobody else in the world greets me with the same lovely, wholehearted grin that he does. There is one human being in the world to whom I am faultless, beautiful, the unfailing source of warmth and comfort. Talk about being good for my ego! Of course, he'll grow out of it, and I hope that as he discovers the many imperfections his sisters have already identified, he will continue to be fond of the poor old woman—but I've got that adoration now, and it gets me through a lot of dirty diapers and oatmeal painted on the furniture.

These aren't once-in-a-while moments of satisfaction. They happen all the time. And there's nothing particularly brilliant or adorable about my children, except of course to me. That's what young children are like, and it's every bit as true as the propaganda that says they are noisy, messy pests. I want the young girls who are growing up to know that.

Children are funny. We can laugh harder at—and with—our children than at any TV comedy. Sometimes it's unconscious humor; sometimes it's the family clown for the day, who is enjoying his performance as much as his spectators are. Children can make us catch our breath with amazement at their thought-provoking observations. They're busy all day long in the important work of organizing their impressions and discovering what kind of a world this is—and sometimes they put things together in a totally new and exciting way that changes the whole way we look at something from that time forward.

Children are lovable. It's when we have one of our own that we suddenly realize how much we love that scrap of humanity. Sometimes we realize it with a sweeping suddenness when we see the naked newborn in the delivery room; sometimes it happens later, when a flood of maternal possessiveness suddenly takes us by surprise. But whenever, however, it happens, it's that love that sustains us through all the weeks and months before the baby can give anything back. There's the first smile, the first real smile with the eyes as well as the crooked little mouth, but to me, the real first is the first time I feel the baby arms around my neck giving me a genuine hug. That reduces me to putty. And they go on being lovable. They're lovable when they're hot and grubby, and when they're sprawled and defenseless in sleep, and even when they're naughty. I can be legitimately and justifiably furious, and in the middle of expressing my righteous indignation I suddenly see that small stricken face staring up at me, and my heart twists with love. They are no less loveable as teenagers, elaborately nonchalant with success or heartbreakingly vulnerable when things have gone wrong. Big, little, good, bad, awake, asleep—we need a whole new vocabulary of love for our children.

Of course, none of this happens without our putting a lot of work in. But that's true of anything. I don't quite understand why work on a job for which we get paid is somehow considered more meaningful than the work we do at home, calmly, repetitively teaching that cushions belong on the couch and feet belong on the floor, that you do need to take a bath even if you did have one yesterday, that you do not snatch the train from your brother even if you do want to play with it, and most important of all, you do not, repeat, do not walk in muddy boots across that section of floor you can see your mother is mopping.

Some of the work we do is peculiar to the career of being a housewife—just as certain work is peculiar to being a secretary, or a computer programmer, or even a fashion model, I suppose—but a lot of the needed skills are the same ones we have to work on in any profession. Calmness, patience, a willingness to let bygones be bygones and move on to the next problem—that's just part of getting along with people. Did you ever hear of office politics? Exactly the same emotions fuel those interesting encounters with a teenager that end with a slammed bedroom door and us breathing heavily in the kitchen trying to calm down and keep our sense of proportion. In those moments it might be a comfort to think of the working women all over the country leaning on the water cooler seething with fury over the pigheadedness of boss or subordinate. People are people, wherever they are. And the big advantage to dealing with people at home is that deep down, sometimes very deep down, we love each other. We care about each other. So eventually we finish doing our deep breathing, and calmly, humbly, knock on the door and confess where we feel we lost control, and start over again on the business of trying to teach each other across the misunderstanding. And when we've crossed it at last, we've gotten a lot further than that woman at the water cooler. With the same reconciliation effort, she may have burnished her image with her boss, or guaranteed more productive time from her underling, but we've helped strengthen links that are going to last through eternity. That is love, and I think I'm immensely fortunate to have it a part of my daily working life.

There is one infallible method for getting oneself into this career of being a housewife. A young woman meets some personable young man and marries him, and one thing leads to another, and there she is, newly retired from the working world, very probably because she's expecting her baby in a month or so. She has become a Housewife.

That is what happened to me—not exactly when, as a young girl, I might have expected it to happen. But the Lord moves in mysterious ways. As a parent now, I find it fascinating to consider the way in which the Lord tailors the life experiences of each of his multitudinous children here on earth to provide each of us with exactly the learning experiences we need and can grow upon. Obviously perfectly aware that this particular daughter has a stubborn and argumentative streak, the Lord has had a pattern for me that has consistently been to withhold a blessing until I have really realized that down to the very foundation of my soul, that is what I have wanted. So it was with my marriage.

During the years when most of my friends were meeting and marrying, I was meeting and not marrying. It was never right. The young men who wanted to marry me were nice people but never more, and the young men I wanted to marry clearly preferred to wait for someone else. So, by default more than by design, I developed a career. I had the satisfaction of discovering that there was work I could do well; I had the independence of being able to decide what I wanted to do, how I should spend my money, where I thought it would be nice to go; and gradually, day by day, month by month, year by year, I learned that for me, that wasn't enough. I looked at my friends who were flourishing and floundering in early marriage, starting families with budgets stretched beyond the breaking point, and did my best not to envy their struggles. But I knew, ever more surely, that their battlefield was the one I wanted to fight on. So when, late in my twenties, I encountered a particularly fascinating young British architect, I realized immediately that not only did I very much want to marry him—I very much wanted to be married.

Now, fifteen years later, I still feel exactly the same way. Of course, in the way we each tend to think our personal experience has universal application, I believe there is a great deal to be said for a young woman's giving herself a chance to grow up and find out who she is before hurling herself into matrimony and a new family. On the other hand, my sister, who lives near me with her seven children and her husband whom she married when she was nineteen, believes equally firmly that she married at exactly the right time for her, and that the struggles to grow up together have welded them into an extraordinarily close and intimate unit. So I guess there is no generally applicable formula, and the best we can say to every young woman is be as wise as she can, pray honestly, and be prepared to find answers in ways she may not expect. Most of all, she should be careful. Her marriage is the foundation and cornerstone of her family for now and forever, and eternity is a very long time to spend with the wrong person. Of all the reasons there are for marrying, there is only one that I can say unequivocably is a bad one, and that is to marry because one's best friend is marrying.

After the marriage come the children. Right then is when the woman of today has to make her decision. It didn't used to be such a visible fork in the road. For most women, the choice was automatic. You had children and you stayed home with them. But women's liberation, which has made so many alternatives available to us, has produced a climate of opinion in which the choice to stay at home and raise your children yourself is simply another one of those alternatives; and, if we're to be absolutely honest about the general attitude of today, rather a shabby and unimaginative alternative at that.

There is no doubt that for many mothers, the choice to stay at home with their children does not exist. The quality of mothering done by many of those women who have to split themselves between two lives reduces me to humble admiration. But I am not talking about them. I am talking about the rest of us, women who may dress less elegantly and eat more macaroni and cheese on a single income than we would with two paychecks coming in, but who basically have the option to choose not to sell their time. Surrounded by loud praise of the independence and self-fulfillment of the wage earner, and tempted by the thousands of delightful goodies we could have so much more easily if there were more money flowing into the family coffers, we Latter-day Saint women sometimes feel we are alone in being counseled to stay at home with our growing children. We're not. Ruth Graham, the wife of the Reverend Billy Graham, has said that the real liberation of women would be to be freed from the burden of working outside the home. She goes on to say that where there is genuine economic necessity, the children recognize it. "Children are perceptive," she says. "They know if their mother is working for an extra color television or because the family cannot do without the money she earns."

So if by choosing not to work outside the home we are also choosing not to have that extra color television for our children (and most of us on a single income in these hard times are making that kind of choice), and given that staying at home has very positive and enjoyable aspects for us as individuals, what do the kids get out of it?

One of the biggest things, I would suggest, is that much maligned quantity time that the trendy ladies dismiss so cavalierly. You know the line: "Oh, but I have quality time with my children." Well, I have quantity time, and I would bravely suggest that it's every bit as important. I think that children learn a lot of what it is to be an adult during the times when nobody is paying any particular attention to them. I would even hint that the child whose mother focuses her whole attention upon that child whenever they are together is developing a distorted idea of what a woman's life is all about.

I contend that my children are learning constantly, and valuable lessons at that. We are encouraged to keep our houses and yards in order. And how is this tidiness supposed to happen? Little as they are, my children learn that a neat and tidy home is not created by waving a wand. They learn that it takes work, that playthings as well as grown-up possessions have places where they belong, that spilled juice has to be mopped up by somebody, and that dirty clothes have to be physically moved from the spot where they are discarded to get into the laundry. Apparently these are not easy lessons to learn, judging by the daily necessity to teach them all over again, but I am convinced that the baby trotting after me as I vacuum is gradually developing a preference for cleanliness.

I honestly don't feel I need to be apologetic about spending time on the telephone sharing confidences with a friend while Marianna hangs on my leg begging for attention. She'll get her attention when I hang up. Since I'm home all day, there's time to sit down and find out what she wanted and to give her a tickle and a cuddle, interrupted only by James, who wants some too. But it hasn't hurt her to wait. She is just beginning to have friends, and somewhere in her developing world view I want her to learn that grown-ups have friends as well, and like to spend time with them. We all have a lifelong battle with jealousy in a thousand different forms. Perhaps Marianna, competing for my attention with my friend on the phone, is on her way to learning that there is room for many friends in my life, that she herself is by far one of the most important of my friends, but not the only one.

I'm glad I have quantity time to offer my children, because their crises and problems are not synchronized with the pattern of a working day. My oldest is just approaching adolescence, but I can see already that as she grows older, problems that are urgent when they arise—generally just after school—may have faded by later in the afternoon, when a working mother is just getting home. This is not to say that a working mother can't be responsive and consoling, but it's a lot harder. It doesn't take great sensitivity to figure out something's wrong when a tear-stained face greets you at the door, but I worry that I would miss some of the very faint signals of distress I hear in the carefully controlled account she may give her father that evening when he's home. No mother can make everything all better; growing up is hard. But at least I'm there to offer comfort and companionship, even if my mind is sometimes distracted.

Our children need to learn about independence and self-reliance, even in such simple ways as learning to amuse themselves. In a way, the child whose mother feels obliged to be a constant entertainment director is as crippled as the child who spends hours mesmerized by the television screen. How many of us remember childhood hours lying on the grass watching clouds drift past? We are so inundated by advice these days on how to challenge a child's intelligence that we sometimes forget that children need time to discover what they want to learn, and that a child may long as much as we do for a moment when there is nothing to do next—when he can, if he wishes, do nothing for a few minutes. Even the daughter hanging on our chair and whining, "I'm bored," is, after all, just one more in the long chain of generations of children complaining of boredom, and if we are in the middle of making up a grocery list, or mending some trousers, or writing a letter, or even reading the comics, there is no reason in this world why she can't wait until we are finished—by which time, in the exasperating way of children, she will probably have thought up something absolutely fascinating all by herself.

There are certainly times when we want to share their activities, but those are not all of the times. In the quantity of time we have together, there are hours to spend jointly and hours to spend separately.

As women in the Church, we have special responsibilities to teach our children how the gospel forms the pattern and structure of our daily life. All that time on the telephone pinning down a substitute to teach our Primary class is one way a child, overhearing, learns that we have the responsibility for working out the administration of the Church here on earth. The child hanging around as his mother arranges for dinners to be brought in for a mother with a new baby, or sets up appointments for her visiting teaching, is learning something about compassionate service and the sturdy network of sisterhood in the Church. The child listening to us passing on the special request for ward members to fast and pray for a family in particular difficulties is learning about faith and the love we try to share with one another.

The temptation to reserve scripture reading for times when the children are peacefully in bed is enormous, and yet our children need to see us reading the scriptures for our own spiritual development. They need us to read the scriptures to them, but they also need to see that we as their mothers read the scriptures for ourselves, not simply as a good example, but as food for our spirits as vital as the food we place on the dining room table for our bodies. The child watching his mother reading the scriptures with an absorption so total she doesn't even notice he is there is learning a lesson as important as many she will teach with her full attention to him. These are quantity time lessons that nobody else can teach our children, because to a child his mother is somebody utterly separate from all the others. To see the part the gospel plays in his mother's life has a significance it would not have if it were, for example, a babysitter doing exactly the same thing.

The gospel gives us the entirely unique perspective of seeing our families as eternally joined. I have lots of friends. Some I enjoy for one reason, some for another. We share different facets of this amazing world. But of all my friends, the two whose relationship with me matters the most are my two sisters, because we are the only ones who have this eternal dimension to our friendship. It amplifies the giggles and sharing; it makes struggling through the arguments and irritations an absolute necessity; it locks us together in cozy warmth. We're going to be bumping up against each other for a long, long time. And so when I look at my own squirming, brawling, all too frequently squabbling brood, I am determined to do everything I can to help them develop the same strong bonds between them that will last when time itself has lost its meaning. I don't know how others make brothers and sisters love each other, but I suspect a most important aspect is to keep down as much as possible the obstacles to their discovering that love all by themselves. Trying to be as fair as possible and yet letting each of them know that each is different and therefore gets my love and attention meted out in slightly different ways—that can't be equalized like apples or oranges. I try to seize upon each demonstration of respect and affection they give each other, and lavish upon them praise and appreciation, letting them know that these are the attitudes I value, the virtues I encourage. I also believe in insisting that however heated the sisterly (or brotherly) debate, it is to be conducted in a civil tone of voice and to take into consideration the probability that the erring sibling did whatever she did for motives that seemed reasonable to her at the time. In other words, the children should learn to treat their sisters and brothers as they would treat their friends, because for all the long years and yearless span ahead, their siblings are going to be their friends—their cherished, infuriating, eternal friends.

Now, I certainly do not wish to imply that any of these values and lessons are mystic secrets, beyond the grasp of any woman who chooses to work outside her home. Other women make other choices, and many of them find time for a range of housekeeping and mothering activities quite apart from their wage-earning duties. All I really know about is me, and I know I have a definitely finite amount of time and energy available. I am grateful that I have the opportunity to spend most of both in the place and with the people who matter most of all to me. My children will outgrow me, as I have outgrown my mother; the absolute dependency of the infant gradually ebbs and dwindles away and is replaced by the friendship of two adults who know each other with the greatest possible intimacy. This time with them close to me is so short, I want to cry out. I cannot bind them close to me; I can only nurture and treasure the love we have for each other, which will join us when the elemental need is gone. Time passes, and as it passes, the bodies of my children grow to match their spirits, which were never younger than mine. This time when they are entrusted into my care is only an interval, after all.

In this swirling sea of change there is only one other fixed point, my husband. Poor invisible man: I've hardly mentioned him, intent as I have been on the elements of my working day, when he is away at his office. And yet he plays an enormous part in my life. I think the interplay and balance between working husband and stay-at-home wife is particularly important and often misjudged and maligned. My husband is my window on the world. During these years of intensive childrearing, his orbit is obviously much wider than mine. He is out in the world every day; I take periodic forays, frequently with children clutching my skirts. Our roles are interlaced. If for me he represents a fresh breeze from outside, for him I am a haven from competition, someone whose love and respect are not related to his level of achievement. What we need from each other, what we do for each other, is different. This is not to say that there are not times when he is amused and refreshed by a glimpse of the different world I inhabit, times when he is the haven for me from the frustrations and exasperations of dealing with our children. And sometimes our needs to receive comfort and reassurance coincide on the same days, and there is a brief brisk struggle to determine who is going to be the haven for whom. Perhaps the most important thing is that we see our accomplishments and achievements as shared. We both glow with pride when our daughter performs the piano sonata, practice for which I have supervised for weeks on end; and we are both triumphant when his architectural work receives an award.

I truly don't understand why my sense of achievement in these accomplishments should be denigrated, as it often is. I have heard people say bitterly that women like me are only finding ourselves through others, instead of doing anything on our own. Don't they understand the concept of working on joint endeavors? Is the lighting director to take no pride in what he does because he is not the actor on the stage? Has the producer no creative function because his work is done away from the audience? I am sure my husband would do well if I were not there; I know he does better because I am, and in my opinion this fact diminishes neither of us. A human being, I believe, is built to lean just a little—to lean upon a loved partner, to lean upon the Lord.

Like the Lord, my husband knows all about me and loves me anyway. My baby, James, thinks I am wonderful and marvelous and all-powerful because he is young and ignorant. In time he will grow up and find out about me; and eventually, I hope, he will find some young woman who will do some things differently and some things the same, and he will come to love her the way my husband loves me—strengths, weaknesses, and all. In return I hope he, and the girls, will come to know the uniquely rewarding territory of marriage, the closeness, the sharing, the wordless communication across the room, the jokes nobody else would understand or care about. It won't be good all the time; no marriage is good all the time. My bishop counseled us wisely when we were married. He told us we need love most when we deserve it least. And we need the love of the Lord. I am so grateful for the Church, for the framework it gives to the fabric of my life, for the discipline, the authority, the strength, and the promises.

Sometimes I can shut my eyes and almost feel the golden days slipping away, as babies scramble into toddlers, and toddlers lengthen into schoolchildren, and childhood blurs into adolescence. These years are so very short, and there's the whole world out there waiting for me when they are gone. I think of those young girls of today, surrounded by the subtle and not-so-subtle urgings to turn their backs on the traditional roles of women, and I want to tell them with all my heart: think carefully. Pray hard, and listen very, very intently for your particular guidance. I can't tell them what it will be. But I can tell them that that lifework of being a wife and mother is one of the most joyous, most demanding, most satisfying opportunities that exists, and I am passionately grateful that that lifework is mine.
