Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Mothering: Everyday Choices, Eternal Blessings

MARJORIE P. HINCKLEY

I grew up in a family where there was a firm foundation of faith, and so my love for the Savior began at an early age. Hanging on our bedroom wall when I was a child was a large print of a famous painting that depicts the boy Jesus teaching the learned men in the temple. Mother had positioned the picture so that the first thing my eyes saw when I awakened each morning was the beautiful face of Jesus. I was grown and long gone from home before I realized what a profound effect this had had on my life.

My love and appreciation for the Savior took on a new dimension when my husband and I visited the Holy Land. I will never forget that experience. We arrived in Nazareth at noon. The main street was narrow and steep, crowded with merchants selling their wares—everything from fish to nylons. The noise was deafening. Schoolchildren were on their way home for lunch. At the bottom of the street was a very large camel, and a group of children chattering with excitement gathered around it. Two boys about nine years of age were making their way up the street, one walking backwards as they threw a ball back and forth. "Was this the way it was when Jesus was a boy?" I asked myself. "Did He go home for lunch and stop to look at a camel and throw a ball with His friends?" I began to understand more fully that even though He was divine, the Son of God, the Prince of Peace, the King of Glory, He was also mortal. He lived on the same earth we live on. He had to overcome the challenges of mortality even as you and I do. He had to discipline Himself to get up in the morning and do His chores. He had to study and learn. My love for Him knows no bounds.

But even though my love for the Savior and my faith in Him are deep and satisfying, I believe what President Harold B. Lee once said: "The testimony we have today will not be our testimony of tomorrow. Our testimony is either going to grow and grow until it becomes as the brightness of the sun, or it is going to diminish to nothing, depending on what we do about it" (Stand Ye in Holy Places: Selected Sermons and Writings of President Harold B. Lee [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984], p. 91).

When we develop a foundation of faith based upon the Savior, what do we as wives, mothers, and women do with it? The following answer from President Spencer W. Kimball has become a wellknown favorite of mine: "We had full equality as [our Father's] spirit children. . . . Within those great assurances, however, our roles and assignments differ" ("The Role of Righteous Women," Ensign, November 1979, p. 102). So your way of strengthening your faith and building the kingdom is probably different from my way because our roles and assignments are different. Some of us have children and grandchildren and even great-grandchildren. Some have none. Some are widowed or divorced. Some are affluent, while others live on the edge of poverty. Some have been educated formally, and others have learned their most important lessons from everyday life.

Some of you are mothers of young children. Though it may not always seem like it, these are golden years for you—years when you will probably do the most important work of your lives. Don't wish away your years of caring for small children. Life is what happens to you while you are making other plans. This is a time of great opportunity for you to build the kingdom. When you teach children to love their Heavenly Father, you have done one of the greatest things you will ever do. I have never felt a need to apologize for my role as a full-time homemaker and mother.

These are, however, busy, busy days for you. I have seen women in all kinds of circumstances—Chinese women working on road repairs, European women working in the fields, Asian women sweeping streets—but it is my opinion that American women, especially Latter-day Saint women, are among the hardest-working women in the world. You plant gardens and bottle the produce; you sew and bargain shop. You go on the heart-fund drive and take dinners to new mothers and those who are sick in your neighborhood. You take care of aged parents, climb mountains with Cub Scouts, go to Little League games, sit on the piano bench while Jennie practices, do temple work, and worry about getting your journal up-to-date. My heart bursts with pride when I see you come into church on Sunday, sometimes as early as 8:30 in the morning, your children all clean and shiny, your arms loaded with supplies, as you head for classes where you teach other women's children. You scrub your house with little or no domestic help and then try to be glamorous for your husband when he arrives home at night. Remember, my dear friends, that you are now doing the work that God intended you to do. Be grateful for the opportunity.

My concern for you is that you are trying to cover all the bases at one time. You cannot be everything for everyone all the time. Belle S. Spafford, former general president of the Relief Society, wrote: "The average woman today, I believe, would do well to appraise her interests, evaluate the activities in which she is engaged, and then take steps to simplify her life, putting things of first importance first, placing emphasis where the rewards will be greatest and most enduring, and ridding herself of the less rewarding activities. The endless enticements and demands of life today require that we determine priorities in allocating our time and energies if we are to live happy, poised, productive lives" (A Woman's Reach [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974], p. 23).

This does not mean, however, that you should have nothing in your hands but a broom and a dustpan and nothing in your head but laundry procedures and economical casseroles. Be creative. Reach out and embrace the things this wonderful world has to offer. I met a mother in Florida who was taking a class in bird-watching. It was exciting to walk through Cypress Gardens with her and share her enthusiasm for the birds that abound there. To her children a sparrow will never again be just a sparrow.

The danger and challenge is that much of what we do does not have eternal consequences. Much of the time we are running to and fro and spinning our wheels. I will never forget a neighbor who had a son in grade school. The PTA was raising money by having a cookie sale once a week during the noon hour, and each class took a turn furnishing the cookies. It came my neighbor's turn to send a dozen cookies to school with her boy. The day preceding was unusually hectic, and there was no time to bake cookies. But how could she send anything other than homemade cookies? What kind of mother would they think she was? It was after midnight when she took the cookies out of the oven. The next morning she proudly sent her son to school with a dozen homemade, beautifully decorated cookies. When he came home from school she asked, "Well, did you buy a cookie at noon?" "Yeah," he responded, "but by the time I got to the table all the store-bought cookies were gone. I had to buy a homemade one."

I love the counsel given in D&C 10:4: "Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength." Choose carefully each day that which you will do and that which you will not do, and the Lord will bless you to accomplish the important things that have eternal consequences. Let me tell you of two women who have done this despite difficult circumstances.

Ann is a single parent, a divorcée. While some divorcées feel there is no place for them in society, and especially in the Church environment, Ann has kept her eye on the big picture and moved steadily forward. It has not been easy, especially when her children were young. It was a challenge to provide both physically and spiritually for her two sons and one daughter, but she taught them well. Now all three children have filled missions. Ann went back to college to increase her education and her earning power. While she was in school she took care of an unfortunate woman who was practically housebound. This job gave her some much-needed money, while also giving her the opportunity to perform a loving service. And, believe it or not, during this time she was the Relief Society president in a larger, family-oriented ward. She ran that organization as if she had nothing else in the world to do.

At the end of her next-to-last quarter in school, the grant that made it possible for her to attend ran out. One son who had recently returned from his mission said, "Don't worry, Mom, we'll get you through." The dean called her in. He had gone over her record and had concluded that her work had been so outstanding that the university would waive the student teaching requirement and the rest of her course work and make her eligible for graduation with the upcoming June graduating class. The Lord blessed her because she learned early to eliminate the unnecessary and do the things that had eternal consequences. She operated from a firm foundation of faith. And in so doing, she blessed her children and helped to build the kingdom.

Another woman who looked toward the eternal consequences of her actions was Francie. As a child, Francie was often embarrassed because of difficulties caused by night blindness. When she walked out of a lighted area into the dark she might step into a hole or run into objects that she could not see. Nevertheless, Francie loved the out-of-doors and spent as much time there as possible. As a child she lived in a mining town in the beautiful Colorado Rockies. The summer after her fourth grade she was walking around the small town one evening with some friends. The girls were looking up and talking about the stars. Francie wondered why she could not see them.

By age sixteen or seventeen she found that she could not see many things at night. The doctors were puzzled. Although she felt some frustration, Francie compensated for her problem in various ways. One was simply to avoid going to unfamiliar places at night, including some areas in the house. On some occasions she took a friend who acted as a guide.

Despite her condition, when she finished high school Francie began to set goals that required both incredible determination and faith. In three years she graduated from Brigham Young University with honors and was the first young woman to graduate in youth leadership with an outdoor emphasis. More than once she completed rigorous BYU survival trips in the rugged desert and proved to herself that if she capitalized on what she had rather than giving in to her limitations, she could do almost anything.

Upon graduation she served a mission to Italy and was known as "the sergeant" because she worked so hard and encouraged others to do the same. While on her mission she found that she could no longer read the small print in the scripture footnotes. Immediately upon her return home she was diagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa, an irreversible disease of the retina that would eventually lead to total blindness.

This upsetting news did not stop her. Once again she packed her bags and left home, this time for Michigan State University in Lansing, where she completed her master's degree in educational curriculum and then continued to do all the course work for her Ph.D. While in Michigan she met her husband, and together they had four lovely children.

Francie is now legally blind. But she is employed part-time as a university academic adviser. She has pursued her church work with vigor, as a Cub Scout leader, as a member of the Primary presidency, and in a variety of other responsibilities. She has taught Relief Society by having a friend record the lessons from the manual on cassette tapes. She listens to them and stores up the information in her mind. She works as a volunteer in her children's school, and with her family she attends community activities, lectures, and museums. She chooses carefully that which she will do, and concentrates on those things that have eternal consequences.

"The scriptures give me comfort and direction in the things that are most important," she says. "I have learned to work with what I have rather than mourn what I don't have. I have strong feelings about my good heritage with noble ancestors who worked hard to do the things they felt were right. Their good qualities are something I can capitalize on. I have a spiritual heritage from my Heavenly Father. I have felt His divine guidance and have received blessings that are beyond measure and sometimes beyond what I deserve."

May I say to Francie, "You, Francie, are doing it. You are concentrating on the eternal perspective and sweeping us all onto a higher plane in the process. We are learning from you about courage and faith and building the kingdom."

There are few things as powerful in the world as the examples of righteous mothers and dedicated women—women such as Ann and Francie. Children today are growing up in a world where Satan is making his presence felt in every aspect of life. Evil in every form is swirling about them—disrespect, irresponsibility, negative criticism, offensive language, dishonesty, immorality, drugs, and the sometimes questionable advantage of too much affluence. How marvelous are mothers who are nurturing and strengthening the children of today. How valiant they are in making their homes a refuge from the evils that could otherwise engulf them.

In his book Everything But Money, author Sam Levenson tells of growing up in a crowded New York tenement where the environment was anything but genteel. But his wonderful mother was dedicated to making respectable and upright adults of her eight precocious children. He writes, "The fight against individual corruption was part of the fight against the environment. The moral standard of the home had to be higher than that of the street. `You are not on the street; you are in our home. This is not a cellar nor a poolroom. Here we act like human beings.' I remember the speech well. Like royalty, Mama said `we'" (Sam Levenson, Everything But Money [New York: Pocket Books, 1966], p. 123).

And so it is with the mothers of today. They are committed to standing on higher ground than the environment surrounding them, and to loving their children into doing the same. There can be weariness and frustration in these motherly activities, but there is also joy.

Now, to my peers. What do you do with mother love when the babies are grown and gone away? Well, another child of a new generation is born and the whole process starts over again. The caring, the loving, the nurturing. The greatest miracle of all—the assurance that life will never end.

On my seventieth birthday I repeated to myself all day something I heard Stephen L Richards's wife say when she was in her nineties: "Oh, to be seventy again! You can do anything when you are seventy!" Contrary to rumor, these are golden years, if you have a measure of good health. At this age, my dear contemporaries, we no longer have to compete with anyone. We don't have to prove anything—we have the privilege of simply enjoying all of the wonderful things this world has to offer. How many of you have told your children how wonderful it is to be this age?

In 1985 Sister Camilla Kimball addressed the women's conference at BYU. She was ninety years old at the time and still going strong, perhaps not physically, but certainly spiritually and mentally. She inspired us all with her continuing drive to learn and her ability to make us all reach beyond our inclinations. At age ninety-two she took up oil painting.

There is so much we can do to be an influence, perhaps not in ways we have once known, but in many other ways. One year, in one of the school districts in Salt Lake City where some of my grandchildren attend, grandparents gave the equivalent of two hundred hours of volunteer service. Who can measure the worth of a grandmotherly or grandfatherly influence in the classroom?

You will appreciate a letter written to Ann Landers some time ago. "Dear Ann Landers," the writer began. "I am a twenty-two-year-old graduate student who would like to express my admiration for some people who have taught me more than all the books I ever read." (If you are over seventy, you can take this personally.)

"Dear Older American, I want you to know how much you have improved the quality of my life. Today I was driving down the street. You were sauntering uptown, your white hair shining in the sun, a smile on your face. You waved when I went by, though you had no idea who I was.

"On my first job as a cashier, I was nervous and scared. The line was long and everyone was impatient. You let the others go first because you didn't mind waiting. When your turn came you said: `Take your time. My, but you have pretty eyes.' I could have kissed you.

"You say, `Have a nice day,' in the elevator and talk about the weather. I can tell by your gnarled hands that you've done a lot of hard work and I admire that.

"You have an aura of calmness that so many of my generation will never know in their mad rush for money and status. Thanks, Older Americans, for being there."

So if we are too tired to go mountain climbing with the grandchildren, it's all right. We can still reach out and lift someone.

We are all in this together. We need each other. Oh, how we need each other! We need deep and satisfying and loyal friendships with each other. We need to renew our faith every day. We need to help each other stand on higher ground. We need to lock arms and help build the kingdom so that it will roll forth and fill the whole earth.

May we all, as Lucy Mack Smith admonished us, "watch over one another . . . that we may all sit down in heaven together" (Minutes of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, 24 March 1842).
