Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

To the Elect Women of the Kingdom of God

EZRA TAFT BENSON

In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord designates Sister Emma Smith "an elect lady." (D&C 25:3.) To you faithful sisters of the Church, I address you as the Elect Women of the Kingdom of God. Commenting on the phrase "an elect lady," the Prophet Joseph Smith said that elect means "to be elected to a certain work." (HC 4:552.) I call you "elect women," for you have been elected by God to perform a unique and sacred work in our Heavenly Father's eternal plan.

In the beginning, God placed a woman in a companion role with the priesthood. The Gods counseled and said that "it was not good that the man should be alone; wherefore, I will make an help meet for him." (Moses 3:18.) Why was it not good for man to be alone? If it were only man's loneliness with which God was concerned, he might have provided other companionship. But he provided woman, for she was to be man's helpmeet. She was to act in partnership with him.

In this pronouncement that it was not good for man to be alone, God declared a fundamental truth. The Lord God gave woman a different personality and temperament than man. By nature woman is charitable and benevolent, man is striving and competitive. Man is at his best when complemented by a good woman's natural influence. She tempers the home and marriage relationship with her compassionate and loving influence.

Yes, it is not good for man to be alone because a righteous woman complements what may be lacking in a man's natural personality and disposition. Nowhere is this complementary association more ideally portrayed than in the eternal marriage of our first parents, Adam and Eve.

The scriptures tell us that "Adam began to till the earth . . . as . . . the Lord had commanded him. And Eve, also, his wife, did labor with him . . . and they began to multiply and to replenish the earth. . . .

"And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters. . . . And Adam and Eve, his wife, ceased not to call upon God." (Moses 5:1-2, 4, 12, 16.)

From this inspired record we see that Adam and Eve provide us with an ideal example of a covenant marriage relationship. They labored together; they had children together; they prayed together; and they taught their children the gospel—together. This is the pattern God would have all righteous men and women imitate.

In the world today, there are observed strenuous efforts to distort and desecrate this divine pattern. We hear much talk—even among some of our own sisters—about so-called "alternative life-styles" for women. It is maintained that some women are better suited for careers than for marriage and motherhood, or that a combination of both family and career is not inimical to either. Some have even been so bold as to suggest that the Church move away from the "Mormon woman stereotype" of homemaking and rearing children. God grant that that dangerous philosophy will never take root among our Latter-day Saint women!

I repeat: You are elect because you were elected to a certain work. How glorious is the knowledge that you are dignified by the God of heaven to be wives and mothers in Zion!

The Church recognizes that not all women in the Church will have the opportunity for marriage and motherhood in mortality. Of necessity, some of our sisters have had to choose careers as a means of their own livelihood, and in some instances to provide for their families. But we do not encourage our young women to enter careers as life-long objectives nor as alternatives to marriage and family. There is a godly and noble reason for this counsel. You were not created to be the same as men. Your natural attributes, affections, and personalities are entirely different from those of a man. They consist of faithfulness, benevolence, kindness, and charity. They give you the personality of a woman. They also balance the more aggressive and competitive nature of a man.

The business world is competitive and sometimes ruthless. We do not doubt that women have both the brain-power and the skills—and in some instances superior abilities—to compete with men. But by competing they must, of necessity, become aggressive and competitive. Thus their godly attributes are diminished and they acquire a quality of sameness with man.

Recently I received a letter from a sister who has spent most of her life in the work force, providing a second income to the home. Her marriage finally ended in divorce. Her greatest concern was that she felt robbed by not having the time to teach her own children the lasting spiritual values, a woman's godly prerogative.

The conventional wisdom of the day would have you be equal with men. We say, we would not have you descend to that level. More often than not the demand for equality means the destruction of the inspired arrangement that God has decreed for man, woman, and the family. Equality should not be confused with equivalence. It is well to remember the inspired counsel of President David O. McKay: "Woe to that home where the mother abandons her holy mission or neglects the divine instruction, influence, and example—while she bows, a devotee at the shrine of social pleasure; or neglects the essential duties of her own household, in her enthusiasm to promote public reform." (Conference Report, October 1907, p. 63.)

When the Relief Society was organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith, he said, "The Church was never perfectly organized until the women were . . . organized." ("The Story of the Organization of the Relief Society," Relief Society Magazine, March 1919, p. 129.) The Prophet gave the women of the Church this inspired counsel, which is as appropriate today as when it was given. Listen to how a woman is to use her attributes and nature to complement man:

"This is a charitable Society, and according to your natures; it is natural for females to have feelings of charity and benevolence. You are now placed in a situation in which you can act according to those sympathies which God has planted in your bosoms. . . .

". . . You need not be teasing your husbands because of their deeds, but let the weight of your innocence, kindness and affection be felt, which is more mighty than a millstone hung about the neck; not war, not jangle, not contradiction, or dispute, but meekness, love, purity—these are the things that should magnify you in the eyes of all good men. . . .

"If this Society listens to the counsel of the Almighty, through the heads of the Church, they shall have power to command queens in their midst. . . .

". . . Let this Society teach women how to behave towards their husbands, to treat them with mildness and affection. When a man is borne down with trouble, when he is perplexed with care and difficulty, if he can meet a smile instead of an argument or a murmur—if he can meet with mildness, it will calm down his soul and soothe his feelings; when the mind is going to despair, it needs a solace of affection and kindness. . . .

"When you go home, never give a cross or unkind word to your husbands, but let kindness, charity and love crown your works henceforward; don't envy the finery and fleeting show of sinners, for they are in a miserable situation; but as far as you can, have mercy on them, for in a short time God will destroy them, if they will not repent and turn unto him.

"Let your labors be mostly confined to those around you, in the circle of your own acquaintance, as far as knowledge is concerned, it may extend to all the world; but your administering should be confined to the circle of your immediate acquaintance, and more especially to the members of the Relief Society." (HC 4:605-7.)

One apparent impact of the women's movement has been the feelings of discontent it has created among young women who have chosen the role of wife and mother. They are often made to feel that there are more exciting and self-fulfilling roles for women than housework, diaper changing, and children calling for mother. This view loses sight of the eternal perspective that God elected women to the noble role of mother and that exaltation is eternal fatherhood and eternal motherhood.

Many years ago, a mother successfully reared her nineteen children to adulthood. She did so almost totally without her husband's help because he, a minister, was imprisoned because of his religious beliefs. Later, one of her sons wrote to her and inquired how she was able to accomplish the marvelous feat of successfully rearing her large family. She modestly replied: ". . . The writing anything about my way of education I am much adverse to. It cannot, I think, be of service to anyone to know how I, who have lived such a retired life for so many years, used to employ my time and care in bringing up my own children. No one can, without renouncing the world, in the most literal sense, observe my methods; and there are few, if any, that would entirely devote above twenty years of the prime of life in hopes to save the souls of their children, which they think may be saved without so much ado; for that was my principal intention, however unskillfully and unsuccessfully managed." (Franklin Wilder, Immortal Mother, New York: Vantage Press, 1966, p. 43; italics added.)

That mother was Susannah Wesley, and the son who wrote was John Wesley, founder of the Methodist Church and one of the great Reformers. Twenty years of the prime of life in the hopes of saving the souls of her children! Such a task requires skill, competence, intelligence, and ingenuity far above any career, and in the eternal perspective is the essence of glorious fulfillment.

When Susannah Wesley informed her husband that she was teaching the nineteen children Bible lessons in what must have been the first Sunday School, her husband wrote back and mildly rebuked her. She replied with that intuitive inspiration with which God graces women who do their elected work: "I reply that as I am a woman, so am I a mistress of a large family. And though the superior charge of the souls contained in it lies upon you, as head of the family, and as their minister, yet in your absence I cannot but look upon every soul you leave under my care as a talent committed to me under a trust, by the great Lord of all the families of Heaven and earth. And if I am unfaithful to Him, or to you, in neglecting to improve these talents, how shall I answer unto Him when He shall command me to render an account of my stewardship?" (Ibid., p. 108.)

There, in the powerful words of a Christian mother, is the eternal perspective of a woman who understood her noble role and the work God had elected her to do.

Today, I pay grateful tribute to two elect women who have influenced my life—my mother and my own sweetheart and eternal companion. I thank God that they have used their womanly attributes of compassion and charity to bless my life and the lives of all their posterity. I bless them that their posterity will hold them in remembrance and love forever.

Mother was Relief Society president in her ward, a small but solid country ward. I remember how important father considered her work in that assignment. Father gave to me, as the oldest of seven at that time and of eleven later, the responsibility of harnessing the horse and getting the buggy ready for mother's two-o'clock weekly Relief Society meetings. This had to be done by one o'clock so she could be there early. At that time I was not tall enough to buckle the collar or put the bridle on the horse without getting on the fence or a box. In addition, I was to take half a bushel of wheat from our granary and put it in the back of the buggy. In those days the Relief Society sisters were building up a storage of wheat against a time of need. Following World War I the United States government called for that wheat to relieve hunger in Europe.

When mother was called to visit the sick in the ward or to help mothers with new babies, it was always by horse and buggy. As the buggy rolled down the dirt road, the circling wheels left a track that stayed even after the buggy disappeared. Mother's influence has also stayed—in my life and in the countless lives she blessed through compassionate service and example. How well she followed the admonition of the Prophet Joseph Smith to "let your labors be mostly confined to those around you, in the circle of your own acquaintance . . . and more especially to the members of the Relief Society."

And to my own eternal companion: there are few things in the world that give a man such courage as the faith of a noble companion who says, more effectively in her actions than in her words, "I will be happy with what you can provide, and I have faith that you will, with my help, provide for our needs."

Often a woman shapes the career of her husband, or brother, or son. A man succeeds and reaps the honors of public applause when, in truth, a steadfast and courageous woman has in large measure made it all possible; has, by her tact and encouragement, held him to his best; has had faith in him when his own faith has languished; has cheered him with the unfailing assurance, "You can, you must, you will."

May I acknowledge how greatly my wife's loving devotion, inspiration, faith, and loyal support have contributed to whatever success may be ours. Since the happy day she became my bride, and we left for Iowa in an old battered Ford, I have never heard a murmur from her lips. She has never given me a single worry except when she was ill, and that has been, with but few exceptions, only with the responsibilities of motherhood.

Under all conditions and circumstances she has been the perfect lady. Her rich heritage and education have enabled her to be a true helpmeet; her congeniality, fine sense of humor, and interest in my work have made her a pleasing companion; and her unbounded patience and intelligent insight into childhood have made her a most devoted mother. These and other virtues, combined with her loyalty and self-sacrificing devotion to her husband, impel me to crown her the sweetest, most helpful, most inspiring sweetheart and wife that ever inspired a man to noble endeavors.

To all you sisters—elect women of God—may he bless you to ever keep before you your unique and sacred honor. May he bless you with increased qualities of faithfulness, benevolence, kindness, and charity that you may always complement your husbands and the priesthood of God.
