Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

The Blessings and Responsibilities of Womanhood

SPENCER W. KIMBALL

Although the organizational details of the Church's programs for women may change from time to time, the basic program is always the same. We call upon all women to gear their lives and train their children as in the past, only more so. We give to you the admonition of the great apostle Paul as he spoke to the Ephesian converts:

"Finally, my brethren [and that means sisters too], be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

"Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.

"For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places." (Eph. 6:10-12.)

Our women are among the best educated and best trained. We encourage all of you to keep abreast of the times, to be familiar with current events, to be able to read the signs of the times, to be prepared to direct your children in the proper paths to guarantee to them a purposeful and eventful life. Paul says to put on the whole armor of God. All of you who are students of the scriptures know of Satan, the father of lies. You know how he turns the truth into a lie. He garnishes evil to make it appear beautiful, pleasing, easy, and even good. He told the prophet Moses, "Worship me." Moses was alert enough to ask, "Where is thy glory? Who art thou?" Moses had already gone through an experience with his Lord, who had told him, "No man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth."

Moses had been given a great vision by God, who had protected him so that he could see and hear and not be consumed. He beheld God with his spiritual eyes. Moses said that he would have withered and died in the bright presence of the Lord but for the Lord's protection.

Then, in questioning Satan, Moses said, "I could not look upon God except he strengthen me with his glory, but you Satan, where is your glory? For I can look upon you with my natural eyes. God said unto me, Worship God, for him only shalt thou serve."

Moses again said, "I will not cease to call upon God." Satan then resorted to his last chance. He said, "I am the Only Begotten, worship me." In his great fear, Moses said again, "Depart from me, Satan, for this one God only will I worship. In the name of the Only Begotten, depart hence, Satan." (See Moses 1:1-24.)

That is a good statement to be used by every soul who is besieged by this father of lies.

When he is challenged, Satan is angry, as he was with Moses. He cried with a loud voice, trembled, and shook, and he departed from Moses, who was resolute. There was weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth as he departed from Moses. There was nothing else for him to do. He has to leave when we say, "Depart from me, Satan." Every soul who has mortality is stronger than Satan, if that soul is determined.

Temptations are great. Satan tells us that black is white. He lies to us; therefore, we must be prepared to make a bold stand before him, for he is without flesh and blood, and against principalities and powers and the rulers of darkness. We need the whole armor of God that we may withstand. We must quench the fiery darts of the wicked with the shield of faith.

As you sisters read the papers, watch television, hear the radio, and read books and magazines, much that comes to your consciousness is designed to lead you astray. Much of what you read may be scurrilous. But you are intelligent. You have learned from your infancy what is right. You know what you want for your children. You must make your own decisions in determining if it is right or wrong.

Some of those who write for the public have already gone after that which is far afield. They have chosen already to subvert the right way. They are telling you that it is not necessary to marry; it is not necessary to marry to have children; it is not necessary to have children; you may have all the worldly pleasures without these obligations and responsibilities. There is the pill. There is abortion. There are other ways to give you this loosely held, so-called freedom. They are telling you that you are manacled to your homes, to your husbands, to your children, to your housework. They are talking and writing to you about a freedom they know nothing about.

Only she is free who knows no master, either Satan or his emissaries. Our only master should be the Savior. It was the apostle Paul who said, "To whom ye yield yourselves to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey." (Rom. 6:16.)

The Lord said: "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."

The Jews to whom he was speaking answered him, "We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free?

"Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin. . . .

"If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. . . .

"Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. [He is still a murderer; he will always be a murderer.] When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it.

"And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not." (John 8:32-34, 36, 44-45.)

The role of woman was fixed even before she was created, and God is the same yesterday, today, and forever. It is written: "And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them. [The story of the rib, of course, is figurative.] And I, God, blessed them [man here is always in the plural; it was plural from the beginning] and said unto them: Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over it." (Moses 2:27-28.)

What a beautiful partnership! Adam and Eve were married for eternity by the Lord. Such a marriage extends beyond the grave. All peoples should call for this kind of marriage.

"And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord." (Gen. 4:1.)

"This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created." (Gen. 5:1-2.)

This is a partnership. And as God completed this magnificent creation, he looked it over and pronounced it "very good" (Gen. 1:31)—something that isn't to be improved upon by our modern intellectuals: the male to till the ground, support the family, and give proper leadership; the woman to cooperate, bear the children, and rear and teach them. It was "very good."

And that's the way the Lord organized it. It wasn't an experiment. He knew what he was doing. Those things that endanger a happy marriage are infidelity, slothfulness, selfishness, abortion, unwarranted birth control, leaving the home to others, and sin in all of its many manifestations.

Eve, so recently from the eternal throne, seemed to understand the way of life, for she was happy that she and Adam had eaten the forbidden fruit. Adam blessed God and began to prophesy because his eyes were opened; he realized that in this life there should be joy for them, and that in the course of events they should again see God in the flesh. Eve also was glad; she said, "Otherwise we never would have had children." (Moses 5:11.) She, like other normal women, wanted children. She and Adam both rejoiced in their confirmed status. Nephi wrote, "All things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things." There were no guesses here, no trial and error. "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:24-25.)

So our beloved mother Eve began the human race with gladness, wanting children, glad for the joy that they would bring to her, willing to assume the problems connected with a family, but also the joys.

Since infancy we have been singing the beloved song "O My Father," its meaning only partly understood by many people. Sister Eliza R. Snow gave us these words and I think they are magnificent. In every funeral of the Kimball family as long as I can remember, "O My Father" was the principal song.

O my Father, thou that dwellest In the high and glorious place, When shall I regain thy presence, And again behold thy face? In thy holy habitation, Did my spirit once reside? In my first primeval childhood, Was I nurtured near thy side? For a wise and glorious purpose Thou hast placed me here on earth, And withheld the recollection Of my former friends and birth. Yet oft-times a secret something Whispered, "You're a stranger here," And I felt that I had wandered From a more exalted sphere. I had learned to call thee Father, Through thy Spirit from on high, But until the key of knowledge Was restored, I knew not why. In the heavens are parents single? No; the thought makes reason stare! Truth is reason, truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there. When I leave this frail existence, When I lay this mortal by, Father, Mother, may I meet you In your royal courts on high? Then, at length, when I've completed All you sent me forth to do, With your mutual approbation Let me come and dwell with you. —Hymns, no. 292

Man became a living soul—mankind, male and female. The Creators breathed into their nostrils the breath of life, and man and woman became living souls. We don't know exactly how their coming into this world happened, and when we're able to understand it the Lord will tell us.

As an indication of the importance the Gods gave to women, the Lord said, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh." (Gen. 2:24.)

Do you note that? She, his wife, occupies the first place. She is preeminent, even above the parents who are so dear to all of us. Even the children must take their proper but significant place.

I have seen some women who give their children that spot, that preeminence, in their affection, and thus crowd out the father. That is a serious mistake. Many marriages have failed for this very cause. They are partners, each given a part of the work of life to do. The fact that some women and men disregard their work and their opportunities does not change the program.

The Lord said to the woman: "In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children." I wonder if those who translated the Bible might have used the term distress instead of sorrow. It would mean much the same, except I think there is great gladness in most Latter-day Saint homes when there is to be a child there. As he concludes this statement he says, "and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." (Gen. 3:16.) I have a question about the word rule. It gives the wrong impression. I would prefer to use the word preside, because that's what he does. A righteous husband presides over his wife and family.

I have attended missionary meetings all over the world. I have heard thousands of missionaries tell about their families back home. I have heard the testimonies of these fine young men. What do they talk about? Almost invariably they speak of the faithfulness of their mothers, the devotion of their mothers to them, her training of them, her deep appreciation for them. Once in a while the father comes in for just a tiny word or two. As a father, I have felt a little twinge of jealousy sometimes when the missionary sons have thus expressed themselves; yet I know what these missionaries say is true and wholly justified. How happy the mothers must be with this adoration and love! Is it not worth all the "sorrow" and suffering and sacrifice?

We are happy to see Paul's exhortation to women. He instructed Titus to teach the women "to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed." (Titus 2:5.) No woman has ever been asked by the Church authorities to follow her husband into an evil pit. She is to follow him as he follows and obeys the Savior of the world, but in deciding this, she should always be sure she is fair.

One woman said, "My home and husband come first in my life. I took care of my children myself when they were little and trained them well. I taught them all to read at home." Here is a mother who is interested in more than just giving the child food and shelter.

Mothers have a sacred role. They are partners with God, as well as with their own husbands, first in giving birth to the Lord's spirit children, and then in rearing those children so they will serve the Lord and keep his commandments. Could there be a more sacred trust than to be a trustee for honorable, well-born, well-developed children? We affirm the Church's strong, unalterable stand against innovations or any unchastity or breaking of the laws that could possibly reflect in the lives of the children.

Motherhood is a holy calling, a sacred dedication for carrying out the Lord's work, a consecration and devotion to the rearing and fostering and the nurturing of body, mind, and spirit of those who kept their first estate and who came to this earth for their second estate to learn and be tested and to work toward godhood. The role of mother, then, is to help those children keep their second estate, so that they might have glory added upon their heads forever and ever.

We have often said that this divine service of motherhood can be rendered only by mothers. It may not be passed to others. Nurses cannot do it; public nurseries cannot do it. Hired help cannot do it; kind relatives cannot do it. Only by mother, aided as much as may be by a loving father, brothers and sisters, and other relatives, can the full needed measure of watchful care be given. The mother who entrusts her child to the care of others that she may do nonmotherly work, whether for gold, for fame, or for civic service, should remember that "a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame." (Prov. 29:15.)

And in the modern revelations we learn that if parents do not teach their children to pray and walk uprightly before the Lord, "the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68:25.)

May God bless you sisters in your homes and in your families, and especially with your husbands that they may recognize in you a great power so that they might better fulfill their responsibilities in life. Your Heavenly Father will smile upon you as you live the commandments and teach them to your children. This is the work of the Lord. God Almighty is responsible for it. It is a great experience to put one's life in the hands of his Heavenly Father so that he may give the service that is required.
