Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Keys for a Woman's Progression

CAMILLA EYRING KIMBALL

I first came to Provo in 1912, a frightened, bewildered refugee. My family had lived in Colonia Juárez, Mexico, and was forced to leave when revolutionaries in the Mexican Civil War threatened the Mormon colonies in Chihuahua and Sonora. I was seventeen when we fled by train to El Paso, leaving practically everything behind. I recall how one of the revolutionaries brazenly lifted a woman's purse from her arm with the barrel of his rifle as she boarded the train. It was a traumatic experience for all of us to leave our homes and start again in a new country. For a few days we were housed in stalls in a lumberyard in El Paso, Texas. The curious came to stare at us. Finally Father came out of Mexico on horseback, and we rented some rooms. My uncle, Carl Eyring, was in Provo attending BYU along with his sister. They wrote, inviting me to come live with them and to finish high school at BYU. This was most generous of them, for they were hard-pressed for funds enough to keep the two of them in school.

The next two years at BYU left me with indelible memories. They were hard, poverty-ridden years, but a time of great personal growth. I learned and prepared myself for employment as a teacher of home economics in the Church academies. I came to love BYU, and through the years I have watched with a thrill as this school has grown tremendously in size and in worldwide influence.

I read the school papers and envy you the many wonderful cultural and intellectual opportunities. I have thought that when my husband and I get to retirement age, perhaps we can come to Provo and be active participants in the wonderful programs available here. I hope each of you has some sense of what a great privilege it is to be part of this institution and that you make every day count in learning and in making lasting friendships. I appreciate this invitation to be with you at the beginning of this conference and share some ideas of how women can best fulfill their calling in life.

The Lord expects men and women alike, first of all, to grow in spirituality—that is, to worship him; to gain understanding of the kind of being he is and wants us to become; to develop deep, abiding faith; and to live by divine principles of conduct. No other school in the whole world is so richly endowed with the resources to teach the whole truth—to teach the important, eternal verities as well as the worldly knowledge we need for vocation and for enjoyment of life. Of all we learn in life, the single most important knowledge we can attain is a firm testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ as our Savior and an understanding of the path he would have us follow.

Sometimes we are accused of being boastful in declaring that we belong to the only true church. But we say it not in pride but in gratitude, considering ourselves blessed to have been born members of the Church or to have had a favorable opportunity to hear the gospel preached so that we would understand and accept it. We reject no truth or good to be found anywhere, but we are anxious to share that added truth which we have. All truth is a part of the gospel. Truth is things as they were, as they are, and as they will be. We are not so arrogant as to assert that the Church program is perfect, for it continues to add programs to meet the changing times, nor would we say that its members are perfect. We have a long way to go before we have become all that the Lord wants us to be. But we do say to all who will listen, "Here is more truth than can be found anywhere else in this world because God has established his church to teach his children as much as is within their capacity to learn," and we say to others, "Come and share with us!"

Many years ago, when we were vacationing in Long Beach, California, I went to the public library to look for books to read. As I browsed through the shelves, a strange woman came up beside me and, with no preliminary introduction, said to me in a demanding voice, "Are you saved?" Taken aback, I paused a second to consider. Then I answered, "Well, I'm working on it." With firm conviction, she admonished, "You'd better accept Christ now and be saved, or you may be too late!" I have thought about this encounter many times since, and my answer to the question would of necessity still be the same today: "I'm working on it." Of course, our salvation depends upon our acceptance of Christ, but also on our continual progress and our remaining faithful to the end. Salvation is a process, not an event.

A major part of that process is in service. King Benjamin said, "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) What shall we serve? Our first obligation is to our families.

So far as we know, the Church organization may not be found in heaven, but families will be. God joined Adam and Eve in the holy bonds of marriage even before they were mortal and commanded them to cleave to one another. God has through all ages fostered the family, giving to men the sealing power so that families can be joined for eternity. The importance of our finding worthy companions and of temple marriage cannot be overestimated when we realize that our eternal destiny depends in part upon this sacred ordinance. Without it, we cannot have fulness of joy. With it, the future is boundless. There are some who, through no fault of their own, do not have that opportunity in this life, but no one worthy of these blessings will be denied them indefinitely. Life stretches beyond mortality, and those who live worthily will find fulfillment in the hereafter.

As husbands and wives, parents and children, our foremost duty and opportunity for service is to one another. President McKay said that "no other success can compensate for failure in the home." We must take advantage of every effective means to strengthen home ties.

The family home evening program has long been a part of the Church plan. I remember well as a child the occasions in our family when we gathered together and each child, beginning with the youngest, had a part on the home evening program. These are happy memories. When my brothers and sisters get together even now, we often reminisce about those times, repeating with laughter the poems and songs we performed back in those days.

It was fun to hear my brother Henry sing in monotone,

What can little bodies do? Like us little lispers, Full of life and mischief, too, And prone to noisy whispers.

And Joe's oft-repeated contribution as a little three-year-old was,

Three little rabbits went out to run, Up hill and down hill Oh, what fun!

The songs the family sang together are still our favorites. Some of them were folk songs brought from England by our great-grandmother. We still sing these with our grandchildren, and these are traditions that bind the family together.

In recent years more definite and concerted effort is being made to perfect the program. We have come to realize that Monday family home evening should be as regular and important a part of our life as attendance at sacrament meeting, that it is worth sacrifices to keep this time special for those close to us.

Many people outside the Church are recognizing and adopting the family home evening program as a tool to strengthen their families. Some time ago my husband spoke at a convention of young business executives and their wives at Sun Valley, Idaho. None of them were members of the Church, but several of them came personally to express appreciation for our family home evening manual, which they were using with their families. A first major effort by the Church to reach the world with this message, the nationwide television program on home evening, had much greater response than anticipated. Thousands of requests for the home evening booklet were received from all parts of the country. What a chance, by precept and example, to have important impact on the lives of our neighbors!

We are by no means the only ones to recognize the importance of the family. Dr. Earl Schaefer at the University of North Carolina has affirmed that "parents and the home environment are more critical to a child's educational success than schools and teachers are." Three years of research has produced "a tremendous amount of evidence that parents' involvement with the child has the greatest impact in achievement, in curiosity, persistence—even creativity." It has long been said that children whose parents read aloud to them learn to read better and with greater enjoyment than children who do not have such experience. Also, that those coming from homes where books are read, ideas discussed, and art appreciated prove to be better students than those who have missed these experiences.

I am sure most of us could bear testimony to the value of our home environment, where family ideals were inculcated in us that provide lasting guidelines for our lives.

Young people anticipating marriage and family should keep these findings firmly in mind. Mothers with small children cannot overestimate the importance of the mother's place in the home with her children. Whoever shares that time with the children will largely determine their character and shape their lives. What a challenge for women!

I still have a vivid memory of my mother sitting at the table after supper in the evening with the lighted coal-oil lamp and an open book before her. As she read aloud to us, she at the same time was knitting stockings for the family. The click of the knitting needles punctuated the stories she read. From her example, I learned to love books and to reject idleness.

Good books were always an important part of our home life. I remember, though, one day when I was small, I came home from the library with the book Camille by Emile Zola, anticipating reading it because the title of the book was so much like my name. The minute Mama saw the book, she exclaimed, "Oh, no, dear, you don't want to read that book." She promptly returned it to the library. A good many years later I read it and then realized that she was quite right in thinking I was much too young for it the first time. I am grateful that she loved me enough to establish standards in our home. The existence of reasonable rules is almost as important as their content.

Rita Chapman of Dallas, Texas, is quoted in the Church News as follows:

I am totally convinced that once a woman has borne a child, she owes that child herself more than anything else in the first five years of his life. . . .

I fear that raising emotion-starved and love-starved children can produce calloused, robotized adults—people who follow the group in straight lines and do exactly what everyone else is doing, because someone has said it is time.

I fear for the working mother who is deluded to believe that some kind, patient woman will tend to her child's emotional needs until she can take over, that someone else will see that her child discovers he is unique, until she can pick him up at the end of the day—when she is perhaps so tired that the best he can hope to hear is, "It's time to go to bed."

I fear for the future of the child whose hunger for love and recognition must be satisfied in large groups. I beg mothers to wake up, to experience the precious dawning of their child's life with him. Evening comes quickly—but in the evening may be too late. (Church News, August 14, 1976.)

The impact of what parents do in the home extends beyond the home, to community and nation. Michael Novak, in Harper's magazine, said:

Throughout history, nations have been able to survive a multiplicity of disasters—invasions, famines, earthquakes, epidemics, depressions, but they have never been able to survive the disintegration of the family. The family is the seed bed of economic skills, money habits, attitude toward work, and the art of financial independence. It is a stronger agency of education than the school and stronger for religious training than the church. What strengthens the family strengthens the society; . . . if things go well with the family, life is worth living. When the family falters, life falls apart. (Michael Novak, "Family Out of Favor," Harper's 252 [April 1976]: 37-40.)

We are in a period when the great propaganda machines are telling us that for a woman to choose a career in home and family is somehow demeaning, and that self-respect demands that she pursue a profession of law or medicine or business. But rather than directing both marriage partners away from the home, we need to encourage both to make the strengthening of the family their primary concern. There is challenge, accomplishment, and satisfaction enough for anyone in this greatest educational endeavor—the home.

In the rural society of my childhood, we often lived close enough to grandparents, uncles and aunts, brothers and sisters, and cousins to use their physical and psychic resources to supplement our own. When we needed help, they were there. But in our highly mobile society today, this extended family is rarely so available. And today fellow Church members often fill that function. The visiting teacher and home teacher programs can provide support of this kind. Every family in the Church has two pairs of teachers who, taken together, should visit that home at least two dozen times a year with a spiritual message and a constant reminder that others care for us. We are responsible for one another. I help you and you help me. These visiting programs offer some of the strongest evidence that we truly are willing to serve one another and that the Church is an extension of the family idea.

In the Church organization, there are ample opportunities for both men and women. I have felt no deprivation in not holding the priesthood. I feel only gratitude that I can, with my husband and sons, receive all of its blessings without my having to assume many of its responsibilities. I have had teaching and leadership positions enough to give me full range for my abilities. In my fifty years as a visiting teacher of the Relief Society, I have had some of my richest human and spiritual experiences. In times of sickness and sorrow, there are very specific needs. In other homes you may be the only contact an inactive family has with the Church. The hand of friendship and fellowship is often the means of reactivation of these families.

It is clear to me that from an eternal perspective, it does not matter where we serve but only how faithfully we serve. To each of us who has a calling as a teacher of families in the Church, I say be faithful and supportive, fulfilling that responsibility to the best of your abilities. And to each of us who is in a family being taught, I say let us make our teachers welcome and allow them to serve us, for in so doing we both shall be blessed.

If we want to give effective service to our families and our neighbors, as we are commanded to do, we must develop ourselves to our full potential. We need to enlarge our intellect and perfect our character. We need to become more Christlike.

The pursuit of knowledge, which is characteristic of a university, is not only permissible, it is part of the gospel plan for us. The revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith in D&C 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants sets the scope of our study:

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and kingdoms—

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereupon I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you. . . .

And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith. (D&C 88:78-80, 118.)

My feeling is that each of us has the potential for special accomplishment in some field. The opportunities for women to excel are greater today than ever before. We should all be resourceful and ambitious, expanding our interests. Forget self-pity and look for mountains to climb. Everyone has problems. The challenge is to cope with those problems and get our full measure of joy from life. These "words of wisdom" from books are a means to that end.

Here and now you are much engrossed in textbooks, which are often tedious but important to the task of preparing for a specific career. They are keys that open doors, windows that open on life.

Some of the delightful pleasures of life are in continuing education in our mature years and in collecting and reading fine books. Continue to pick up interesting information in history, current events, the arts. There are various areas that we may miss in the few years we are enrolled in college, and learning confined to four years is soon out of date.

Through the years I have found it stimulating to be enrolled in a college class or two each year. The stimulation of association with young people helps keep one alive. For some years in Arizona I worked in the city library, which was sponsored by the Federated Women's Club. I helped in the selection of books and found this a challenge to keep up with current literature. I still belong to one or another of the book clubs that bring a variety of reading material into our home, and I do make a concerted effort to select worthwhile books.

And beyond books, learning means keeping the mind open to all kinds of experience. Travel when you have a chance. Travel with an open mind, an alert eye, and a wish to understand other people, other places. That fits us all the better for most of life's callings.

When our children were young, every summer we, with them, made a trip by car to visit the different areas of America, east, west, north, and south. This way we gained a greater appreciation for our great country. Going to Rotary International conventions, especially to Mexico and Europe, broadened our outlook. We worked at touring, seeing countries and people in detail. It has been my privilege, with my husband, to visit the members of the Church in countries all around the world. This has been an opportunity to get close to the people, to feel their needs.

The first fundamental need of every person is the indispensability of love, the feeling of being of value to others. Our interdependence with others is the most encompassing fact of human reality. We need each other.

Much unhappiness has been suffered by those people who have never recognized that it is as necessary to make themselves into whole and harmonious personalities as to keep themselves clean, healthy, and financially solvent. Wholeness of the mind and spirit is not a quality conferred by nature or by God. It is like health and knowledge. Man has the capacity to attain it, but to achieve it depends on our own efforts. It needs a long, deliberate effort of the mind and the emotions and even the body. During our earthly life the body gradually slows down, but the mind has the capacity to grow even more lively and active. The chief limitations confronting us are not age or sex or race or money. They are laziness, shortsightedness, and lack of self-esteem. Those who avoid learning or abandon it find that life becomes dry, but when the mind is alert, life is luxuriant. No learner has ever run short of subjects to explore. You can live most rewardingly by attaining and preserving the joy of learning and serving.

Let me say in summary that with all the other knowledge that enriches our lives, let us not forget to include the knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ. When we think how fervently earthly parents want their children to grow up in faithfulness, we can appreciate in some small measure the great desire our Heavenly Father has that his beloved children may find their way back to him. Living the gospel is not the easiest way of life, but it is the most rewarding way.

I am grateful for the understanding we have of our responsibility to become Godlike in character, to love our children and neighbors as he loves us. The family is important enough to call for our best efforts—no profession is more noble than homemaking. The fulness of respect from good men and from God comes to those who fit themselves to serve and then serve one another—and family first of all—with love.

Nephi wrote: "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Ne. 31:20.) This is the greatest gift God has to offer.

I am grateful for the example set by Christ and for his great atoning sacrifice. I know that he lives. My prayer for us all is that we may follow his admonition to seek divine perfection in our lives and endure faithfully and joyfully to the end of our lives so that we may worthily claim our reward in his kingdom.
