Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

What Does This Situation Require?

JEANIE MCALLISTER

I have always loved horizons. Give me the ocean rolling against an unbroken sky, or an airline window seat above the clouds, or the tallest skyscraper from which to see the city lights, and my mind can feast for months on memory pictures.

Perhaps that's because I grew up with wonderful horizons. Many nights I watched the full moon rise above the canyons of my childhood, flooding the warm summer grass until it seemed like day. And when it was too late to stay outside, I would run inside, strike the house lights, draw the curtains, and sit in the darkened living room to watch the moon's command performance.

In those days, the horizons of my life stretched ahead of me, clear and uncomplicated. But as years went by, life grew more complex and uncertain. By my late twenties, I had left what I'd once considered a permanent career in public teaching and was working in Nantes on the western seacoast of France, trying to determine what my next steps should be.

During many nights that autumn, I had to cross an acre of pitch black field to catch the nearest bus into town; and often as I walked, the words of the hymn came into my mind:

Lead, kindly Light, amid th'encircling gloom; Lead thou me on! The night is dark, and I am far from home; Lead thou me on! (Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985, no. 97.)

These words always gave me courage. I often sang them in the darkness, praying not only that I was headed in the right direction toward town but also that my life was headed on the right course because I truly could not see what lay ahead. And I was a lot farther from home than France.

In the years since, this experience has become a metaphor for my life. Oh, that I could see even a little into the distance to what the future holds. Instead, I see "through a glass, darkly" (1 Cor. 13:12), one step at a time, and this pattern promises to continue. As a single Latter-day Saint woman with a deep conviction of eternal marriage and family, I'm attempting to fit the puzzle of my life together with major pieces missing—a more than ambiguous process.

"Why is a nice young woman like you still single?" people have often asked me through the years. And although my replies have been sometimes scintillating and other times serious, I have yet to discover a truly satisfactory answer to that question myself. What I have discovered is that "Why?" is the wrong question. Viktor E. Frankl's words first helped me to understand that. Speaking of the horrors of life in a concentration camp, Frankl says: "We had to learn . . . that it did not really matter what we expected from life, but rather what life expected from us. We needed to stop asking about the meaning of life, and instead to think of ourselves as those who were being questioned by life—daily and hourly." (Man's Search for Meaning: An Introduction to Logotherapy [New York: Pocketbooks, 1963], p. 122.)

As a single woman, whenever I have replaced the question "Why is this experience happening to me?" with the question "What does this situation require of me?" I have discovered specific actions, the doing of which has prevented my derailment and kept me pushing along the path, even in the darkness. Unmet expectations may be bitter, but I want to be better for my experiences; and the difference between bitter and better is I. I can choose not to be immersed in bitterness. Asking "What does this situation require of me?" helps me see that I can make choices. I can control my life, even if that control extends only as far as my perceptions and attitudes.

Over the years, then, these are some of the answers that come again and again when I ask, "What does this situation—being single—require of me?"

This Situation Demands That I Begin

Begin a new relationship. Begin a new neighborhood. Begin a new career. Begin a new financial commitment. Even though some puzzle pieces are missing, I must start putting together those that do fit. It is so easy when single to delay making major decisions. A single woman decides not to invest in a home, for example, because she might marry and move away or because it seems so permanent, forgetting that every home here on earth is temporary. The single woman's knowing who and when she will marry certainly would help many other decisions fall into place, but without that knowledge, she must begin wherever she can make a step.

Beginning is a way to overcome the paralysis that the unknown often brings. Novice writers are taught to overcome writer's block by scrapping detailed outlines and starting to write any place they choose. If they have ideas for the middle of a composition, then they are encouraged to start there. This strategy also works in life's ambiguous or flat periods. As I put one foot in front of the other, moving along, eventually the landscape ahead begins to come into focus.

Besides experiencing ambiguity, a woman who has been single for a long time may go through a certain mourning period—mourning for a companion never known, for children never born, for time passed never to be recaptured. For widows, mourning periods are publicly acknowledged, whereas single never-marrieds experience this period privately and without the memories of a loved one or the certainty that someone awaits them on the other side.

But as Ecclesiastes says, there is "a time to mourn, and a time to dance." (Eccl. 3:4.) At some point, the single woman must call an end to the mourning and start the dancing. In the words of Broadway's irrepressible Auntie Mame, she must

Open a new window, open a new door, Travel a new highway that's never been tried before . . . There's only one way to make the bubbles stay, simply travel a new highway, dance to a new rhythm, Open a new window ev'ry day. ("Open a New Window," words and music by Jerry Herman [New York: Jerryco Music, 1966].)

At one point in the play, Mame tells her nephew Patrick that life is a banquet and some poor fools are starving to death. By choosing to find something delicious in each experience rather than bewailing what's not on my plate, I can always feast. And I must begin.

This Situation Requires That I Make a Friend of Time

Time for the single woman is often viewed as an enemy, especially as the infamous biological time clock ticks on. In our world of instant results where meals are microwaved in seconds, how do we learn to deal with blessings promised "in due time"? In the framework of the gospel, a single woman who is keeping the commandments sees immediate results from obeying the Word of Wisdom or the law of tithing, and yet the blessings she may yearn for most seem completely out of reach.

I have found that one of the answers is to focus on the present. Now is the only real time there ever is. When a child newly arrives from heaven, it takes several years before he or she grasps the mortal concept of time. Could it be that children are so carefree because they are so oriented to the present?

The present is a peaceful place where we need not worry about past mistakes or future fears. People who fear commercial flying are taught to train their minds to think only of the present moment, not of what might or might not happen during the remainder of the flight. I, too, can do something right now that might seem overwhelming if I thought I had to do it forever. It is impossible to live years within minutes, but we try to do it all the time when we fail to focus on the present and become obsessed with the future.

And yet we sometimes must think of tomorrow. As fearful as the years ahead may seem to the single woman growing old alone, the future can also become a friend if viewed properly. Frankl tells of getting through some of his most difficult moments in the concentration camp by imagining himself years hence, sharing with an audience what he had learned from his present sufferings.

Looking for future meaning in present situations is a technique that has helped me keep going many times when I have found myself tiring. This technique is actually the gospel principle of faith, because it requires me to exert my mind to envision a reality in the future that I cannot see in the present. In contemplating the friendly use of present and future, I like to think of the tightrope walker who, with perfect balance, keeps his eyes on the future goal, all the while aware of the present process of placing one foot in front of the other.

But what are we to do during those times when the present seems too painful and the future bleak and comfortless? We may look productively to the past. I love the little poem that says:

There was a Dachshund once so long, He hadn't any notion How long it took to notify His tail of his emotions. And so it happened While his eyes were Filled with woe and sadness, His little tail went wagging on Because of previous gladness.

Remembering "previous gladness" and past times when we received the Lord's blessings can give us infusions of strength to meet present challenges. Before meeting Goliath, David looked back, saying, "The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine." (1 Sam. 17:37.)

Of his arduous mission to the Lamanites, Ammon recalled: "Now when our hearts were depressed, and we were about to turn back, behold, the Lord comforted us, and said: Go amongst thy brethren, the Lamanites, and bear with patience thine afflictions, and I will give unto you success. . . . Now behold, we can look forth and see the fruits of our labors; and are they few? I say unto you, Nay, they are many. . . . blessed be the name of my God, who has been mindful of us." (Alma 26:27, 31, 36.)

We are told, "Count your many blessings. . . . / And it will surprise you what the Lord has done." (Hymns, no. 241.) Recalling the past helps us to see that while we thought the Lord was not walking by our side, yet we were carried unknowingly in his arms through some of our darkest hours. This is one important reason why we are counseled to keep journals. They help us remember faith-promoting experiences from the past, giving light and hope when neither seems to be shining brightly before us.

Past, present, future—all seasons may prove friendly if we use them wisely. Time is what turns grass into milk. Time is what makes patience possible. And our exercise of patience helps the Lord to work his will in our lives without our getting in the way.

This Situation Entreats Me to Exercise Faith

Faith is that spiritually aerobic practice of hoping for things "which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21.) Exercise is the perfect verb to use with faith because it implies continual practice as life adds heavier and heavier weights, making our spiritual muscles grow more capable of bearing burdens.

What can I do to exercise faith? I can concentrate on what is certain. That is not easy in our age of uncertainty. A college degree does not guarantee a lifetime job. A jumbo jet does not guarantee a safe arrival. A temple marriage does not guarantee a faithful partner. We make decisions that seem certain and secure but can be undone in a moment by change, collision, or catastrophe.

Yet while we are living in the most uncertain of times, we are also living in the most certain—a time when the gospel is here in its fulness, a time of prophets and promises, both to us as a people and to us individually. If I view my life at times as a puzzle, I must also remember that my patriarchal blessing is the picture on the lid of the box. "What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:23.)

A woman who has waited much of her life for promised blessings, however, sometimes finds herself believing she must have done something in the past to nullify those promises. Sometimes she simply stops believing altogether because it is less painful. What can she do to exercise faith if she finds herself in this situation?

She can thank the Lord for those blessings promised in her patriarchal blessing but not yet received—those things "which are not seen, which are true." I have learned that thanking the Lord in advance makes me more alert to blessings when they do come and has increased my faith that others, only mentioned, will yet come to pass.

Although a patriarchal blessing usually covers the broad sweep of our lives, extending beyond mortality, it is not necessarily comprehensive. It is important to remember that we may receive blessings not detailed there. For instance, the specific promise of posterity was never mentioned to my mother, yet she gave birth to five children and has twenty-five grandchildren. Often, many years after receiving a patriarchal blessing, we are given additional light and knowledge in other priesthood blessings because the Lord knows that what we have experienced in the interim has better prepared us to be recipients.

To exercise faith I can also live righteously. Lectures on Faith tells us that "unless [the saints of God] have an actual knowledge that the course they are pursuing is according to the will of God they will grow weary in their minds, and faint." (Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985], pp. 67-68.) I used to wonder how I could know if the career path I was taking was acceptable to God. Then one day I realized that the path I should concern myself with most must always be the path of righteousness, and the Lord will help me in the places where I cannot see far ahead. The scriptures tell us that "the path of the just is as the shining light." (Prov. 4:18.) Security does not consist of knowing what lies outside us or ahead of us; security lies inside us when we are close to him.

Concentrating on what is certain, giving thanks for blessings, and living righteously all increase our faith. Nevertheless, even when we are trying to do our best, fearing that blessings may not come will weaken what faith we have been able to develop. Fearfulness is not of the spirit of the Lord. "For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." (2 Tim. 1:7.) Fear works against us. And when we give it heaven in our hearts, we may find ourselves in the same position as some early elders in the Church who were told, "Ye endeavored to believe that ye should receive the blessing which was offered unto you; but behold, verily I say unto you there were fears in your hearts, and verily this is the reason that ye did not receive." (D&C 67:3.) If I find myself in this situation, it demands that I discipline my mind to focus on the task at hand rather than on the fear itself.

A wonderful example of such focusing was shared with me by Hazel Hilbig, a special education teacher who taught reading to elementary school children of varying grade levels. She routinely gave her students practice tests to alleviate their nervousness when they faced an actual reading test. But one of her students had failed many times and was experiencing emotional trauma at home. During his practice test he began to read with quivering lips and halting voice. A young Korean boy, just learning English, was part of the group. Sensing his classmate's anguish, he turned and advised, "Don't scare. Just read."

These simple words remind me of an experience I had one December when I left graduate school and drove across the country alone in treacherous weather. Semi trucks were strewn along the freeway as I drove past Chicago. Three hundred people had been stranded in their cars by a fierce ice storm in Des Moines. The road I had traveled on was closed to traffic behind me just after I passed through Rawlins, Wyoming. I was driving with a fever and an aching throat, afraid to take medicine that would make me sleepy. The swirl of the snow across the highway made me feel as if I were at sea. I kept wondering what I would do if the weather caused something to go wrong mechanically with the car, if another driver should skid into me, or if I were stranded somewhere on the open plains.

I tried singing hymns to keep awake, but I needed something rousing to counteract the icy fear, my utter aloneness, and the quiet sameness of mile after mile of snow. Quite naturally the words to "The Lord Is My Light" came into my mind. "Then why should I fear? / By day and by night his presence is near. . . ." And the words to the second verse came just as easily. "The Lord is my light; though clouds may arise, / Faith, stronger than sight, looks up through the skies." (Hymns, no. 89.) Singing helped focus my mind. I tried not to scare, just drive. I remember promising in prayer that I would also drive fear from my mind, focus on the task at hand, and let the Lord "lead me, lead me along."

When I had returned safely home, I had to retain that focus of faith when I was again faced with determining new personal and professional directions for my life. After this experience, the words of the hymn I'd sung since childhood were forever changed for me. To this day, they bring a flood of emotion because I know that the Lord teaches us most powerfully through symbols, and my cross-country trip was both a literal and a symbolic preparation for other crucial life experiences to follow where I would need to look to him even more.

Fear may come not only from intense experiences but also from listening to others around us. For the single woman it may be voices that say, "It's too late," "You should have . . . ," "You're too fussy," "If only. . . ." Loud physical noise drowns out smaller sounds and can cause stress and debilitation; likewise, listening to voices other than God's voice, even if the voices are well meaning, can drown out the still, small voice, causing us to grow weary in our minds and faint.

Heavenly Father's voice of perfect mildness helps me focus my mind on faith. I love to hear him in the scriptures, saying:

"As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee." (Josh. 1:5.)

"Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness." (Isa. 41:10.)

How to exercise faith is shown in the story of the famous trapeze artist who was teaching his students how to perform on the high trapeze. One young man froze with fear at the sight of the fragile bar above him and choked, "I can't do it." The instructor wisely replied, "Son, you can do it, and I will tell you how. Throw your heart over the bar, and your body will follow." (Norman Vincent Peale, The Power of Positive Thinking [New York: Prentice-Hall, 1952], p. 111.)

Through the years, throwing my heart over the bar has become a habit that has worked again and again for me. But what of the times in life when it seems virtually impossible to get either heart or body over the bar? The single woman is usually her own major source of physical and emotional support. As she grows older, she may also be the major source of emotional support for aging parents and for other single friends. Though a career may not be her first choice, yet she goes forth to slay her own dragons each day and returns to her castle alone each night. Sometimes she grows weary. Megatrials or the cumulative effects of minitrials bring their own brand of battle fatigue. Perhaps she has prepared for the 100-yard dash and finds she is in the middle of a marathon. If I find myself fatigued or heartsick in the middle of the race, what does this situation require of me?

This Situation Whispers That I Pray for the Comforter

The ministration of the Holy Ghost during times of trial is well described by President Rex C. Stallings of the Salt Lake Winder West Stake. "Part of our earthly progression is to experience pain and suffering and disappointments. The Holy Ghost was meant to comfort us through sorrow, not necessarily to remove the experience of suffering. We need to learn this; otherwise, during suffering, we may start to disbelieve the Holy Ghost because we still hurt."

President Stallings recalls that as a child he would often skin his knees in play and then bump the scabs off several days later. Running in tears to his mother, he would climb into her lap and feel her warm arms rocking and soothing him. "It didn't take the pain away," he says, "but it gave me comfort. And that's how the Holy Ghost works. He doesn't take the pain away, but he gives you comfort."

During those times in my life when my heart has not cleared the bar, praying for the Comforter has slowly but surely brought a peace and a subsequent strength to my soul I would not have thought possible.

The Comforter can also bring all things to our remembrance. During difficult times we may be reminded that every trial has its ending and that we determine by our response whether or not the ultimate outcome will be positive or negative. Since we pay for our experiences with ourselves, they become virtually priceless. The same rain that beats upon us is also watering our souls. And when the sun reappears, knowing that we endured well the storm is one of the greatest rewards we can experience.

We may exult as did Ammon, saying, "Behold, my joy is full, yea, my heart is brim with joy, and I will rejoice in my God." (Alma 26:11.) Or we may feel to say as did the poet George Herbert, who, having endured major disappointments in his life, marveled at God's goodness with these words in "The Flower":

How fresh, O Lord, how sweet and clean Are Thy returns! ev'n as the flowers in spring, . . . Grief melts away Like snow in May, As if there were no such cold thing. Who would have thought my shrivel'd heart Could have recover'd greenness? . . . And now in age I bud again, After so many deaths I live and write; I once more smell the dew and rain, And relish versing: O my only Light, It cannot be That I am he On whom thy tempests fell all night.

When we feel burned out by trials or beaten by battle fatigue, the Comforter reminds us that God can "make weak things become strong." (Ether 12:27.) The shrivel'd heart can recover greenness and in age bud again, for "earth has no sorrow that heav'n cannot heal." (Hymns, no. 115.)

Finally, This Situation Asks Me to Believe in Miracles

One of my favorite stories about miracles is of three young trees who lived together on a hillside. They often talked about what each would like to be when he grew up.

One said, "Babies are the sweetest things in the world. I should like to be a baby's cradle."

The second spoke, "That would not please me at all. I should like to be a great ship so I might cross many waters and carry cargoes of gold."

The third tree stood off by himself in deep reflection. "Have you no dream for the future?" asked the others.

"No dream," he answered, "except to stay on this hillside and point men to God. What could a tree do better than that?"

Years passed, and the three small trees grew up to be tall and beautiful. One day men came to the hillside and cut down the first tree, But he was not made into a cradle. Instead he was hewn into rough pieces and carelessly put together to form a manger. "This is not what I planned to be," he sobbed heartbrokenly. "Shoved into this dark stable with no one but the cattle."

But Heavenly Father, who loves trees, whispered, "Wait. I will show you something." And he did.

For one night when God's Only Begotten Son was born, he was wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in the manger. The manger quivered with delight. "In all my dreams I never thought to hold a baby like this," he said. "Why, I am part of a miracle. Truly, this is better than all my planning."

Years passed. And men came to the hillside and cut down the second tree. But he was not made into a great sailing vessel. Instead he became a tiny fishing boat owned by a man named Peter. "To think that my life has come to this," he complained unhappily. "Just a fishing boat."

But Heavenly Father, who loves trees, whispered, "Wait. I will show you something." And he did.

For one day on the Lake of Gennesaret, Jesus sat in the little boat and spoke to the multitude on the shore. He spoke words of such wisdom and light that the little boat listened eagerly. "Why, I am part of a miracle," he whispered, his heart full of wonder. "In all my dreams I never thought to carry a cargo like this. Truly, this is better than all my planning."

Months went by, and men came to the hillside to cut down the third tree. "I don't want to go into the valley," he wept, as the axe cut into his heart. But the men tore away his branches, hewed him apart, and fashioned his pieces into a crude cross. "This is terrible," he quivered. "They are going to hang someone. Oh, I never wanted this to happen to me. I only wanted to stand on the hillside and point men to God."

But Heavenly Father, who loves trees, whispered, "Wait. I will show you something." And he did.

For one day Jesus took up his cross and was led to a place called Golgotha where he was crucified between two thieves. Afterwards, his body was laid in a tomb. But at dawn on the third day when Mary Magdalene and the others came to the sepulchre, an angel met them, saying, "He is not here: for he is risen, as he said." (Matt. 28:6.)

And the cross began to understand. "Why, I am part of a miracle," he marveled. "Jesus' great mission was to give his life so that all who have ever lived on earth can one day return to God and live with him again. In all my dreams I never thought to point men to God in this way. Truly this is better than all my planning."

The woman who has been single for many years often finds herself in a situation similar to that of the three trees. "This is not at all what I planned on," she may think. For the early, easily married, finding a companion seems quite commonplace; but for the one who has waited, nothing seems more miraculous. The single woman must believe that Heavenly Father, who loves her, is whispering, "Wait. I will show you something." And she must remember that signs follow those that first believe.

God's miracles are often so different from what we expect. As I think of my life and the lives of my friends and family through the years, I believe that although God's timetable has usually been inexplicable, his miracles have been better than all our planning.

My family always supposed that my father would live to a ripe old age. His heritage was one of longevity. He was a healthy and robust man, a man without guile, a man of great compassion and love for people from all walks of life. But while serving with my mother in the mission field, he began to lose his memory and reasoning abilities. Like the three trees, our family had moments of grief and terror. All of us went through our times of questioning, of wondering what was happening and why it was happening to our father. I thought over and over of the statement, "Anyone who doesn't believe in miracles isn't a realist." (Attributed to David Ben-Gurion, former prime minister of Israel.) It was time for a miracle, and no one deserved one more than my father.

Though my family is scattered across the country, we have always remained close in spirit. On an appointed day, we all fasted and prayed earnestly that my father would be healed. And each of us received the calm assurance that he would be all right.

As months went by, however, instead of gradually improving, he grew steadily worse. The final diagnosis was Alzheimer's disease. One neurosurgeon likened the condition of his brain to that of a bright city whose lights, one by one, slowly blink out. Once a man with a brilliant mind, he no longer knew the names of his children. We watched him die a little each day.

The calm assurance that we had once interpreted as possibly a promise of healing now became Heavenly Father whispering, "Wait. I will show you something." And he did. The miracle was not that my father was healed, but that his illness revealed the pure person he had become through all the years as he had faced his trials with faith and forbearance and a happy spirit.

The miracle was that the disease in all its hideousness could not destroy the essence of what was truly my father. As his mental faculties eroded, his spirit grew more luminous, his ability to communicate love grew even stronger. All my life I'd heard him pray for the welfare of his family, mentioning each of us by name. Now when I heard him pray, his words were broken and his sentences incoherent, but the spirit of his requests that the Lord watch over us was unmistakable. I read with new eyes the scripture, "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities . . . the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." (Rom. 8:26.)

Willa Cather wrote, "Where there is great love, there are always miracles. Miracles rest not so much upon faces or voices or healing power coming to us from afar off, but on our perceptions being made finer, so that for a moment our eyes can see and our ears can hear what is there about us always."

The miracle was what happened to each of us as a result of this seeming tragedy. Our perceptions became finer, our capacity to love expanded, our desire to remain an eternal unit grew stronger than ever before.

Last autumn I spent some time in New York City on business. On several nights I stood at the window of my darkened hotel room as if in a theater. I looked at Central Park, twenty-one stories below, a black patch of stage ringed with lighted skyscrapers, and watched as the full moon entered from the right to rise majestically above Manhattan.

The moon was a harvest moon, and it was October, a year since my father's death. I found myself thinking of how well he had responded to what life's situations required to him, of how his soul had shone more brightly as the darkness deepened around him, of how the miracles my family experienced had blessed each one. I thought, too, of another night in Gethsemane when the Savior responded to what his foreordained situation required and brought to pass the great miracle of the Atonement.

The moon shines because it receives light from the sun. How brightly we shine when the Lord is our light. When we respond affirmatively to what life's situations require. When we begin. When we make a friend of time. When we exercise faith. When we pray for the Comforter. When we believe in miracles.

Single or married, no one sees very far along the horizon in mortality. As we ask, "What does this situation require of me?" and act on the answers, we realize more deeply that putting the puzzle of life together is as important as the pieces or the outcome. Ambiguity helps us practice this process and thus develops in us qualities that certainty never could.

Phillips Brooks said, "Do not pray for tasks equal to your powers. Pray for powers equal to your tasks. Then the doing of your work shall be no miracle, but you shall be the miracle." (The Best of Words to Live By, ed. William Nichols [New York: This Week magazine, 1967], p. 63.)

God tells us his work and his glory is to bring to pass our immortality and eternal life. (See Moses 1:39.) In responding well, we help him in that work, for we may become as he is. And there is no greater miracle.
