Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Happily Hereafter

BLYTHE DARLYN THATCHER

As a child I loved the story of Cinderella. I especially loved the part when ordinary, impoverished Cinderella magically became beautiful. I believed the effect was basically universal: The once-plain little girls of the world in due time would, like Cinderella, be transformed into lovely, willowy, young ladies. Knowing I wasn't beautiful or slender yet, I waited patiently for the years to bring that magic.

One fall, coming back to high school, I saw Carol McGowan and Elaine Rogozenski, two girls I had known since grade school, one tall and gangly, the other short and pudgy. Both, obviously visited by the fairy godmother, were suddenly lovely, graceful, and slender. I wasn't disheartened; I just assumed it might take a little longer for my own transformation.

The years have since brought many transformations to me but never quite the Cinderella effect. I am passing fair and sometimes strikingly attractive, but lovely, graceful, and slender I have never been. I blame my genetic makeup: What's a fairy godmother to do with Grandmother's stout English genes, anyway?

The Cinderella effect was only one of several major notions I had about what occurs in a girl's life. I also assumed that sooner or later I would decide on a profession, work for a time, get married, settle down to a house, learn to cook, and love reading Pooh stories to my four boys and two girls before tucking them in at night. Now, sixteen years of teaching later and staring age forty straight in the face—single—I entertain different notions.

I was resistant, but I finally had to concede that there would be no fairy godmother in my life. What was even harder to admit was that I would likely never be lovely, graceful, or slender. I would have to make do with passing fair, erratic grace, and elusive slenderness.

I reluctantly relinquished my childish belief in a fairy godmother, but I have known all along there is a God. My childlike faith in God long preceded my wish for a fairy godmother. From my earliest days I was nurtured by my parents' belief and trust in God and Jesus Christ. As a fledgling in Presbyterian Sunday School, I treasured a growing collection of poster pictures of Jesus I earned by memorizing passages of scripture. I loved the flavor of those rich biblical words, and I basked in the affinity I felt with heaven in knowing them.

In those early childhood days I wondered how God took care of everything. I understood his need for angels with so many people on earth to shepherd. Keeping track of sins, I surmised, was done by putting a big black check mark next to the sinner's name. Once people had twelve checks, they would have to go to hell when they died. By the time I was nine, I already had about seven check marks, and I was worried. Adolescence added innumerable check marks to my name, and I gave up that notion in self-defense.

My fifteenth year brought me to the Church and ended my teenaged spiritual decline. I felt cleansed in body and spirit as I was lifted out of the waters of baptism. My sense of affinity with the spiritual was renewed; my faith took on new dimensions.

At sixteen, with anticipation and quiet anxiety, I received my patriarchal blessing. Because life had not always been tender with me, I just wasn't sure that this blessing was going to be all good news. For instance, in my pre-Mormon days I had decided I didn't ever want to marry. Now I wanted marriage with all my heart, and because it counted so much, I feared that, innately, I wasn't worthy. This blessing would be the telling of it. I wanted so much to be celestial material and was afraid my best was only third-level terrestrial. Not only did my patriarchal blessing calm my worst fears but it also provided illuminating insight to my celestial heritage and potential. That blessing has provided continuous motivation to live my life to merit its fulfillment.

As I conformed my life to gospel teachings after my baptism, I assumed my righteous life-style would enhance my marriage possibilities. The "1 chance in 300—or is it 3,000? or 3,000,000?—of marrying an active LDS man" statistics weren't available in those days. I certainly planned to marry, though the process itself was vague to me; there were already thriving cherubs and a happy hearth as I envisioned my marriage.

Since high school graduation, I have never had any five-year plan that didn't have marriage on the agenda. I still don't. There have even been times when marriage was the only substantial item. Nevertheless, one thing the years have clearly taught me is that marrying is not the issue; marrying right is. For me, that knowing has nothing to do with being too choosy or living single too long. Many factors play on my decision to marry, but the one who ultimately wins my hand will be that man whose direction matches my deepest eternal direction and whose living portrays that commitment. Short of that, I prefer to be single.

Don't misunderstand me. The same spirit that longs for exaltation has immense longing for eternal companionship. It is precisely because I most desire eternal companionship that I am willing to be alone all of this life, if necessary, rather than forfeit my divine eternity. But I would also be ecstatic if, without further delay, that noble companion's advent occurred in my life. Thus far, however, there is no sign of my nobleman on the horizon. And "thus far" has now been some twenty years! It took varying portions of those twenty years for me to, first, recognize my circumstance of singleness and, second, effectively respond.

Sometime in my twenties, I determined that I didn't care when I got married as long as I was married by thirty. When thirty came and went, the reality of singleness began to set in. I thought perhaps I should increase my involvement and "seek for the companionship of one of the noble sons of our Father in Heaven" a little more directly. I began taking community school classes, not solely for that purpose but with the conscious thought that he might be there learning French or creative writing. When I didn't find him there, I thought I would find him on higher educational ground. Graduate school was the answer. Along with the master's degree would come credentials for public school administration—I was looking to my professional career, just in case. He didn't enroll in my master's program, but I still thought the university might be his most plausible setting. So I enrolled in another graduate program. I came away with more credentials and another degree but no husband.

During those graduate school years, however, I did become engaged to a man I met elsewhere. On that engagement testing ground, as in no time before, my long-held perspectives concerning what was right for me in marriage were soundly tested and ultimately spiritually validated. He was not my nobleman, but that then-wrenching relationship now provides me great peace of mind as I continue as a single woman in a world where marriage reigns supreme.

But in those years, even in my twenties, as year after went by and I remained single, I began to doubt my worthiness for marriage. I searched deep within myself, trying to find what was wrong with me that kept me single. Yes, I could be thinner, prettier, more mature, more spiritual, more intelligent, more ad infinitum. But fatter, uglier, sillier, and duller women than I were getting married.

I did have opportunities—if that's the appropriate terminology for men who would have married me. Ah, but too many Irving Stone romances, and one of my own, had pierced my heart. For me, it has ever been imperative that there be fire, electricity, a camaraderie of personalities and spirits, that the two of us, man and woman, be bondable spirit and body.

My youthful perception of Church doctrine has also held sway. Already believing Christ my Redeemer, the other and lasting appeal of the gospel for me has been that I, even I, through Christ, could eventually become perfect. I have known since my first days in the Church that I am already terrestrial material; I could marry any of several men and ensure myself a terrestrial eternity. That frightens me. For me, it is imperative that the one I marry have my desire for eventual exaltation.

It may well be that my imperatives keep me single, but the very core of me could never enter marriage under lesser circumstances. In no way do I view myself above men; only, for me to marry, that inner equality must be there. Then, in full trust and as one, we could finish working out our salvation and exaltation.

While these perspectives regarding my marriage are the result of much contemplation and introspection, events of the last several years literally forced me to reevaluate and, in some basic ways, to realign my beliefs and my approach to life. The engagement and another wrenching relationship wherein I temporarily lost my sense of self-worth and eternal direction combined with a near-fatal fall requiring extensive recuperation proved sufficient catalyst.

I was still reeling emotionally from both of those difficult relationships when I suffered the fall. I had been four years in graduate school requiring two of my summers while working full-time throughout. I was exhausted and had set my heart on a footloose, rejuvenating summer that was only days away.

It wasn't to be that kind of summer. My fall resulted in a serious concussion, two head gashes, jammed neck and shoulder muscles, a broken left wrist, multiple bone bruises, and a right knee with a partially torn ligament and damaged kneecap. To have so many physical injuries and at the same time be suffering such intense pain of mind and spirit, and then to find that after a month of constant pain and swelling it was necessary that I undergo knee surgery—it seemed more than I could bear. The accident was the last straw after so many months of awfulness. I was sorely disappointed to have yet to be alive, and I bitterly agonized my complaint to the Lord.

I spent hours in that torment of soul as I thrashed on my bed with my cast and brace and pain. But after those hours, I began to reason. As I contemplated all the reasons why the fall should have killed me, it also began to dawn on me how rather miraculous it was that not only was I not dead but I was not paralyzed, permanently crippled, or subject to seizures or blackouts. And somewhere in that abyss, I also became aware of my agency. That day despair began to be replaced with life-saving resolve.

I determined that if I had to live on—and since I apparently was supposed to—I could not continue in my spiritual posture. Of all my afflictions, I knew that most in need of healing was my spirit. Finding myself at such a low juncture, I realized that, however unwittingly, I had allowed my circumstances and my impressions of good people in better circumstances to make me feel I had no right to expect exaltation for myself. That was a revelation to me. Extending such power to others and believing such false intimations about myself had nearly cost me my exaltation. I understood about the "arm of flesh" in a way I had never understood before.

That life had appeared so hopeless when my doubting replaced my faith made it apparent how much truly believing meant to me. Through the years, as I learned gospel truths and principles, I had worked diligently with myself to get rid of the self-ascribed, spiritually damning innuendos left over from my early years—suspecting that I was somehow an exception to Christ's redemptive powers, particularly toward exaltation; suspecting that the sins I had committed or been victim of made me an unsuitable candidate for eventual godhood; suspecting that there was a nontraversable chasm between people of eternal potential and me. I had wanted to eradicate those monumental doubts from my life entirely, but for all my efforts they had gone only as far as the back burner of my mind. Through all my years they had inconsistently, but gnawingly, come back to haunt me. I had tried to ignore them, hoping they would eventually give up or die out. I realized I was now staring them straight in the face. They would finally really have to go.

It was all too clear to me what doubting the effects of my righteous efforts and doubting the Lord's promises to me produced. "All things produce after their own kind: the offspring of faith is faith, the offspring of disbelief is disbelief." (Joseph Fielding McConkie, Seeking the Spirit [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978], p. 11; italics added.) I had given disbelief space, allowed it to increase, and in my recent, darker days, even fed it. I had nearly sold my soul for it. That I had so nearly succumbed intensely sharpened my sense of the dichotomy involved.

Faith, beyond the gift, and agency became verbs, not concepts. I resolved: If I have a choice, which I do, then I choose to have faith—faith in the Lord, in the Atonement, in prayer, in repentance, in forgiveness, in service, in my potential, and in the goodness and potential of others for exaltation; faith in the scriptural fact that the Lord does not make status exceptions about who may share in his blessings but all people "are privileged the one like unto the other, and none are forbidden." (2 Ne. 26:28) faith that the Holy Ghost, keeper of all truth, can witness and imprint on my soul my worth, an imprint that with nurturing can withstand all false assessments—and I choose to nurture; faith that as I rely on the Lord through exercised faith, I am capable of overcoming all barriers, self-imposed or otherwise; faith that in my process of perfection, I can eventually attain all the attributes of godliness.

I am a daughter of a Heavenly Father. I can "reasonably expect to become like [him]." (Henry B. Eyring, Excellence [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984], p. 20.) I had not realized before how dependent that expectation is upon my exercised faith. Constant nurturing is an essential that I had not previously understood or fully employed. I now recognized it as the practical complement to knowledge and faith.

In the past I had had difficulty letting go of my trespasses, even some minor ones. I somehow felt a sort of humility in their remembrance; I also felt a persistent sort of futility in my righteous reachings. Truly exercising my faith in Christ, I began to see that repentance and forgiveness afforded me a reconciliation with Christ and my Heavenly Father that I had never before allowed. I let go of those trespasses, the misconstrued humility, and the persistent futility. I decided to actually trust in the sacrifice and promise of the Lord.

With new perspective I understood that this life is to prepare me to meet God and become like him. It was understood by all concerned that as I grappled with life I would commit my share of sins. What I have learned about myself is that once I really understand what is right to do, I usually persist in the right. It is to my eternal benefit to forgive myself for sins I have repented of, sins that I committed not because I clearly desired to do evil but because I did not perceive clearly the benefits of righteousness. As I repent, the Lord offers me forgiveness, a forgiveness that is consecrated as I take the sacrament each week. The Lord in his perfection is able to forgive me; I do him honor to complement his forgiveness of me with my own. I also further my progression, aligning myself consistently closer to godhood.

These spiritual insights did not occur in an instant, but there is that moment forever cut out of time when I decided to doubt no longer. And then I decided to exercise faith consistently. That has made all the difference.

The acid test of how well I could overcome doubt was Mother's Day, 1986. Locking my door as I left for church that sunshiny Sabbath, I thought, if we have to celebrate Mother's Day, this is a good day to do it. I was happy with life and thought I could handle my lack of brood as we celebrated that accomplishment by other women.

Through Relief Society and Sunday School I was outside myself, enjoying my learning and appreciating the efforts to ensure our ward mothers a happy day. Tender memories and feelings for my own ever-kind and benevolent mother enhanced my appreciation for her and for those women in my midst.

Sacrament meeting began with a musical Primary tribute to the mothers. Afterward, two of those Primary children chose to sit with me, one on each side, and I busied myself giving them paper and pen to occupy the moments that might lag for them.

"Would all the mothers please stand? We want to give each of you a cookbook for Mother's Day."

I had known the request was coming; I thought I was prepared for it. Why, then, was there this sudden heartwide pain, depleting me of strength and spirit? I felt desolate; the two children beside me only heightened my sense of isolation—and it had nothing to do with not getting a cookbook.

I knew what was wrong; I was still vulnerable. I will never be past wanting husband, children—to belong in that fashion. I was quick to realize, though, as I sat through the remainder of the meeting, that I had a choice. I could suffer my anguish all the day long, or I could exercise my faith to get back outside of myself. I primed my mind and heart to have me be a blessing to all with whom I came in contact for the rest of that day.

After church I took a short nap to help renew my strength and spirit. Then I made arrangements with a couple to care for their children while they went on a trip. I went to a Mother's Day dinner for my mother-by-affection (my parents are long deceased). After the dinner, I took home my dear eighty-nine year-old grandma-by-affection. I also had a gentle, meaningful conversation with a treasured but downcast friend.

When I returned home that evening, I was completely refreshed, with no hint of my earlier mourning. It did not escape me that I had been a genuine blessing to several people that day, and one of the reasons I could offer my time and heart in that fashion was that I was single. Another, more significant, reason was that I chose that day to trust in the Lord's timetable for me, and I exercised my faith in that to the benefit of others. That day has remained a convincing reminder that faith is power, divine power, healing power, and it is mine.

Truly believing in Christ and his promises and consistently endeavoring to match my thinking and actions to that faith—it is this, I have finally learned, that not only sustains me but empowers me. Possessing the gospel is not at all sufficient; I must, with consistent accuracy, apply the gospel and make the power of its principles mine. That may sound like common knowledge, but it has been the hardestwon, farthest-reaching scholarship of my life.

What I have explained has taken me all of my almost-forty years to learn. I have learned it all as a single woman. Perhaps I would have learned it sooner in the security of marriage; perhaps it would have taken me still longer with a husband and children bolstering my sense of security. No matter. I do know it was imperative I learn; I am keenly aware of the eternal implications.

Having thus learned, I find that my enjoyment in living life has been greatly enhanced. Turning forty single doesn't cast a first cloud on my happiness. In fact, I have big plans to celebrate this benchmark birthday. Engraved invitations will be sent to the surely thousands of friends who, over the years, have invited me to their wedding showers, trousseau teas, wedding breakfasts, wedding receptions, and wedding parties. Since this birthday is on an August Saturday, an over-the-hill birthday open house for this still-single woman is in the works!

I have always figured I missed out on a good thing by not having a wedding shower or reception to get me going in life. I've worn out most of the things I used in my first twenty years of adult life, so engraved on the invitation will be the option (preferred!) to bring a nonwedding gift. At the open house I will make sure an embossed receipt is given for each beautiful, elaborate, and lavish gift that comes through my door. Then if, in the not-too-distant future, I get married, those guests need only bring their receipt to my wedding reception. I'm sure all my friends will think this a delightful crossing for me into middle age.

As I have journeyed toward this fortieth year, I have made do with passing fairness, erratic grace, and very elusive slenderness. But while my outward comeliness has remained basically unchanged, with divine tutelage and blessings quantum leaps have occurred within. All who know me long and well would attest to my ever-increasing inner beauty and refinement. Better yet, I have come to realize that this manifest beauty which is mine is a rare, everlasting loveliness.

I still love the story of Cinderella, and I still wish I could be lovely, graceful, and slender in appearance. Not for one moment, though, would I trade transitory outward beauty for this internal, external comeliness, not even for a moment.
