Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Sojourn

MARY ELLEN EDMUNDS

I graduated from Primary in the Rock Church near the post office. The woman who was assigned to give The Talk spoke to us about "you sweet young girls on the threshold of womanhood." Afterward I sat with my friends, and we tried to understand the significance of this passage into MIA, but we were still much into kick-the-can, bikes, snow forts, marbles, playing in our tree house, and watching the Lombardi brothers dig tunnels in the field next to the hospital. Nevertheless, we went to MIA. We each had a bandlo that we glued plastic things on, and I still remember how long it took me to make my felt daffodil to put on the top. We sat through lessons on the steps about achieving a temple marriage and a happy home and family. "If you do THIS, then THIS will happen."

Things haven't quite turned out the way my MIA teachers indicated they would. The Rock Church is still there, but the hospital is in a new location, the Lombardi brothers moved who knows where, the bandlo is in a box in the basement, my friends are scattered in many places, I'm approaching fifty, and I live alone.

Some of the situations and milestones of being single have been hard. I had a rough time with the knowledge that I was reaching the age where I likely would never bear a child. It was a very difficult reality for me. I had always looked forward to having my own children and anticipated having several.

There have been adjustments related to living alone, and there are questions at times like, "Do you mean to tell me that I'm going to need to do all these things for myself?" There's so much I don't know, and it has never been easy to ask for help from others.

It isn't always comfortable to go places alone, either, even to Church meetings. I'm very aware of those who have family to sit with, particularly of women who have husbands. There is also a variety of responses to me from others.

There have been times during interviews with priesthood leaders where I have felt even they weren't sure what to ask or how to listen and instead have filled in their time with me talking about their families and situations. That has been a cause of frustration. I've not had regular visits from either visiting or home teachers. Visiting teachers have tried, but from the time I returned from a mission in Indonesia in 1978, I have not had home teachers. I have requested them but have not had a visit, and I found it uncomfortable to keep requesting. I likely would have felt more need to follow up on my requests if I didn't have my family—my parents and brothers and sisters, many of whom live near—and wonderful neighbors. It hasn't been that I have always needed something fixed or done—although that does happen—but I wanted someone to know something about me and have some awareness of my circumstances, needs, strengths, and interests.

I've been faced with the awkwardness some feel when they find out I'm not married. The question that leads to this realization is usually something like, "What is your maiden name?" or "How many children do you have?" I respond with, "I'm not married." No tears, no embarrassment, just the fact: I'm not married. But so often the response, especially in body language and tone of voice, indicates that I'm to be pitied and surely I'm missing all the things that bring true happiness in this life. Others sometimes even convey to me that they think I'm only pretending to be happy, that I can't really be happy as a woman (with or without children) without being married.

There are many who try to make something happen. They line me up with their son or their brother or their neighbor or a nice single man they used to know who's close to retirement. "You could go on a whole bunch of missions together." There have been some enjoyable experiences, and there have been some disasters. I have never responded well to the feeling I have sometimes, "So this is what it has come to—leftovers." No doubt there have been some men who have responded that way to me, too. Then there are the well-meaning souls who say, "Oh, I just know you'll marry a General Authority some day!" or "I just know there's a special man being saved for you!" For me, or from me? The message usually comes across this way: "Someday you'll be happy; I just know it."

There have been many times when I've watched my brothers and sisters and friends with their families and have had a very difficult time. Some of those little children have seemed like kindred spirits, and I have wondered if they are like my own children would have been if I had been able to have any. I've had times in my life when I've wondered about the rest of my patriarchal blessing because of the promises about children and family that have yet to come. Such instances turn out to be times of searching, pleading, pondering, and stretching. Am I happy? Fulfilled? Peaceful? Progressing? Achieving? Does anything I have accomplished in my life count in the whole scheme of things? Are we only "on hold" while we're single? Does the real living only happen with husband-wife combinations?

I recognize that there are things I could not have done had I been married, with or without children. I don't pretend to know how significant these experiences are in an eternal sense, but I am convinced that they matter. I have many relationships that are eternal in nature. I have consciously decided I will give my days and years the best I can and trust in a loving, wise God to help me know what I need to know, and do what I am supposed to do, and become the best MEE (Mary Ellen Edmunds) possible.

Several years ago, probably close to twenty years, I became aware that I spent a lot of time thinking—and worrying—about what I didn't have. All around me were reminders of what others had that I didn't. It wasn't so much their possessions as their situation—their home and family and children. During this time I read a little story that had a powerful effect on me. I don't remember just where I found it, but I'll never forget how it made me feel and the deep impression it left:

Two little children were put early to bed on a winter's night, for the fire had gone out, and the cold was pouring in at the many cracks of their frail shanty. The mother strove to eke out the scantiness of the bed covering by placing clean boards over the children. A pair of bright eyes shone out from under a board, and just before it was hushed in slumber a sweet voice said, "Mother, how nice this is. How I pity the poor people who don't have any boards to cover their children with this cold night."

This little story stopped me in my tracks. I thought about it over and over again, coming to the realization that I had spent far too much time in my life thinking of all I didn't have instead of all I did have. Here was a little unknown child who taught me a great lesson: she was grateful for present blessings. She was looking at everything from the perspective of what she had. And thus was born my personal theory of relativity.

I know there will always be many people who have much, much more than I do—more time, more clothes, more talent, more hair, more pets, more toys, more children, more things—but there will also always be millions who have much, much less than I do, and in many situations much, much less than they need. I began to understand it is not what I have, but what I enjoy, that brings real happiness. My theory of relativity ties in with such hymns as "Count Your Blessings." (Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985, no. 241.) I have been making a conscious effort to expect less and appreciate more. This change is making a noticeable difference in my life. It's a process, not an event, so it takes time, but I feel progress, and I am enjoying the effort.

I have spent a total of six years living and working in developing countries, most of the time as a missionary. I have had many powerful learning moments, and I have had some magnificent teachers. But there has been a price to pay for this education and experience. I remember how hard it was for me to say yes to a call to serve in Indonesia. I was thirty-six years old and had not been home three years from my previous mission. I felt like I was just beginning to become established somewhat in my life. I was becoming aware of things such as building up toward retirement and learning to take care of myself. I didn't know if I could handle another mission physically or emotionally. But within hours, particularly during some time in the Provo Temple, I knew that this was the right thing for me to do—certainly not the easy thing, and not what I would have chosen without prayer and the process of ask, seek, and knock.

In Indonesia I spent about a month in Jakarta with the mission president and his family and my companion, a young woman from Malaysia. Then we were given our assignment: we were to live and work in central Java in the city of Solo. We arrived there after an allnight train ride and found our little home. I was surprised to find it so rough. No sinks and no toilet, just a hole in the floor. The well where we'd get most of our water had fish and junk in it. The large open storage tanks where we'd store what water we could get from taps were lined with scum. There were rats, cockroaches, scorpions, flies, mosquitoes. I kept saying to myself, "Self, you have done this before; you can do it again. Shape up; get tough; hang in there." But I felt discouraged, and I knew that this was going to be a difficult adjustment.

That night I was awakened because I hurt and I couldn't breathe. I had anticipated that—my previous missions had been in humid areas, too, and I always had asthma. I used my inhaler, but it was a while before I could breathe comfortably. Meanwhile the mosquito and bedbug bites hurt and itched. I was hot and sweaty. I lay there on my back looking up, imagining I could see beyond the ceiling, and cried unto the Lord. I complained, "Why was I sent here? What is going on? Is this supposed to be a good experience? Am I being tested again? I don't want to go through all of this again, I just don't. I like to breathe!" I'm sure I mentioned all of the things I could think of that I didn't have in that situation. I was beginning to feel like one of the great martyrs of all time.

The next morning I decided to begin cleaning and organizing. One thing I had noticed was that my fan was filthy. I had a little three-speed fan that worked sometimes; it depended on what else was running in our neighborhood. The power fluctuated in an amazing way. We already knew, for example, that by 6:00 P.M. our one light in our living area would be gone—too much competition. Time for the candles again. But I did have a fan, and I took it out by our well to clean it.

I was just starting to take it apart when a woman came to the door, which was near our well, and asked if she could get some water. I had noticed her before and felt happy we had something to share. I noticed, too, that she had the same dress on as before, that she had several children, and that she was pleasant. She began to talk to me while she was drawing water. She wasn't complaining, but she told me some things about her life. Her husband, a polygamist, seldom visited, and she was having a struggle trying to care for her children. She lived behind us in a makeshift dwelling that had no electricity, no water, and not even a hole for a toilet. Something began to happen to me while I listened to her, the woman at the well, as I became more aware of my three-speed fan. My theory of relativity was brought powerfully to my mind and heart on that important day in December 1976, and this good woman was my teacher.

A few weeks later some Church members who lived in a Chinese cemetery as squatters invited us to visit them. We rode our bikes in their direction, and they were waiting for us on the main dirt road to show us how to reach their homes. In one home the man, Sukiman, had built a small bench for us to sit on. We talked for a while, and then I asked a typical question, "How many children do you have?"

Some special, unspoken communication passed between him and his wife, and then he responded, "There is no one following us." It wasn't just, "We have no children." In the Indonesian language it was more like, "There is no posterity." He added, "We have had children, but we didn't know how to care for them, and they all died." That hurt. That didn't seem fair, not when so many of us knew so much about caring for children and had so many resources to help us.

We kept talking. At one point Sukiman asked, "Sister, do the members of the Church in other parts of the world pray for me?"

I knew that some did, even though I hadn't always been among them, and I responded, "Yes, Sukiman, there are many members who pray for you."

He became emotional and said so sincerely, "Isn't that wonderful? I pray for them, too."

This was in 1977, and we were receiving letters from home about the shortage of water. It was a year when there wasn't enough snow and rain, and everyone was concerned. Church members would ask us, "What do you hear from your family?" We told them about the water shortage, and they expressed concern.

Things became relative in a powerful way one day when a missionary received a clipping from a newspaper reporting that in a part of California the people were being restricted in their water usage. They had to cut down to only 120 gallons of water per day for everything they needed. 120 gallons! I thought of Sukiman. I wondered what in the world he'd do with 120 gallons of water in one day, even if he could possibly carry that much water from the well, which was quite a distance away from his home. And to think that the 120 gallons would be safe water. . . .

During that month of February we got a message from our mission president in Jakarta informing us that all members of the Church throughout the world were going to fast and pray together, for each other, for all the problems and challenges in the world that members were facing. We were to let the members of our branch know.

We knew that many of the members ate only one meal a day and not because they were fasting. But they responded, and we gathered in our branch meeting on Sunday. One of the brothers was asked to pray, and I'll never forget the feeling I had. At one point I even opened my eyes, so touched and impressed was I with what he was saying. "And please, Heavenly Father, take care of those who are suffering because they don't have enough water. We have plenty. Could You take some of ours and share it with them?" It wouldn't surprise me at all to learn one day that He allowed them to share their water.

In the Philippines in 1973 I was serving as a health missionary, and my companion and I used to take the bus from Manila to Baguio about once a month. We began to notice one little girl who was always at the bus station in Baguio when we'd arrive. She sold peanuts and newspapers. She always had on the same ragged T-shirt, shorts, and thongs. She got so she recognized us and would run to greet us when we'd arrive. One day we took her picture. She looked at the camera curiously, and we wondered if she'd ever had her picture taken before. We took the film back to Manila and got it developed. On our next trip we brought her a picture of herself and could hardly wait to find her.

She came running when she saw us, and I handed her the photograph, expecting her to exclaim with delight that she was happy to have it. But she took it and kept looking at it intently, finally asking, "Who is this?"

I couldn't believe it. Here was a little child who, in the literal sense, didn't know who she was! I said, "It's you."

"Me?" She looked even more closely at the picture."

"Yes, it's you." Then I got an idea and pointed to the hole in her T-shirt. "Do you see this hole? Here it is in the picture. This is your shirt, and this is you."

Then I could see by the look on her face that she had at last discovered it was a picture of her. She dropped the papers and peanuts and went hollering through the bus area, "It's me! It's me! It's me!"

Relatively speaking, I know a lot about myself and my relationship to my Father in Heaven, the Savior, the Holy Ghost, my earthly parents and brothers and sisters, and to everyone I meet. Here was a little girl who knew almost nothing about who she was and who God was. My little friend didn't know that she had kept her first estate and had the potential to return to live with God. It seemed to me that I could learn from that contrast. I could learn of gratitude for knowing who I am and for a chance to help anyone else know more about who they are, especially with regard to their relationship to their Heavenly Father and their purpose for being on this earth with the rest of us.

These and many other experiences helped me realize how much I have and caused me to do a lot of pondering about how much I enjoy what I have and how willing I am to share. My experiences have brought me perspective and help me understand more about myself and others and about life. One thing perspective does is teach me more about why—why I was asked to do certain things at certain times in my life. I have found that for me nothing happens in isolation; it is all connected. Each thing that I have said yes to that was right and good has been tied to other opportunities and experiences. I have called this article "Sojourn" because through my experiences I have become so conscious of how brief life is, how temporary and critical.

I find I take more time to try to make sure things are in the right order. First things first, as they say. I can remember reading in D&C 88:119 about "a house of order." I had always pictured that as a home with "a place for everything and everything in its place." Now I've expanded the picture to include order in the sense of timing and value: the right things in their right place in that sense. I am peaceful about timing and seasons, knowing that indeed, "to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven." (Eccl. 3:1.) I want to do the right things in the right order. I know that this life is the time "to prepare to meet God" (Alma 34:32), as Amulek taught, and that although there are some things I can't do as a single person, there are things I can do because I'm single.

Occasionally there are times when I feel down, frustrated, discouraged, or overwhelmed. I thought of an idea about twelve years ago that helps me put things in perspective and keep them there. I decided to schedule time to be depressed. During the day if I begin feeling a bit low, I remind myself that I have a time in my schedule for that and I can wait. Then when it's time, I really get into it. I have to be in a place where I can't be distracted by anything too positive or cheerful. That means if I'm around people, I let them know that for a few minutes (I try to make ten minutes the absolute maximum) I'm going to be depressed and they should leave me alone. Sitting in a corner is a good location because there's less chance of spotting a book I want to read or catching some happy scene out the window. This approach has helped me by causing me to see more clearly that I have far more to be happy about than sad. I usually end up spending less time being depressed than I had planned, and sometimes I start laughing or become motivated to do something productive, interesting, enjoyable, and uplifting.

I love having things to look forward to—a holiday, a book I'm going to read, something I'm going to do with or for someone. I love looking forward to things that are an hour away, a day away, a year away, or more. I love learning new things. A friend of mine, Florence Richards, decided that each year she would learn something new. I remember that one year it was learning to play the accordion. I admire her plan and have tried it. Recent things I've tackled are learning (finally) something about computers and learning American Sign Language, because it's one of my responsibilities at the Missionary Training Center.

I have worked to genuinely enjoy others' success and happiness. There were times in my life when I felt some envy for what others had that I didn't have, but through consciously working on it I have learned what a good feeling it is to be genuinely happy with others. And I realize that I have opportunities and happiness that others may share, too. Sometimes I've had people say to me, "You're so lucky to be where you are, doing what you're doing." I don't know what part luck may have played, but I have done many things in my life because I knew they were right for me to do, although they have been anything but easy. When God has asked me to do something hard, I have decided he must know I can do it.

Sometimes, in implementing my theory of relativity, I handle my frustrations by going outside myself. My office has a window, and I pretend I'm standing out there looking in. It's an interesting exercise to look in on my situation and life and experiences. Some of the positive thoughts that come when I "step outside" include realizing I am free and have choices and opportunities. Then I might remember walking with a young boy in Indonesia as he poured out his heart about his hopes and dreams, his yearnings. The reality of his situation was that he might never reach some of his goals. As we walked that day, my young friend asked me why. We talked about what we do with what we have. I told him my feelings about the scriptures that mention "according to that a man hath" and my consciousness that in many respects many of my brothers and sisters in temporally challenging situations were doing more with their challenges and opportunities than I with mine. He had worked and saved for about five years to serve a mission, and he valued his two years highly because he had worked hard for them. So much of what he and others invest their time and work in is that which they can take with them. So much of what I have is of the world.

Once while I was living in Nigeria, West Africa, I became very sick. I was trying not to be discouraged about it, but those old questions kept coming, questions that usually began, "Why . . .?" I had received several priesthood blessings, and it was hard not to doubt my faith or my worthiness to be healed. I kept wondering what I was accomplishing because I was so sick every day and any exertion only made matters worse.

It was Christmas time in 1984, and we held a program in our branch. During the course of the program I picked up a little child named Blessing. I could tell she wasn't feeling well, either. I held her in my arms and looked at her and began to communicate with her. It wasn't words—I didn't know her language and she didn't know mine—but it was a powerful sense of communication. I wondered about her in my heart. "Little Blessing, what is life like for you? Do you have any hope at all? It must be hard to be hungry so often. And to have sores on your feet." I knew I could have no real understanding of what that little child was feeling, but our eyes locked and neither of us looked away for a long, long time. I realized I was crying. I don't know that I would have had as much sensitivity for how she was feeling if I had enjoyed perfect health while I was there.

Eventually I was sent home because of illness and spent three months of "crash and burn," physically and emotionally. I had never been a quitter before. There were too many unanswered questions at once. Too much wondering about why. And the majority of the questions had to do with "Why me?" Not so much why did I get sick while I was there so that I couldn't finish, but why was I the one who was taken away and given special care in a modern hospital in America? Oh, I can think of all the things that people would usually say if I tried to explore that question with them. But I was thinking of Blessing and my other friends there who were also not feeling well and who struggled every day with pain and sickness. Why MEE? Even now, I haven't quite settled that question in my mind or my heart.

I was able to go back for a couple of weeks in April 1985. It helped me feel somewhat more peaceful about things. I attended church in the same branch, and it was good to see my friends. One little soul whom I nicknamed Broomstick was there. I called her that because she was seven years old and weighed twenty-three pounds. I used to scoop her up and take her to the front of our small chapel with me; I'd find her just inside the door, seeming not to have the energy to go any further. I loved holding her and the other children. I loved the way they held on tight and soaked up the love. I know they could feel how much they were loved.

On this particular Sunday in April, near Easter, I picked up my tiny friend, Broomstick, and held her. We sang "I Know That My Redeemer Lives" (Hymns, 1985, no. 136) that day. I felt a prompting to sing it to her, so I did. "I know that your Redeemer lives. . . ." Some of the phrases were particularly powerful and touching. "He lives to bless you with his love." "He lives your hungry soul to feed. He lives to bless in time of need." "He lives to hear your soul's complaint." "He lives to silence all your fears. He lives to wipe away your tears." I found I couldn't sing after just a few phrases; I could only whisper the words to her. She was watching me, and I wondered if her soul could understand what I was trying to share. "He lives, your kind, wise, heavenly Friend. He lives and loves you to the end." "He lives and grants you daily breath. He lives, and you shall conquer death." It was an unforgettable experience.

My theory of relativity is tied closely to all such experiences. I think of those who have less than they need and look at myself with so much, much more than I need of many things. I have decided that an important attribute of being godlike is described in D&C 104:17: "For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare." I spend a lot of time pondering this. Enough is enough. Why is it sometimes so hard for me to have enough—and to spare? If only we could properly see others' needs in light of our own wants. (See Spencer W. Kimball, "The Gospel in Action," Ensign, Nov. 1977, p. 77.) Oh yes, if only I could do that more. For me, I have realized that when I spend a lot of time thinking about what I don't have, I miss all the chances to be content and happy with what I do have—the "clean boards" to cover myself with on a cold night. A friend said, "You can never get enough of what you don't need, because what you don't need never satisfies you." Amen.

In 1981 I had the opportunity of spending a short time observing work being done by welfare services missionaries in a refugee camp near Bangkok, Thailand. Here I learned other permanent, powerful lessons. One afternoon we visited with a family who had fixed up a nice home in the space they had been given. As we were visiting, I noticed that a little girl bumped into a small bag of rice. It spilled all over. Immediately, without any anger, the adults and children stopped what they were doing and helped pick up every single kernel of rice. I watched that simple act, and I learned much from it about the value of even a single kernel of rice. I thought of how much I must have wasted during my life that likely would have been of great value to someone else.

Another time at the refugee camp I noticed a little girl watching me. She had on an oversized pink shirt. Every time I'd try to look directly at her to smile or communicate in some way, she'd run away. I wondered about her, who she was and what she'd had to experience at her tender age. Toward the end of the day we went back to the place where the missionaries had their office. I sat near the window with my back to the outside. My arms were stretched out, and my hand was on the edge of the window.

After a while I noticed the little girl in the pink shirt approaching me, walking very quietly, watching to see if I'd turn around. I didn't. I decided just to sit quietly and see what happened. She got closer and closer. When she was right next to me she stopped, and we were both very quiet. I didn't turn. Then she reached up and touched me, and ran. It was like electricity, that quick touch from a tiny finger. I felt it deep in my soul and was moved to tears. I sat there thinking and feeling when I noticed that she was coming back. I still didn't turn but waited to see what would happen. Again she approached carefully and quietly, and again she stood waiting. Once again she touched me and ran, and I felt another deep and powerful response. She did this another time, and still I didn't turn. The last time she did this she stood as before but then reached up and put her whole small hand on top of mine and pressed it hard. I wept. I felt so much love for that little child and kept thinking, "Oh, little child, who are you? Where are you from? Are your parents alive? Do you have any brothers and sisters? Are there people who care about you and are helping you? Where will you go? Where will you live?"

Later as I thought about the little girl in the pink shirt, I found myself thinking about my theory of relativity. I had been blessed constantly and abundantly in my life; my own needs were far better met than this child's. I realized anew that there was so much good I could do if I would be willing. I could bless and nurture others and help assure blessing and nurturing in others' lives. "As thy days may demand, so thy succor shall be." ("How Firm a Foundation," Hymns, 1985, no. 85.) I have felt that so strongly in my own life. God knows me. Every single day. He knows my needs. I'd like to be more that way with others.

What seems critical to me, then, is not whether I am married or single, but that I am striving towards being perfect: whole, complete, and pure, prepared for what God has in mind for me. It's as King Benjamin described when he invited us to become as little children:

"For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19; italics added.)

I probably have resisted and whined and moaned too much and haven't been what anyone would call submissive. But I'm trying. It's extremely important for me to know that I am doing the will of God. I need to know in my heart that what I am doing pleases him and helps him in his work. I feel a tremendous peace from knowing that.

One thing that has helped me very much through all the ups and downs of all the years of my life has been the knowledge that God lives and that I can communicate with him any time. Prayer has been such a significant source of help, comfort, peace, and direction. I like to pray specifically, to think, ponder, and listen. It means a lot to me when there's time to spend an hour or so and have a real dialogue rather than a monologue. I like to take notes sometimes when I pray, writing down impressions and feelings that come. I have had some marvelous experiences doing this. I remember when I was having a particularly difficult experience in my life trying to find the light at the end of the tunnel. I was praying and got a feeling to take notes. What I wrote down still has a lot of meaning and significance for me. Writing in my journal or writing letters to friends also is a great help in sharing my feelings and ponderings.

I gain a lot of enjoyment from the scriptures, and I find it makes a difference if I'm reading and studying every day. I purchased some scriptures on tapes, and I listen to them when I am driving by myself. It's good to use another sense, and I discover, in hearing, some different emphasis or meaning in a particular verse or section. I also love the hymns and find the words very meaningful. If I have an experience in which a hymn is particularly powerful, I like to write that down. Then I can go back in my journal and remember that day or that experience in which the hymn taught me something. I also like to cross-reference the hymns in my hymnbook, adding scripture references to those already listed in the new hymnbook. I like to underline, too, the words or phrases that have special meaning to me.

I am deeply grateful for the privilege of attending the temple. The blessings of being in that holy place increase my peace and fortify me for all that's outside in the world waiting for me. Temple attendance helps me gain perspective, understanding, and insight. I feel spiritually enlightened when I'm there. I love to see friends there; it is one of the best places on earth to run into someone you love. Temples have always seemed like places of refuge and sanctuary to me. I find answers to questions, a lightening of my burdens, and a wonderful sense of comfort while I'm there.

I'm aware of the influence of what I read, see, and listen to upon my thoughts and actions. I work at reading, watching, and listening only to those things that I want to remember, things that will inspire, lift me, and teach me important lessons.

I like to do things that make me stretch and grow, such as choosing to drive a different way to work, mending a misunderstanding, finding a new way to do a routine thing, memorizing something, being the first to say "I'm sorry," and being honest and real with people. In other words, I try not to get caught in a routine or in being predictable, but rather to explore new ways to do the same things and to look for new adventures or opportunities.

Humor has helped me through my life. I have tried to develop a good sense of humor. I found when I was working as a nurse and teaching nursing that there were times when humor could save the day. There were times, too, when situations weren't funny. I have tried to develop a sensitivity to others' feelings and not laugh at their expense. I still have trouble with that at times, laughing at people instead of with them, but I keep working on it. I want to be kind and gentle and never embarrass or make fun of anyone. It hurts me to see someone else hurting. I also don't like to make light of sacred things. But I do believe that we can be happy and cheerful and that life is generally wonderful and a tremendous adventure.

I try to help and lift others through being cheerful. I believe that "men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.) I think it's healthy to be happy. I want to radiate love, goodness, optimism, and hope in my countenance. I'd like to live so that everyone I meet would know I love them and am genuinely happy because I know that God lives, loves me, and believes in me. I'd like to help others experience this same kind of happiness. I like the way it's phrased in Mosiah 18:20, that we are willing to bear one another's burdens that they may be light. I want to help lift burdens so they can be bearable.

I'm convinced that happiness is possible in almost any situation because I have observed it in such a wide variety of circumstances and have experienced it myself in so many different ways. Happiness is more tied to attitude than to situation, which for me has direct application in my singleness. . . .

Life is a magnificent adventure. I'm so happy to be alive! I'm grateful for the progress I'm making in things that are important to me and look forward to learning, understanding, and applying gospel principles more fully as I continue my efforts to learn and grow. I want to explore more about denying myself of all ungodliness. I want to understand the law of consecration better. I want to live the law of the fast more fully, having enough and to share more often. I want to make promises carefully and then keep them. I want to develop increased personal integrity. I want to learn more about what it means to follow a living prophet. I want to increase in patience and gentleness.

I know that things that are now relative must some day be absolute—that I must be absolutely clean, pure, obedient. Meanwhile I try to get better at the process. . . .

Could there be anything more wonderful than the chance to work out our own salvation with the help of God and others? Some have the chance to do that in teams, husband and wife, and others in a wide variety of situations. Whatever the situation, whatever the circumstance, there is the privilege of living principles that bring blessings and of knowing joy and peace and progress in this life.

I am convinced that our Heavenly Father wants us to be happy in this life and in the life to come. I know that his gospel in its fulness has the answers to all my needs and all my questions. He has shared with us all we need to know, to do, and to be in order to be happy. I know that God is alive, aware, and full of understanding and mercy. He is gentle, just, kind, patient, and fair. I am content with that and filled with peace, with bright expectations for my eternal future. And oh, how I hope that "then shall I see his face with pleasure." (Enos 1:27.)
