Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

Daily Acts of Consecration

ROSEMARY CURTIS NEIDER

Are daily acts of consecration opportunities to do kind deeds? Recently I agreed to take out the garbage for my neighbors while they were out of town. My household was in such an uproar that week that I completely forgot about the garbage. My unfortunate but loyal husband removed the seats from our van and carried their two oversized containers to an innocent-looking dumpster. That was an act of sanitation, not consecration.

Later that week, I planned to take a little birthday something to my brother. Enroute I was not only hit by another car but, while waiting for the police, was plastered with wet, slushy snow tossed through my open window by an obliging snowplow. Thoroughly soaked, I finally spoke to a police officer, totally unaware that my two-year-old was busily decorating our velour car seats with a blue marking pen. That was an act of frustration.

Then there was the homemade chicken soup incident. My cousin, who lives quite a distance from me, was ill, and I wanted to help. Shortly before pulling up to her home with a delicious soup, I hit a bump, and the sudden jolt decorated the ceiling and windows of my car with peas, noodles, and bits of chicken. My treasured china tureen shattered. I had no money with me, and small, hungry children were waiting to be fed. I could only hand my cousin's husband, who was visibly disappointed, the loaf of bread. That was an act of humiliation.

My life often reminds me of my favorite childhood movie, Tarzan, with Johnny Weismuller. Remember? Time after time visitors to the jungle were pursuing something precious—ivory tusks, jewels, rare rubies. The angry natives captured and tortured the intruders, sometimes tying their arms and legs to wild animals to stretch them in four different directions, catapulting them across a ravine, or throwing them into an alligator-infested river. Too often my life feels just like that. I am the prisoner whose outstretched arms and legs are tied to bamboo trees, who waits with a headache for the background drums to reach their frenzied peak so the natives can split me apart.

We are all in a jungle of sorts, pursuing what we think is precious: raising a family, loving a husband, making a living, fulfilling a Church calling. Daily acts of consecration may seem like the furthest thing from our agenda. Consecration usually comes in the form of inconveniences: alligators, restless natives, elephant stampedes. I am beginning to see that we refer to acts of consecration as being daily mostly because on the day they were needed, they were given.

I was blessed to learn about gentle acts of consecration from my parents. When I was thirteen, I was delivering political tracts for a relative running for office in our community. At one home, a woman read the flyer and began to make bitter, heated, unkind comments about my extended family. Tears streamed down my face as I made my way home, anxious to tell my mother. She wouldn't let this woman get away with such offensive, insulting behavior. When I told my sad tale, Mom suggested that we make cookies for the woman. I really couldn't believe what I was hearing; maybe Mom hadn't understood. But an hour later, I sat in the car with a plate of cookies. "Just say you're sorry you upset her and wish her a good day," Mom encouraged, dropping me off at the woman's doorstep.

Consecration is returning cookies for unkindness.

A young woman I know struggled so with her home life that she ran away and eventually moved in with a friend of mine. At age sixteen, she had rarely been treated or spoken to kindly. Hoping for a fresh start, she changed high schools. I helped her check out of her old school. Most teachers marked F on her checkout slip and looked at her as if she were a hopeless case. I could feel their disdain as they tallied up her absences. No one asked why she was leaving or where she was headed. Her last stop was the library, where she needed a signature verifying she had no fines. Here a kindly older woman with a beautiful smile looked at her checkout slip, signed in the appropriate place, and then turned to this troubled young woman. "This isn't you," she said. She put her arms around the girl and hugged her warmly, "I know you'll do well in your next school. This isn't you."

Consecration is valuing another.

My mother died when she was in her early forties. She left seven children, ranging in age from a five-year-old to a newlywed (me). I remember well the rainy November evening of her funeral. On a long, built-in seat against the window in our family room, my father lined up brown paper grocery sacks and filled them one by one with plants and the lovely food we had received from caring neighbors and friends. I couldn't imagine what he was doing. In the dark and cold, he carried the sacks out to our station wagon. I'll never forget his explanation: "This is more than we can possibly use. Your mother would want this food taken to those who are less fortunate."

Some would be surprised that he was aware of anyone less fortunate than we were that night. But we were surrounded by rich feelings of the Spirit, which flooded our home with love and a sense of well-being. To my heart, it made perfect sense for my father to remember the needs of others in his time of need.

Consecration is absolute gratitude.

Shortly before my mother died, the doctors counseled my father to call the family in to see her one last time. It was late on a Saturday night. My father, who was the stake president, had just completed the Saturday evening adult session of stake conference. He hadn't wanted to attend, but my mother insisted that he deliver his talk on the Book of Mormon, which they had prepared together in the previous weeks. We rounded up teenagers from dates, rousted little ones from bed, and drove to the hospital. As we entered her room, Mother, who had had difficulty breathing and had been quite uncomfortable, was now beautiful and serene as she sat up in her bed, smiled at each of us, and extended her arms to us.

I don't know what she said to each child. I recall only what she said to me as I took my turn to be close to her and feel her touch. She reminded me of her confidence in me and love and then asked me to stay in touch with two girls I had known since childhood. They weren't particularly close friends, and I hadn't thought about them for some time. I was a newlywed, completely absorbed in the events of my own life. But she expressed concern for their welfare. Her final words intrigued me, and as the years have gone by, I see that Mother showed me consecration as an attitude of concern for others.

The sacred, ongoing acts of caring for others on our journey through the jungle lead us to real wealth. None of these stories is a "daily" story. Mothers die only once, thank heaven, and cookies are not often required as part of a campaign. We get only so many chances to change schools or make compassionate gestures to people who might be hurting as much or more than we are. I don't think Tarzan had to save people every day. Some days he just hung around the tree house with Jane and drank coconut milk. But when the need arose, he was there.

Usually acts of consecration come in the form of inconveniences and bad timing, leading us to confuse them with frustration, humiliation, and even sanitation. Consecration is our willingness to give of ourselves and of our resources in daily acts of kindness. How do we do that when we ourselves are overwhelmed?

It helps to be where we should be when we should be there. We need to keep doing what the Savior would have us do because that is the time he will best be able to strengthen us.

I once attended sacrament meeting when I was really discouraged. I had had sick children for weeks and was exhausted. My husband and I were dealing with problems I couldn't discuss with anyone. One of the tortures I experience is acting as if everything is fine when inside I am crying out for help. Not all problems can appropriately be shared.

Two men gave talks at that sacrament service, and as I listened, I was bathed with a feeling that all would be well. Understanding, peace, and strength filled me. I looked around the room; it seemed to be just another meeting to everyone else. But I knew that inspiring message from a loving Heavenly Father was specially delivered to me through these servants.

Shortly before Easter this year I realized that my visiting teaching wasn't done. I was tempted to make phone visits . . . again. A message from President Gordon B. Hinckley in the Ensign prompted me to make one last effort. He said the symbol of our religion should be found in the lives of our members. As I sat in the home of an eighty-seven-year-old woman who had only limited experience with gospel living, I was impressed to read to her about the Nephites touching the hands and feet of the resurrected Savior. We read on about the little children being brought to him and of the angels ministering to them. She concentrated longer than I had ever expected, and she kept saying, "Here, now, put a piece of paper in that page so I can find it again later. Oh, put one there, too."

What can I say? I felt the Spirit strongly in her home, and my complex, hurried schedule didn't matter anymore. I felt gratitude and an increase of strength for many days afterward.

Spiritual satisfaction comes almost daily if we put our lives in accordance with his will.

In the kitchen of my childhood home, a plaque on the wall read: "To do carefully and constantly and kindly many little things is not a little thing." While some people have been out in the world doing great things, I have been home doing many little things that hardly seem worth mentioning and yet have been very challenging to me. We had two more babies while in our forties and have known three years with barely a full night's rest. My husband has been a bishop or stake president for much of our marriage and has therefore been gone a great deal. His consecration is also my consecration. He could not do what he does without my doing what I do at home, even though I may feel frustrated and isolated at times.

I love the scripture in which Joshua speaks to the tribes of Israel as they face a most difficult task: "Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you" (Josh. 3:5). Giving the benefit of the doubt, listening, problem solving, instilling belief, praising, returning goodness for unkindness—these take conscious effort. They are a "wonder," and I am very much a student in learning to do them.

Though little things rarely sound great and sometimes seem of little value, consecration is doing the little things carefully and constantly and kindly. For instance, over the last twenty-three years of our married life, my husband, Mike, has generally come through the door of our home cheerfully calling out,

"How can I help?"

How can we help? If we have an attitude of consecration and prayer in our hearts, the Lord will use each of us to work a mighty wonder.
