Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

"The Same God . . . Worketh All in All"

JILL MULVAY DERR, JANATH RUSSELL CANNON, AND MAUREEN URSENBACH BEECHER

As has been said of our Relief Societies," observed President Zina D. H. Young in 1891, "we commenced with a handful of patches to make quilts."<#>1 With that homely metaphor is suggested the piecemeal development of Relief Society from 1842 to the present. "Line upon line, precept upon precept," the Lord promised the faithful,<#>2 and so has been the unfolding of Relief Society, transforming and innovating as needed in its mission to the world as part of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. "We have had to grow a little by little," Aunt Zina continued. "For one thing is true: you cannot put a quart into a pint cup."<#>3

From the handful of sisters who with their brethren heard the gospel message, experienced the witness of the Spirit, entered the covenant, and became Saints of the latter days, to the present time, the basic pattern has never varied in its essential components. Olga Kovarova in Czechoslovakia in 1983 traced the same path to membership in the Church, and in Relief Society, as did Zina Huntington in New York in 1835: they heard, they prayed, they received witness, they were baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ, and they received the Holy Ghost. Thereafter they took whatever steps opened to them: they learned the doctrines; they bore testimony; they participated in projects and programs; they blessed the lives of others and were blessed in turn. Available to them, as the gospel spread abroad, were and are the blessings of the Spirit, of sisterhood, of priesthood direction, and of the temple. As Zina Huntington Young witnessed America's western movement, the struggle for suffrage, and the compromises toward statehood, so Olga Kovarova experienced the dissolution of the communist eastern bloc and her country's adaptation to free-market economy. But above the maelstrom of world affairs, observed Sister Zina, "is the grandeur of the spirit of God that quickens our souls, that causes love to happily live, and imparts knowledge of the life to come. What greater things, what nobler aspirations can we desire?"<#>4

Venerable Elizabeth Ann Whitney, who had been a counselor in the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, looked back from 1878 to the 1842 beginning: "The Relief Society then was small compared to its numbers now, but the Prophet foretold great things concerning the future of this organization, many of which I have lived to see fulfilled."<#>5 By the time of her writing, Mother Whitney had witnessed some of those "great things": the Relief Society in Nauvoo had grown from twenty to thirteen hundred in two years; the women had felt the strength of the Spirit, had grown in sisterhood as they crossed the plains together, had rebuilt their society in Utah wards, and, with priesthood blessing, had extended it churchwide. Relief Society had mothered the Young Ladies and Primary associations, had sponsored home industries, had improved community health care, had established and maintained connections with women worldwide, had made strong beginnings to women's political enfranchisement and in all these endeavors received support from priesthood leaders.

In Mother Whitney's understanding, surely the blessings of the temple were preeminent. In those holy houses, sisters ministered to sisters, and they received, as faithful women still receive, the "knowledge and intelligence" that the Prophet Joseph Smith promised. In temples, through the highest ordinances of the Melchizedek Priesthood, women entered the new and everlasting covenants sealing in union wives and husbands, children and parents. Still, Sister Whitney continued, "there are many things which yet remain to be fulfilled in the future of which [Joseph Smith] prophesied, that are great and glorious; and I rejoice in the contemplation of these things daily."<#>6 Surely she would have observed with satisfaction the shipment of Relief Society wheat to ameliorate catastrophe; the creation of facilities for improving maternity care; the establishment of communitywide social service programs; the projects to relieve wartime sufferers. And along with that, the spiritual advancement of women as they strengthened families, served missions, created courses of study, taught one another, and entered the temples in ever greater numbers and with increasing frequency.

The twentieth century saw Relief Society and the Church as a whole adapt progressive principles and new technology to their purposes. Geometrically increasing membership demanded systematization, which threatened to replace with mechanization the familiarity that had warmed the women's meetings. "All organiz'd bodies have their peculiar evils, weaknesses and difficulties," Joseph Smith had told the Nauvoo Relief Society;<#>7 they too must learn to adapt to circumstances. With church growth, the whole must be divided into manageable parts, hierarchical relationships emphasized, priesthood correlation strengthened, and programs and lessons standardized.

Two world wars and a worldwide economic depression forced the reach of the women beyond their own narrow borders. Where the Prophet Joseph had told the few in Nauvoo, "Let your labors be confin'd mostly to those around you in your own circle,"<#>8 the new challenge voiced by succeeding prophets encouraged the sisters to reach beyond their early confines. President Spencer W. Kimball wrote in 1979 that "much of the major growth that is coming to the Church in the last days will come because many of the good women of the world . . . will be drawn to the Church in large numbers." In both numerical and spiritual growth, he said, the "female exemplars of the Church will be a significant force." In them, he observed, "there is often such an inner sense of spirituality."<#>9 Recent years have seen marked increase not only in the numbers of sister missionaries, but also in the community activities of Latter-day Saint women at home and business and professional women in their communities at large.

Relief Society is a worldwide sisterhood, not, as earlier, in the organizational sense of holding corporate membership in international councils, but in the immediacy made possible by the technology of air travel and instant communication. The "small circle of sisters" in Czechoslovakia who sent, through Elder Boyd K. Packer, their "hearts and thoughts" to all the Relief Societies, are encircled into the larger sisterhood of the Church. "Each sister, no matter where in that circle she stands, can look to either side and feel the spirit of inspiration coming back as she extends the gentle hand of charity to those on either side," Elder Packer explained.<#>10

The in-gathering to a geographical Zion, which marked early Mormonism, pivoted at the meridian of this dispensation into a worldwide diaspora. Women who clustered for safety in the sheltered valleys of the Great Basin mothered granddaughters and great-granddaughters who now make their homes in the far reaches of the globe, where they strengthen and are strengthened by local convert members. Together they build and are building Relief Society. Five generations of one family illustrate:

In 1837 Elizabeth Haven [Barlow], a twenty-six-year-old convert, left her Massachusetts home and joined with the Saints in Missouri. Driven with them to Illinois, she found solace among her sisters in Nauvoo, and on April 28, 1842, she was accepted into the Female Relief Society there. She delivered her fifth child en route to the Valley. There she and her husband made their home in Bountiful, just north of Salt Lake City. In 1857 she was called to preside over the Relief Society in Bountiful. Despite the interruption of the move south during the Utah War, she continued as presidentess into her seventies, being released just three years before her death.

Elizabeth's daughter Pamela, meanwhile, married and was sent with her husband, David Thompson, to colonize in Panaca, Nevada. There she was called as Relief Society president. Widowed in Nevada, she returned with her children to Utah. Theresa, Pamela's daughter, just ten years old when her father was killed, married at seventeen and joined the Saints who moved to Mexico's northern provinces. She served there as counselor in the Relief Society. Most of those Saints returned to Utah after the 1910 Mexican revolution. Theresa's daughter, Athelia Call Sears, served as Relief Society president in Ogden, Utah, during the years when money-making projects demanded much of the women. Despite her seventy years, Sister Sears led her women in a catering contract that enabled them not only to finance their own Relief Society, but also to equip the ward kitchen and hand the bishop a check for a thousand dollars for other ward uses.

By now Relief Societies were being organized in student branches at universities in the United States and Canada, and Athelia Sears's namesake daughter, Athelia Tanner, was one of the first to serve at the University of Utah branch in Salt Lake City. Sister Tanner settled finally in Pasadena, California, where she served in a Relief Society. Her daughter followed suit as a Relief Society president in a student ward at Brigham Young University and later in a family ward in Texas. Change of circumstances and continuity of spirit pervade the history of this one family of Relief Society workers.<#>11

Still other Latter-day Saint women in their moves find themselves totally isolated from the Church. Cherry Bushman Silver, who was called to the Relief Society's general board in 1991, was in the mid-1970s the lone Latter-day Saint woman on an Ivory Coast plantation, where her husband managed a sugar operation. "Everything but a common humanity separated us from our African neighbors," she wrote. "Thinking of the satisfactions of Relief Society," Cherry invited the wives of eighty company workers—Vietnamese, Mauritian, British, American, French, and Malagasy, as well as African—to inaugurate a monthly gathering. Over the more than two years the Silvers were there, the quasi-Relief Society put on a Christmas party for the children and established and staffed a lending library for the workers' families. "Given a goal, some handicrafts, and a chance to sit down and work together," Cherry became convinced, "women worldwide could weld bonds across cultural barriers and reduce their feelings of difference."<#>12 Quoting from the Indian prophet of peace, Mahatma Gandhi, an Idaho Relief Society member wrote, "I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides and my windows to be stuffed. I want the culture of all the lands to be blown about my house as freely as possible."<#>13

Relief Society women find much that is familiar in the account of Relief Society activities in the Oslo Norway Third Ward. To her friend Marian Johnson in Utah, Alfhild Morteng typed a newsy letter about their mutual friends. Sister Vigdis Johansen, ill since before the birth of her last child, is in the hospital, Alfhild reported. In socialist Norway, there would be government support for the family of seven children; even so, she wrote, "this is a great challenge to the women in R. S. We try to bring dinner for the family at least 2 or 3 times a week." Most of the women in her Relief Society are employed full time, she had said earlier, adding a dimension to her comment now that "the sisters are wonderful in doing this beside all the other things they do."

In her gentle observation that "we have lately had several difficult situations to be organized in R. S., situations as I never have[experienc[e]d before," Oslo's Sister Morteng touched the most universal challenge of Relief Societies worldwide: the multiplicity of differences apparent between earlier Relief Societies and contemporary ones, and among Relief Societies in the hundredplus nations where they are organized.<#>14

"To Relieve the Poor"

Remote from the basically homogeneous Relief Societies of the Utah church in past years are tiny circles of Eastern European or African women, rural societies of central Mexico, affluent societies of southern California, or central-city societies of, say, Chicago. Statistics of the Hyde Park Ward in Chicago evidence the church of the nineties in ways no Relief Society presidency had dealt with until recently. The ward boundaries encompass the southern half of Chicago, with a population of over 1.5 million, in a basically middle-class, racially integrated community that encompasses both the University of Chicago and some of the nation's poorest ghetto neighborhoods. High convert baptism rates (during 1990 there were 140 baptisms, half of them adult women) and the transience inherent in university wards keep the ward leadership in flux. Economically the picture is mixed. Several Relief Society members, highly educated, earn over $100,000 yearly. Several others are students, both single and married, living frugally on loans and part-time work. Twenty-five percent of the society members are single parents. Low-paying jobs, unemployment, and lack of vocational skills are the most serious problems for many, and state welfare remains the only option for several. Even though most are high school graduates, many are functionally illiterate.

Supporting these sisters in their family responsibilities demands innovation and imagination on the part of ward priesthood and Relief Society leaders. Catherine Stokes, a health services administrator, had been a member of the Church just four years when she was called as Relief Society president in Hyde Park in 1983. She learned quickly that the visiting teaching coordinator was in fact her most important "counselor." She got "the best woman in the ward" for the job, and "spent as much time with her" as she did with her counselors, she later reflected.<#>15 Communication among the diverse women of her ward was not easy, and she lightheartedly defined her mission as "helping you white folks understand us black folks."

Temporal responsibilities weigh heavily on twentieth-century Latter-day Saint women as they did on their foremothers. Wars, depressions, and natural catastrophes have taught contemporary women the lessons that taming a wilderness and building communities taught their ancestors: the virtues of diligence, hard work, and self-reliance. In that tradition many Latter-day Saints, especially those without financially supportive husbands, have had to take on the responsibility of supporting themselves and their families. Camilla Eyring Kimball advised sisters in Europe to "qualify in two vocations—that of homemaking, and that of preparing to earn a living outside the, home, if and when the occasion requires."<#>16 Relief Society, she urged, would assist women in achieving their temporal objectives as well as the spiritual ones.

Nevertheless, the consistent message of the Church to women, in particular those who are parents, has set the priorities in order: "No career approaches in importance that of wife, homemaker, mother," reiterated President Ezra Taft Benson in 1987, citing his predecessor, Spencer W. Kimball.<#>17 "Mothers," President Benson stressed, "teach your children the gospel in your own home, at your own fireside." Echoing scriptural precedent he promised, "Your children will remember your teachings forever, and when they are old, they will not depart from them. They will call you blessed."<#>18

Traditionally Relief Society has strongly supported women in their important work as nurturers, in their own homes and within the broader community of Saints. Providing quilts for immigrants arriving in the valley of the Great Salt Lake or for Cambodian refugees arriving in California, taking classes in midwifery and obstetrics to save mothers or serve as health missionaries, visiting teaching in the homes of their sisters, or tutoring homeless children, Relief Society sisters nurture with skill and with love.

Single or partnered, Relief Society women have been taught an outreach beyond their own intimate circle as an essential element in gospel living. For many, as for board member Cherry Silver, "loneliness dissolves when I have someone with whom to share and someone to care for, when I have work that is important to do, and when I confide in our Heavenly Father and feel his assuring care."<#>19 As President Amy Brown Lyman observed, "Relief Society women have never been satisfied with mere self improvement." They "have had a feeling that life was incomplete unless through their work and themselves they were able to make a contribution toward the welfare of others."<#>20

Including successive generations of women in the work of Relief Society has been a challenge since the 1890s. President Joseph F. Smith's 1907 invitation remains current: "We want the young women, the women of faith, of courage, of purity . . . to take hold of this work with vigor, with intelligence and unitedly, for the building up of Zion and the instruction of women in their duties—domestic duties, public duties, and every duty that may devolve upon them."<#>21

In admonishing women to work "unitedly, for the building up of Zion," President Smith reiterated a core Relief Society principle. Sarah Kimball, in the 1870s, attributed the remarkable success of her ward society to the willingness of the sisters to work "in unison." Working in unison with their brethren and under priesthood authority, as she and other sisters learned, was just as imperative. The partnership of women and men in building the kingdom was the natural extension of the partnership of parents in the family. "Neither the man without the woman, nor the woman without the man, in the Lord," was as applicable to the larger body as to the intimate family.

"In the Lord"—or in other words, under the holy priesthood direction—men and women covenant together to serve God, whose kingdom they are building. The presence of Relief Society in the ecclesiastical organization reflected this divine pattern. Speaking, as a contemporary scholar has expressed it, "in a different voice,"<#>22 women help move both the family and the community of Saints toward wholeness, completeness, eventual perfection. Relief Society's fruitful history has affirmed the importance of balance of male and female, the pattern of partnership established in Nauvoo by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Seen in the eternal setting, men's and women's interests are not separate. Nor is the well-being of individuals separable from the well-being of the community, in the Lord. The body of the Church is one whole; likewise the temporal and the spiritual merge in divine oneness.

"To Save Souls"

Relief Society's vision of its sacred purpose has from its inception set the Mormon sisterhood apart from other social or charitable women's groups. Its members were to be "a select Society separate from all the evils of the world, choice, virtuous and holy."<#>23 They were women of covenant, endowed with knowledge from on high. To foster the spiritual growth of individual members, to prepare them to receive and to honor the saving ordinances of the priesthood, remains the highest aspiration of the Relief Society.

It is difficult to assess, or even describe, the spiritual dimension of women's lives. Following the Doctrine and Covenants injunction not to "boast themselves of these things," Latter-day Saint women speak quietly and reverently, if at all, of the sacred moments in their lives, "given unto you," the scripture continues, "for your profit and for salvation."<#>24 Like their sisters of the past, however, contemporary women do experience the gifts of the Holy Ghost, to whose power they testify.

The gift of tongues, Joseph Smith taught, was solely for the comfort and assurance of the Saints, and so was it received in the early days of the restoration.<#>25 With the extension of the Church into areas where other languages are spoken, however, the original gift has been expressed anew to a new dimension: as on the day of Pentecost, when people needed to hear the word in their own tongues, so the gift has been experienced in the twentieth century.

Relief Society in the Hauula Hawaii First Ward in the early 1970s was composed of Tahitian, Tongan, and Samoan speakers as well as those whose native tongue is English. After opening exercises, the Polynesian sisters and those who spoke English would separate for their lessons, to return for the closing hymn and prayer. Wrote Marvelee Soon Tahauri of the Polynesian sisters, "I always stayed in the English session, watching those women come and go, never knowing their names, where they lived, or what they discussed." Then, in August 1977, stake leaders challenged the Relief Societies to dissolve the language sessions in order to unify the sisters, and Sister Tahauri, who was called as spiritual living teacher, adopted "occasionally unusual" methods toward the objective of mutual growth, understanding, and appreciation. English speakers self-consciously mouthed scriptures in halting Tahitian or Tongan, the Polynesian women nodding encouragement; a Samoan sister read in English, "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another."<#>26

"Then one day," recalled Sister Tahauri, "after I had presented a lesson on turning our weaknesses into strengths, a sister stood, weeping while bearing testimony in her native tongue. Suddenly she rushed over to where I sat and embraced me, kissing me time and time again. `Thank you, thank you!' she sobbed. I should have been prepared to experience this realm of the Spirit," reflected Sister Tahauri, "yet I was trembling, and the tears flowed unrestrained."<#>27 It was the same gift, surely, as that which blessed the Nauvoo sisters, the gift of tongues "for your comfort." "Who can interpret my tears?" queried a young woman in a Nauvoo testimony meeting in 1982.

Healing the sick as a gift of the spirit has not left the women of the restoration, although its forms have changed. Men, women, and children join in fasting and prayer, individually as well as in families and wards, on behalf of the sick. Holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood administer to those in need, and all members of the Church may add to their faith, as they ask the Lord to bless an individual.

A Latter-day Saint woman serving a mission with her husband in Coalinga, California, heard the prompting of the Spirit to her and applied her faith in the healing of a sister. In her July 13, 1942, report to their mission president, she wrote of meeting the woman, who was afflicted with cancer, outside the sick woman's home. "She was feeling so bad and tired," the missionary wrote, "that my husband said to me, `Take her in the house and get her to lie down.' This I did, and feeling so sorry for her, I drew up my chair close to the bed." Reaching out to touch the woman, she said, "`Now go to sleep.' She seemed to be comforted and soon began to doze, when a still small voice said to me, `Why don't you pray?'" Silently and humbly, the missionary prayed, asking not only that the woman's pain would cease but also that she would be blessed "that the cancer would die and even go out of the bone and that she would be healed from the crown of her head to the soles of her feet." When the woman awoke, the missionary said, she reported that the pain had gone, and she "got up and went about her work." Some time later the missionaries received word through the woman's daughter that her mother was well and strong. "Through her faith she was healed," reported the missionary.<#>28

Women participate in the gift of healing by being themselves as well as by applying their faith to others' needs. A Delaware mother, called as president of the stake Relief Society, found her negative attitude affecting her service. "One day," she wrote, "as I drove the 75 miles to the stake center alone, I began to pray aloud in the car. I realized I needed a healing of my mind. . . . Weeping and praying, I asked the Lord to either heal me or release me so that the work would not suffer further. Suddenly the Spirit touched my mind, gently and lovingly, and smoothed away that wrinkle of confusion." From that affirmation came her testimony that "God can heal anything—our prejudices, our bad habits, and our minds, bodies, and spirits."<#>29

"If you live up to your privileges," Joseph Smith promised the women in Nauvoo's Relief Society, "the angels cannot be restrained from being your associates."<#>30 Such was the experience when, awaiting the dedication of the Manti Temple in 1888, Mary Ann Burnham Freeze heard angelic voices. Such experiences recur among contemporary sisters. One young woman, having spent much of her life practicing piano and organ, felt strongly the potential of music to infuse the congregation with the Lord's spirit, to bring the worshipers closer to the Lord. Called as choir director, she felt on one occasion a commitment to making a particular anthem a gift to the congregation, an affirmation of her testimony and the testimonies of the choir members that the Savior lives and loves them. Together they prepared well and prayed. Sunday arrived, and they stood to perform their offering. As she conducted the choir, the young woman "felt light coming forth from them, and mingled with their voices she heard the voices of angels." Never had she heard sounds so beautiful; others in the congregation shared the experience.<#>31 Women of the twentieth century, like their sisters of the nineteenth, have learned to reach for and receive the assurance of the Spirit that their service is accepted.

A contemporary mother told her friend of her benefaction in the time of her need. The new school term was about to begin, and the children were to receive blessings from their father. The living room was tidied, the children settled, their father ready in suit and tie. The Spirit was present, the mother said, as the father pronounced the blessings. The baby in her lap began to fuss, so she carried him to the bedroom. She looked about that cluttered room in the dim light. Clothes, papers, books were everywhere, chaotic in dark contrast to the order and light of the room she had left. It seemed to her that she was part of the dimness, the disarray—that she was not worthy to be in the happy circle of peace and light in the living room. As she prayed for help, she had the impression of light descending, encircling her and her baby. With the light came peace and confirmation; the Lord loved her and accepted her offerings.<#>32 The gift was as sure as had she received it, as her predecessors sometimes had, in more dramatic and more public manifestation.

The assurances of the Spirit, as the Prophet Joseph reminded the sisters in Nauvoo, are "for your comfort." Now, 150 years later, those sweet outpourings are as needed as ever. But for contemporary women, as for the Nauvoo sisters, the manifestations of the Spirit are not sufficient for salvation. Now, as earlier, their faith, thus reinforced by the Spirit, brings Latter-day Saint women to the doors of the holy temple. There, under authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood, they receive endowments from on high. There they augment their baptismal covenants and partake of the "knowledge and intelligence" promised to them. There they cement their bonds with husbands under the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, and begin to learn the meaning of divine daughterhood and sonship. Under priesthood authority are sealed the blessings of which the Spirit bore witness, the blessings through which the men and women are taught, tested, redeemed, eventually to be exalted.

"God Hath Tempered the Body Together"

It is significant that Joseph Smith based his spiritually moving and doctrinally significant April 28, 1842, address on the epistles of Paul as recorded in 1 Cor. 12 and 13. He began, as the apostle did, by identifying many gifts—tongues, prophecy, healing, knowledge, and faith among them—as being possessed by individual members, but all as necessary to the Church as eyes, ears, and hands are to the body. These diverse gifts, Paul explained, are from the same source, of the same Spirit.<#>33

As each individual member of the body of Christ—the Church—possesses his or her own gifts, so each epoch of the Church and each entity of its organization has its own purposes. "There are differences of administrations," Paul wrote, "but the same Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all."<#>34

So it is that the Nauvoo Relief Society sisters sent petitions to their governor and administered to the sick; that the first Utah societies sewed clothes for Lamanite women and children; that the 1870s Relief Society gathered wheat and built halls; that in the 1920s the Relief Society administered social services for state and local governments; that during World War II they operated an employment agency; and that in the 1970s they built statues honoring women's lives. Differences of administrations, Paul observed, and diversities of operations, but "the same God which worketh in all."

Having thus justified the uses of those spiritual and administrative gifts, however, the apostle Paul extended his vision to one that transcended them all. "But whether there be prophecies," he writes, "they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away."<#>35 They are the lesser gifts, "for your comfort," but impotent to save. Only charity, "the pure love of Christ," has the power to redeem mankind. "Charity never faileth," promised Paul. In its choice of motto, Relief Society chose the better part.

The temporal obligations of Relief Society are but schoolmaster to its spiritual responsibility: to bring souls to Christ. In concert with their brethren, women of the Church reach toward that perfection which comes as the grace of God "after all we can do." "For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away."<#>36 All the lesser gifts, partial blessings, are circumscribed in that vast and all-encompassing love. That charity which is "the pure love of Christ" is the lodestar of Relief Society. "And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity."<#>37

NOTES
