Various authors, LDS Women's Treasury: Insights and Inspiration for Today's Woman ( 1997)

A TREASURY OF QUOTATIONS FOR WOMEN

Blessings Available to Women

See also Spiritual Growth of Women; Spirituality of Women

DERR, JILL MULVAY AND MAUREEN URSENBACH BEECHER

Ours is a heritage of abundance: of peace, of wisdom and knowledge, of faith and testimony, of partnership with our brethren in building the Lord's kingdom under the direction of his holy priesthood. It is the inheritance of charity, "the pure love of Christ," which "endureth forever, and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him [or her]." (Moro. 7:47.) By praying for, receiving, and exercising charity, we become like unto the Son, in purpose one with the Son. He will receive all that the Father has and so will we if we become like him. The Lord tells us that we—Mary, Katharina, Tchitrilanka, Lyli, Louise, Anna—we are his inheritance. We are the fruits of his harvest, his jewels, his own. Faithful stewards are no more servants but the sons and daughters of God, heirs and joint heirs with Christ to "inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, dominions, all heights and depths," fullness and "exaltation and glory in all things." (Women and Christ—Living the Abundant Life: Talks Selected from the 1992 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson, Susette Fletcher Green, and Marie Cornwall [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1993], 102.)

EDWARDS, JAROLDEEN

I testify that the Lord loves women. He watches over us and loves our womanhood—the duties and the responsibilities of our gender—and he can speak to us directly with spiritual messages that are necessary for our personal welfare and for the callings in which we are engaged. (Thing I Wish I'd Known Sooner . . .: Personal Discoveries of a Mother of Twelve [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 100.)

KAPP, ARDETH G.

It is my fervent and humble testimony that the heavens are very much open to women today. They are not closed unless we ourselves, by our choices, close them. And this reality can be just as evident as in any time past. As I read of the great spirituality of women of the past and realize how the Lord communicated with them, I thrill with the spiritual manifestations that have accompanied their missions in life, literally a power evidencing the will of God made known through their instrumentality. I think of Eliza R. Snow, of whom Joseph F. Smith said, "She walked not in the borrowed light of others, but faced the morning unafraid and invincible."

The Spirit whispers to me that there are Eliza R. Snows among us even today, and there can be many, many more. We can pull down the blessings of heaven through obedience to law. These divine and sacred blessings are not reserved for others alone. Visions and revelations come by the power of the Holy Ghost. The Lord has said, "On my servants and on my hand-maidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy." (Acts 2:18.) (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 63.)

SMITH, IDA

If we as Latter-day Saints really understand the gospel of Jesus Christ and all that it portends for women, we will realize that no blessing can be withheld from us if we are prepared and worthy to receive it. The Lord expects us to be exemplars and teachers. I pray that we may catch the understanding and vision of who we really are—and so be. (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 48.)

SMITH, JOSEPH

You are now placed in a situation in which you can act according to those sympathies which God has planted in your bosoms. . . . If you live up to your privileges, the angels cannot be restrained from being your associates. (History of the Church, 7 vols., 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967], 4:605.)

SNOW, LORENZO

The Spirit of the gospel teaches every man who lives in the line of his duty that he is in the path of right, and so it does every woman. By it she knows she is walking in the path of truth and life. It is this Spirit which teaches the sisters as well as the brethren the right from the wrong; and she has a perfect right to know the truth of her religion—to have a knowledge for herself that the principles of her profession are divine. Is there anything wrong or mysterious in this? No. It is because she is a child of God, and therefore she is capacitated to know as he knows—to comprehend the principles of her religion, its divine origin, and its tendency onward and upward. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 140.)

Challenges to Modern Women

See also Priorities of Women; Working Mothers

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

We hear much talk—even among some of our own sisters—about so-called "alternative life-styles" for women. It is maintained that some women are better suited for careers than for marriage and motherhood, or that a combination of both family and career is not inimical to either. Some have even been so bold as to suggest that the Church move away from the "Mormon woman stereotype" of homemaking and rearing children. God grant that that dangerous philosophy will never take root among our Latter-day Saint women!

I repeat: You are elect because you were elected to a certain work. How glorious is the knowledge that you are dignified by the God of heaven to be wives and mothers in Zion! (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 70.)

CORNWALL, MARIE

Sisters, let's stop . . . saying to each other, "Your life is better than mine." In D&C 19:25, the Lord declares, "I command thee that thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife; nor seek thy neighbor's life." I have always thought these commands referred to adultery or murder, but think about the way that second statement is phrased in the context of the first. Do you covet your neighbor's life?

People frequently tell me that my life seems so exciting and interesting. It is, sometimes, but if my private struggles were as readily apparent as are my public accomplishments, I doubt that anyone would want to trade places with me. Sisters, do not covet your neighbor's life. You may want what appear to be her special blessings and opportunities; but life is a package deal, and it is not likely that you would be so covetous of her difficulties if you really understood them. (Women of Wisdom and Knowledge: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conference, ed. Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 5-6.)

HOLLAND, PATRICIA T.

The perspective I have gained over these many years of listening to the worries of women is that no one woman or group of women—single, married, divorced, or widowed, homemakers or professionals—has cornered the full market on concerns. There seems to be plenty of challenges to go around. And, I hasten to add, marvelous blessings as well. In this, too, we are united in our diversity. Every one of us does have privileges and blessings, and we do have fears and trials. (A Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988], 14-15.)

KAPP, ARDETH G.

Even as we endeavor to play our various parts in their appropriate seasons, there will continually be self-appointed stage managers who, not knowing or caring about the script, will shout from the wings, "You're playing the wrong part. You don't want the supporting role. That isn't important. Why be a supporting actor when you can be the star? Be front stage. Move in. Let them know who you are. This is your chance to win the applause."

There are those who would attempt to revise, rewrite, and restructure the script, changing the sacred roles of men and women, modifying the scenes and seasons, adjusting the morals and models where possible, and even altering the main stage, the home, in which the most important drama of life should unfold.

There are always loud voices assuming authorship while abdicating stewardship. You and I may never win acclaim, and society may never know us beyond the street where we live, or because one calling or position may be in the public eye more than another. But I am sure that when the lights have gone out and the curtain is closed on our second act, the opinions of others, the acceptance and applause of the crowd, will be a haunting echo if our Father's approval is in question.

It won't matter if we play center stage or in the wings if our Lord and Savior is at the very center of our life. He reaches out to us with this promise: "Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not. Behold the wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails in my hands and feet; be faithful, keep my commandments and ye shall inherit the kingdom of heaven." (D&C 6:36-37.) And Alma reminds us, "This life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors." (Alma 34:32.) Our labors come in a variety of ways. (My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 7.)

RICHARDS, STEPHEN L

The world is making butterflies out of women and a prison out of home. (Conference Report, Oct. 1951, 112.)

SNOW, ELIZA R.

[Some women] are so radical in their extreme theories that they would set [for themselves an] antagonism to man . . . [and] make [their sisters] adopt the more reprehensible phases of character which men present, and which should be shunned or improved by them instead of being copied by women. (Woman's Exponent, 15 July 1872, 29.)

SPAFFORD, BELLE S.

This is a wonderful world for women. The richness, the hope, the promise of life today, are exciting beyond belief. Nonetheless, we need stout hearts and strong characters; we need knowledge and training; we need organized effort to meet the future—a future pregnant with unborn events, big with possibilities, stupendous in its demands, and challenging in its problems. (A Woman's Reach [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], 27.)

TURNER, RODNEY

The radical feminist movement is antiwoman. Those who succumb to its blandishments are not freed, but enslaved. (Woman and the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 27.)

Woman's historic calling as wife and mother is being minimized. As the family has diminished in size and importance, so has the role of mother and homemaker. (Woman and the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 27.)

While women are fully justified in denouncing male exploitation, to insist upon being accepted as neuter persons rather than female persons is to expose themselves to even more pernicious forms of male exploitation in the future. They forget that woman's nature was meant to have a mollifying effect on man. For it was from her that he was to first learn the ways of tenderness and compassion, of sacrifice and devotion. Only by magnifying their roles as mothers can women effectively temper their sons. When women reject their divine appointment and strike out in pursuit of some quasi-liberty patterned after the behavior of men, there is no one left to gentle their sons and prepare them to love and honor woman as she was meant to be loved and honored. Thus, an emotional vacuum is created in the hearts of men and women alike. Life for everyone becomes unbalanced, skewed in favor of the material and the rational as opposed to the spiritual and the emotional. Hearts become hardened. Lives are blighted. Minds destroyed. Bodies corrupted. Souls lost. (Woman and the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 29.)

Charity

EDMUNDS, MARY ELLEN

I suppose you can have service without love, but I don't think you can have genuine charity—pure love—without service. (Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 34.)

I have come to know that the gospel of Jesus Christ is full of beautiful words, all related to the word charity. Words such as feed, hug, mourn, serve, forgive, lift, succor, comfort, share, visit. Love is what makes us whole. Love perfects us. If we really have charity, with all that it means, then peace happens, and Zion can be a reality. (Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 50.)

GATES, SUSA YOUNG

We must love one another. Only so can our long years of toil and struggle reach full reward and we be crowned with life everlasting. (Relief Society Magazine, May 1921.)

HANKS, MARION D.

A woman doesn't need to be married to love: she needs to be a true instrument of God's love, and she will then find love as she gives it. In the end, happiness can be found in self-fulfillment, which comes, as do other marvelous and mysterious blessings from God, with self-forgetfulness in love of God and our neighbors. You can fill a life by being thoughtful, dignify a life by being unselfish, and sanctify a life by committing energies to being God's instrument of love to his children. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 121.)

Chastity

MCKAY, DAVID O.

A girl who sacrifices self-respect for social popularity debases true womanhood. (Conference Report, Apr. 1949, 15.)

The test of true womanhood comes when woman stands innocent at the court of chastity. (Conference Report, Apr. 1949, 15.)

TURNER, RODNEY

Woman is "one of the fairest gems of all God's creation." She is the epitome of everything virtuous, lovely and praiseworthy. And chastity is her crowning glory, her most precious possession. Its loss is one of the saddest things that can befall her. (Woman and the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 123.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

Ever since I knew that my mother was a woman I have loved the sex, and delight in their chastity. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 12:194.)

Childless Women, Challenges and Blessings to

BALLARD, MELVIN J.

God bless those mothers who are not yet permitted through no fault of their own to be mothers in very deed, but who are nevertheless mothers at heart. The Lord looks upon the hearts of men and women, and their intent, and they shall be judged according to their will and their desires. Such mothers shall not go through eternity childless. There are born into the world countless thousands of children who die in their infancy whose mothers unfortunately shall not be worthy to go where these children shall be when, as little infants, they come up in the resurrection from the dead in their infant state to be, of necessity, under the care and direction of a loving mother until they grow to maturity; and no doubt worthy women who have not been granted the privilege of motherhood, shall have their hearts satisfied in the adoption and in the eternal right and possession of these motherless children. So there is hope for all men and women who are unfortunate in this respect. (Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, comp. Bryant S. Hinckley [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1949], 206-7.)

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

Not all women in the Church will have an opportunity for marriage and motherhood in mortality. But if you in this situation are worthy and endure faithfully, you can be assured of all blessings from a kind and loving Heavenly Father—and I emphasize all blessings. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], 550.)

HOLLAND, PATRICIA T.

As I tenderly acknowledge the very real pain that many single women, or married women who have not borne children, feel about any discussion of motherhood, could we consider this one possibility about our eternal female identity—our unity in our diversity. Eve was given the identity of the mother of all living—years, decades, perhaps centuries before she had ever borne a child. It would appear that her motherhood preceded her maternity just as surely as the perfection of the Garden preceded the struggles of mortality. I believe mother is one of those very carefully chosen words, one of those words rich with meaning after meaning after meaning. We must not, at all costs, let that word divide us. I believe with all my heart that it is first and foremost a statement about our nature, not a head count of our children. I have only three children and have wept that I could not have eight. (Some of you have eight and weep that you can't have three.) And I know that some of you without any have wept, too. And sometimes, too many have simply been angry over the very subject itself. For the sake of our eternal motherhood I plead that this not be so. Some women give birth and raise children but never "mother" them. Others, whom I love with all my heart, "mother" all their lives but have never given birth.

Therefore, we must understand that however we accomplish it, parenthood is the highest of callings, the holiest of assignments. And all of us are Eve's daughters, married or single, maternal or barren, every one of us. We are created in the image of the Gods to become Gods and Goddesses. And we can provide something of that divine pattern, that maternal prototype for each other and for those who come after us. Whatever our circumstance, we can reach out, touch, hold, lift, and nurture—but we cannot do it in isolation. We need a community of sisters stilling the soul and binding the wounds of fragmentation. (A Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988], 26-27.)

KAPP, ARDETH G.

We were alone with each other at a motel in St. George, Utah, one Thanksgiving time when all our relatives were with their families. Early in the morning, I lay in bed thinking. I remember my heart crying out as I anticipated Christmas approaching. And although we could share in the joy and excitement of our nieces and nephews, it wasn't like having our own children with stockings to hang. The whole thing seemed to me to be unfair. I felt darkness and despondency settle over me, and I did what I had learned to do over the years. I got on my knees and prayed for insight.

My answer came when I opened the scriptures to D&C 88:67-68: "And if your eye be single to my glory [and remember, God's glory is to help `to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man' (Moses 1:39)], your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that ye shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will."

I don't know how long it will be for others who have similar longings. For us it was years. But one day we did gain an eternal perspective, and we felt peace, not pain; hope, not despair. I would have liked so much to have received that insight years before, but I know that had that happened, I would have been deprived of the growth that comes from being comforted by the witness of the Spirit after the trial of my faith.

If I have any comforting message for others, it is this: Peace of mind comes from keeping an eternal perspective. Motherhood, I believe, is a foreordained mission. For some, this glorious blessing may be delayed, but it will not be denied. Motherhood is an eternal reality for all women who live righteously and accept the teachings of the gospel.

On the other hand, the characteristics of motherhood, which include concern for others, sacrifice, service, compassion, teaching, encouraging, and inspiring, can be the noble labor for each of us now, with or without children. The fate of each spirit in the eternities to come depends so much on the training it receives from those here and now who are willing to help another gain eternal life.

To participate in this glorious work gives meaning and purpose, great joy, and eternal blessings each and every day, even as we anticipate the promises of the future. (My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 127-28.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

Let me here say a word to console the feelings and hearts of all who belong to this Church. Many of the sisters grieve because they are not blessed with offspring. You will see the time when you will have millions of children around you. If you are faithful to your covenants, you will be mothers of nations. You will become Eves to earths like this, and when you have assisted in peopling one earth, there are millions of others still in the course of creation. And when they have endured a thousand million times longer than this earth, it is only as it were at the beginning of your creation. Be faithful and if you are not blessed with children in this time, you will be hereafter. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 8:208.)

Children, Bearing

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

The Lord states that the opportunity and responsibility of wives is "to multiply and replenish the earth, according to my commandment, and to fulfil the promise which was given by my Father before the foundation of the world, foundation of the eternal worlds, that they may bear the souls of men; for herein is the work of my Father continued, that he may be glorified" (D&C 132:62.) With this divine injunction, husbands and wives, as co-creators, should eagerly and prayerfully invite children into their homes.

Then, as each child joins their family circle, they can gratefully exclaim, as did Hannah, "For this child I prayed, and the Lord hath given me my petition which I asked of him; therefore also I have lent him to the Lord: as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the Lord" (1 Sam. 1:27-28). Isn't that beautiful? A mother praying to bear a child and then giving him to the Lord. (Parents' Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 22 Feb. 1987.)

FIRST PRESIDENCY: HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK JR., DAVID O. MCKAY

The Lord has told us that it is the duty of every husband and wife to obey the command given to Adam to multiply and replenish the earth, so that the legions of choice spirits waiting for their tabernacles of flesh may come here and move forward under God's great design to become perfect souls, for without these fleshly tabernacles they cannot progress to their God-planned destiny. Thus, every husband and wife should become a father and a mother in Israel to children born under the holy, eternal covenant. (Conference Report, Oct. 1942, 12.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Come home, wives, to your children, born and unborn. Wrap the motherly cloak about you and, unembarrassed, help in a major role to create bodies for the immortal souls who anxiously wait. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 327.)

SMITH, GEORGE ALBERT

How will those feel who fail to obey that first great command [multiply, and replenish the earth] when they stand in the presence of the creator, who says to them, as He said to those in olden times, "Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven." How can they comply with that invitation if they have no children to take to the Father? They must remain childless throughout eternity. They have been blind to their rights and privileges. It is only by a proper understanding of the laws of God, and by compliance with the Gospel of Jesus Christ, only by doing what the Lord has said we should do, that we will enjoy the fulness of happiness that our Father in heaven has promised those who are faithful. I do not feel to censure, but with all my heart I pity the man and woman who grace their home with the lesser animals of God's creation, and keep away from their firesides those angels from His presence who might be theirs through time and through all eternity. I realize there are some men and women who are grieved because they are not fathers and mothers, they are not blessed of the Lord in that particular, they have no children of their own, and by no fault of their own. I believe the Lord will provide in such cases. If they will do their duty in keeping the other commandments, their reproach will be taken away. I raise my voice among the sons and daughters of Zion, and warn you that if you dry up the springs of life and abuse the power that God has blessed you with, there will come a time of chastening to you, that all the tears you may shed will never remove. Remember the first great commandment [Gen. 1:28] fulfill that obligation. (Conference Report, Oct. 1907, 38.)

SMITH, JOSEPH

The time [will] come when none but the women of the Latter-day Saints [will] be willing to bear children. (In Young Woman's Journal, Nov. 1890, 81.)

Children, Teaching and Nurturing

See also Motherhood; Mothers, Influence of; Mothers, Responsibilities of; Parenting

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

Mothers in Zion, your God-given roles are so vital to your own exaltation and to the salvation and exaltation of your family. A child needs a mother more than all the things money can buy. Spending time with your children is the greatest gift of all.

With love in my heart for the mothers in Zion, I would like to suggest ten specific ways our mothers may spend effective time with their children.

First, take time to always be at the crossroads when your children are either coming or going—when they leave and return from dates—when they bring friends home. Be there at the crossroads whether your children are six or sixteen. In Proverbs we read: "A child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame" (Prov. 29:15). Among the greatest concerns in our society are the millions of latchkey children who come home daily to empty houses unsupervised by working parents.

Second, mothers, take time to be a real friend to your children. Listen to your children, really listen. Talk with them, laugh and joke with them, sing with them, play with them, cry with them, hug them, honestly praise them. Yes, regularly spend unrushed one-on-one time with each child. Be a real friend to your children.

Third, mothers, take time to read to your children. Starting from the cradle, read to your sons and daughters.

Remember what the poet said, "You may have tangible wealth untold; Caskets of jewels and coffers of gold. Richer than I you can never be—I had a mother who read to me." (Strickland Gillilan, "The Reading Mother.") You will plant a love for good literature and a real love for the scriptures if you will read to your children regularly.

Fourth, take time to pray with your children. Family prayers, under the direction of the father, should be held morning and night. Have your children feel of your faith as you call down the blessings of heaven upon them. Paraphrasing the word of James: "The . . . fervent prayer of a righteous [mother] availeth much" (James 5:16). Have your children participate in family and personal prayers and rejoice in their sweet utterances to their Father in Heaven.

Fifth, take time to have a meaningful weekly home evening. With your husband presiding, participate in a spiritual and an uplifting home evening each week. Have your children actively involved. Teach them correct principles. Make this one of your great family traditions. Remember the marvelous promise made by President Joseph F. Smith when home evenings were first introduced to the Church: "If the Saints obey this counsel, we promise that great blessings will result. Love at home and obedience to parents will increase. Faith will be developed in the hearts of the youth of Israel, and they will gain power to combat the evil influences and temptations which beset them." This wonderful promise is still in effect today.

Sixth, take time to be together at mealtimes as often as possible. This is a challenge as the children get older and lives get busier. But happy conversation, sharing of the day's plans and activities, and special teaching moments occur at mealtime because mothers and fathers and children work at it.

Seventh, take time daily to read the scriptures together as a family. Individual scripture reading is important, but family scripture reading is vital. Reading the Book of Mormon together as a family will especially bring increased spirituality into your home and will give both parents and children the power to resist temptation and to have the Holy Ghost as their constant companion. I promise you that the Book of Mormon will change the lives of your family.

Eighth, take time to do things as a family. Make family outings and picnics and birthday celebrations and trips special times and memory builders. Whenever possible attend as a family events where one of the family members is involved, such as a school play, a ball game, a talk, a recital. Attend Church meetings together and sit together as a family when you can. Mothers who help families pray and play together will stay together and will bless children's lives forever.

Ninth, mothers, take time to teach your children. Catch the teaching moments. This can be done anytime during the day—at mealtime, in casual settings or at special sit-down times together, at the foot of the bed at the end of the day, or during an early-morning walk together. Mothers, you are your children's best teacher. Don't shift this precious responsibility to day-care centers or baby-sisters. A mother's love and prayerful concern for her children are her most important ingredients in teaching her own. . . .

Tenth, and finally, mothers, take the time to truly love your children. A mother's unqualified love approaches Christlike love. (Parents' Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 22 Feb. 1987.)

Teach children gospel principles. Teach them it pays to be good. Teach them there is no safety in sin. Teach them a love for the gospel of Jesus Christ and a testimony of its divinity. Teach your sons and daughters modesty and teach them to respect manhood and womanhood. Teach your children sexual purity, proper dating standards, temple marriage, missionary service, and the importance of accepting and magnifying Church callings. Teach them a love for work and the value of a good education. Teach them the importance of the right kind of entertainment, including appropriate movies, videos, music, books, and magazines. Discuss the evils of pornography and drugs and teach them the value of living the clean life.

Yes, mothers, teach your children the gospel in your home, at your own fireside. This is the most effective teaching that your children will ever receive. This is the Lord's way of teaching. The Church cannot teach like you can. The school cannot. The daycare center cannot. But you can, and the Lord will sustain you. Your children will remember your teachings forever, and when they are old, they will not depart from them. They will call you blessed—their truly angel mother. Mothers, this kind of heavenly, motherly teaching takes time—lots of time. It cannot be done effectively part-time. It must be done all the time in order to save and exalt your children. This is your divine calling. (Parents' Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 22 Feb. 1987.)

You, my sisters, set the example through your lives and through your teachings that influence children to set proper examples for others. "A little child shall lead them" (Isa. 11:6). No one is too young to exert influence. We begin to lead others, appreciably, as soon as we have character of our own. There is a certain innocence of heart, purity of soul, and refinement of feeling peculiar to children, to youth, which affects other people, ofttimes more vitally and potently than we are accustomed to think. These are mature spirits in infant bodies, in child bodies—precious, eternal souls. Let us ever consider them as such. So, as you teach these children, remember this is our first obligation, to implant in their hearts a testimony of the divinity of this great work. (Annual Conference of the Primary Association, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5 Apr. 1950.)

CLARK, J. REUBEN, JR.

Mothers in Israel, teach your sons to honor and revere, to protect to the last, pure womanhood; teach your daughters that their most priceless jewel is a clean, undefiled body; teach both sons and daughters that chastity is worth more than life itself. These are the duties which the Priesthood looks to you primarily to carry to, and to maintain in, that cradle of all virtues—the righteous home. We Priesthood shall help as best our natures permit, but the burden for that task is now and always has been, in the greatest part, yours. Unless you shall do this, the whole world will sink into a welter of sin and corruption. May God help you in your task! (Conference Report, Apr. 1940, 21.)

KAPP, ARDETH G.

When I hear sisters say, "I don't want to teach the young women. I don't want to teach the Primary. I need to be in Relief Society," I want to say, "For precious little time will only a few be selected to teach the children and to teach the young women. It is in teaching diligently that we are instructed more perfectly." Those who are privileged to have a calling to teach the children for a short time can enhance and hasten their spiritual understanding as they are teaching, not just as they are being taught. (My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 52.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Do sons grow strong spontaneously? Do youth become spiritual and remain clean and virtuous without training? Could it be that there are many careless, unclean, irreligious youth today because mothers fail to train? The stripling sons of the former . . . Lamanites were superior because ". . . they had been taught by their mothers, that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them" (Alma 56:47). This teaching is not a single sermon but a lifetime of example and precept. Here were mothers who loved their sons more than themselves, more than clothes, or entertainment, or social life, or business life, or luxuries. Here were women who gave themselves to their families—time, energy, effort, mind, and soul. Then came the dividends: a whole community of righteous, noble sons to sire generations of people so full of goodness and faith that it was to carry over through centuries. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1958, 7.)

The thought continues to ring over and over: What would be the condition in our communities of youths if the modern mothers, with their freedom from household drudgery, wealth of facilities, increased time, and greater training, were to concentrate upon the training of their children; if they were to come home from the factory and the office and the schoolroom in those years when children are in the home; if they were to reduce their social obligations, their entertainment, and selfish diversions; if they were to dedicate the major part of their time and energies and powers to the creation of a small heaven in their home, total co-operation with their husbands, and a limitless devotion, teaching, training, leading, developing their children; investing their lives in their families, using the Church, the gospel to the fullest extent in that training? (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1958, 8.)

Parents must first teach of Christ. We can see that not all activities we could engage in are of equal weight. . . . Some concerns have higher priorities. We remember the words of Nephi as he counseled: "And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ . . . that our children may know to what source they may look." (2 Ne. 25:26.) What inner strength would be in every person if he knew that the Master and His teachings were indeed his great source of guidance, his great source of correct example, his great source of help! That is our prime goal in all our teaching in the home. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 333.)

MERKLEY, HELOISE DAY

If you love the Gospel and seek everything that is virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, then—as naturally as the plant turns to the light—your child will also seek these things. For if you love such things, you will talk of them admiringly. You will fill your home with them, and you will enjoy them with your child. And by striving after good things to which you lead him, you will sharpen his intelligence and increase his eternal glory. For the glory of God is intelligence. (Motherhood: A Partnership with God, comp. Harold Lundstrom [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1956], 81-82.)

ROMNEY, MARION G.

My beloved sisters, for the salvation of yourselves, your children, and your children's children, I urge you to get a knowledge of the principles of the gospel and impart the knowledge to your children in your home.

It is a mistake to depend solely upon the Church organizations to give them this knowledge. Yours is the primary and the final responsibility to bring up your children in "light and truth." (Relief Society Magazine, Feb. 1965, 88-89.)

SMITH, GEORGE ALBERT

I was trained at the knee of a Latter-day Saint mother. One of the first things I remember was when she took me by the hand and led me upstairs to the bedroom. . . . When we got upstairs she sat down by my little trundle bed. She had me kneel in front of her. She folded my hands and took them in hers and taught me my first prayer. I shall never forget it, I do not want to forget it. It is one of the loveliest memories that I have in life, an angelic mother sitting down by my bedside and teaching me to pray. (Sharing the Gospel with Others, comp. Preston Nibley [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948], 147-48.)

SPAFFORD, BELLE S.

A firm and unwavering testimony is of first importance to a mother, not for her sake alone, but also because of her key position in the home and the potency of her influence upon her children. She is peculiarly situated to implant faith and build testimony, or to cause doubt and discount truth. Children are pliable, receptive to suggestions, direction, and teaching, but once habits of thinking and behavior are established, once beliefs are fixed, it is extremely difficult to modify or change them. (Motherhood: A Partnership with God, comp. Harold Lundstrom [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1956], 189.)

WOODRUFF, WILFORD

No mother in Israel should let a day pass over her head without teaching her children to pray. You should pray yourselves, and teach your children to do the same, and you should bring them up in this way, that when you have passed away and they take your places in bearing off the great work of God, they may have principles instilled into their minds that will sustain them in time and in eternity. I have often said it is the mother who forms the mind of the child. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 15:12.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

Mothers, let your minds be sanctified before the Lord, for this is the commencement, the true foundation of a proper education in your children, the beginning point to form a disposition in your offspring, that will bring honor, glory, comfort, and satisfaction to you all your life time. (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], 198.)

If you mothers will live your religion, then in the love and fear of God teach your children constantly and thoroughly in the way of life and salvation, training them up in the way the should go, when they are old they will not depart from it. I promise you this, it is as true as the shining sun, it is an eternal truth. In this duty we fail; we do not bring up our children in the way they should go, or there would be no turning away, wandering here and there from the society of the Saints. We let our children do too much as they have a mind to; if they want this or that their wishes must be gratified. (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], 206.)

Parents should govern their children by faith rather than by the rod, leading them kindly by good example into all truth and holiness. (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], 208.)

Mothers, will you be missionaries? We will appoint you a mission to teach your children their duty, and instead of ruffles and fine dresses to adorn the body, teach them that which will adorn their minds. Let what you have to clothe them with be neat and clean and nice. Teach them cleanness and purity of body and the principles of salvation. (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], 210-11.)

The duty of the mother is to watch over her children and give them their early education, for impressions received in infancy are lasting. . . . Children have all the confidence in their mothers; and if mothers would take proper pains, they can instil in the hearts of their children what they please. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 14:105.)

If a mother wishes to control her child, in the first place let her learn to control herself, then she may be successful in bringing the child into perfect subjection to her will. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 14:277.)

The mothers are the moving instruments in the hands of Providence to guide the destinies of nations. Let the mothers of any nation teach their children not to make war, the children would grow up and never enter into it. Let the mothers teach their children, "War, war upon your enemies, yes, war to the hilt!" and they will be filled with this spirit. Consequently, you see at once what I wish to impress upon your mind is, that the mothers are the machinery that give zest to the whole man, and guide the destinies and lives of men upon the earth. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 19:72.)

Church, Women in the

ASHTON, MARVIN J.

The work of our wonderful women is vital. . . . It is extremely important for stake and ward councils and committees to consistently concern themselves with issues that affect families, women, youth and children. These issues should be a regular part of the agenda of these meetings, and our women leaders should take part in the discussion. Our women are companion-leaders to help all our members receive the benefits of the Church and the watchcare, development, and refuge from the world that the Church provides. Please do not overlook the great strength that can and does come from our women. (Regional Representatives Seminar, 31 Mar. 1989.)

BALLARD, MELVIN J.

You have been willing to do this, you have enabled men to become bishops, stake presidents, and high councilmen, and give most of their time to the Church. You are making sure that he who holds the key that shall unlock the door to your exaltation shall not lose that key; and he must magnify his calling or he will lose it. There is no power, no influence in this Church greater than that which the sisters hold, and we could not do without them. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1939, 21.)

BROWN, HUGH B.

In what work then can you best make contributions to the program of the Church? First, and most importantly, you make a contribution as mothers and teachers—two of the highest and most sacred callings in all life. These callings require sanctification. You remember the Master said, "And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth" (John 17:19). (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1961, 813.)

CLARK, J. REUBEN, JR.

From the beginning the women of the Christian church have shown their surpassing faith and devotion. Only one Apostle stood near the Cross while the Christ was crucified, but Mary, the mother, was there, and Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's children, and the women that followed Him from Galilee. It was Mary Magdalene who was first at the tomb when the Sabbath had ended, and to her Christ vouchsafed the first view to mortals of His resurrected body.

From that time until now woman has comforted and nursed the Church. She has borne more than half the burdens, she has made more than half the sacrifices, she has suffered the most of the heartaches and sorrows.

In the modern Church hers has been the abiding, unquestioning faith, the pure knowledge, that has enheartened the Priesthood and kept it going forward against all odds. Her loving trust, her loyal devotion were the faithful anchor that held when storms were fiercest.

For all this we are more grateful than we can say. We humbly ask the Lord to help you sisters in the future as in the past. We Priesthood need your courage, your steadfastness, your faith, your knowledge, your testimony, to cheer us on, to keep us in the way. (Conference Report, Apr. 1940, 21.)

GRANT, HEBER J.

Without the wonderful work of the women, I realize that the Church would have been a failure. (Gospel Standards, comp. G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1941], 150.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

In addition . . . to home government, women often stand with their husbands in responsible places and share in some measure the success or failure which characterizes their husbands' administration of affairs. In selecting men to occupy responsible positions in the Church, it not infrequently happens that a useful and competent man is barred from consideration because of the deplorable want of fitness in the wife, and though a wife may not always bar a husband's opportunities, she may, nevertheless, prove a great hindrance to him in the discharge of the duties that belong to his office. If our sisters could only realize how helpful they might be to their husbands who hold responsible positions in the Church, and if they would only take pride and pleasure in their husbands' administration of affairs, the conduct of men in public office would in many instances be very greatly improved.

The word and law of God are as important for women who would reach wise conclusions as they are for men; and women should study and consider the problems of this great latter-day work from the standpoint of God's revelations, and as they may be actuated by his Spirit, which it is their right to receive through the medium of sincere and heartfelt prayer. A woman without heartfelt devotion for the things of God is not prepared to stand at her husband's side and enjoy his confidence in the graver responsibilities that devolve upon him in the government of the Church. Husbands are justified in withholding their confidence from and in refusing to be influenced by wives whose worldly ambitions and want of appreciation of divine things lead them to contend for personal advantages and selfish gains. Wives of leaders should have a generous feeling for all that relates to the affairs over which their husbands preside. Such women should not be exclusive in their social relations, and should avoid the evils that frequently come from yielding to the influence and views of a small coterie that may have selfish aims and personal advantages to serve. (Juvenile Instructor, 38:371-72.)

SNOW, ELIZA R.

It is the duty of each one of us to be a holy woman. We shall have elevated aims, if we are holy women. We shall feel that we are called to perform important duties. No one is exempt from them. There is no sister so isolated and her sphere so narrow but what she can do a great deal towards establishing the kingdom of God upon the earth. (Woman's Exponent, 15 Sept. 1873, 62.)

SNOW, LORENZO

The thought has impressed itself upon me that the brethren of this Church, myself included, have been wonderfully favored of the Lord in having the companionship and assistance of such faithful, loyal wives and mothers as He has blessed us with. It is difficult to imagine what we should have done or what progress the work of the Lord would have made without them. When we have been absent on foreign missions, their missions at home have generally been no less arduous than ours abroad; and in the midst of trial and privation they have exhibited a patience, a fortitude, and a self-help that has been truly inspiring. Thank God for the women of this Church. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 139.)

It has always been a source of pleasure to me to notice how faithfully you sisters of the Relief Society have stood by the servants of the Lord under all circumstances. You have ever been found at the side of the priesthood, ready to strengthen their hands and to do your part in helping to advance the interests of the kingdom of God; and as you have shared in these labors, so you will most certainly share in the triumph of the work and in the exaltation and glory which the Lord will give to His faithful children. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 139.)

Differences between Women and Men

See also Equality between Women and Men;

Priesthood and Women

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

You were not created to be the same as men. Your natural attributes, affections, and personalities are entirely different from a man's. They consist of faithfulness, benevolence, kindness, and charity. They give you the personality of a woman. They also balance the more aggressive and competitive nature of a man.

The business world is competitive and sometimes ruthless. We do not doubt that women have both the brainpower and skills—and in some instances superior abilities—to compete with men. But by competing they must, of necessity, become aggressive and competitive. Thus their godly attributes are diminished and they acquire a quality of sameness with man.

I received a letter from a sister who has spent most of her life in the work force—providing a second income to the home. Her marriage finally ended in divorce. Her greatest concern was that she felt robbed from not having the time to teach her own children the lasting spiritual values, a woman's godly prerogative.

The conventional wisdom of the day would have you be equal with men. We say, we would not have you descend to that level. More often than not the demand for equality means the destruction of the inspired arrangement that God has decreed for man, woman, and the family. Equality should not be confused with equivalence. It is well to remember this inspired counsel of President David O. McKay: "Woe to that home where the mother abandons her holy mission or neglects the divine instruction, influence, and example—while she bows, a devotee, at the shrine of social pleasure; or neglects the essential duties of her own household, in her enthusiasm to promote public reform" (Gospel Ideals, p. 481.) (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], 547-48.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

The more woman becomes like man, the less he will respect her; civilization weakens as man's estimate of woman lessens. (Conference Report, Apr. 1959, 74.)

TURNER, RODNEY

Women cannot change their attitudes and behavior without changing themselves. If women are not the gentler, the purer sex, it is because they have altered that nature with which the Creator endowed them in the beginning. (Woman and the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 18.)

WIDTSOE, JOHN A.

This equality does not ignore the natural differences between man and woman. Woman is the child bearer and child rearer. To this glorious function she gives a large part of her life. The man is the provider of the necessities and comforts of the family. This does not reduce woman to a dependent. Freed from family and household cares, she could as well probably earn the living for the family. It is rather a cooperative enterprise based upon a divinely ordained division of labor for forming, maintaining, and protecting the unit of society, known as the family. Husband and wife who conform to natural law and beget and rear children are performing labors of equal importance. Each gains both freedom and power from such family life. One cannot look down upon the other. Both have the right as time and strength permit to exercise their talents as they may desire. Whenever these natural functions are set aside, frustration and defeat in life follow. (Relief Society Magazine, June-July 1943, 372-73.)

Equality between Women and Men

See also Differences between Women and Men;

Marriage Relationship; Origin and Destiny of

Women; Partnership between Women and Men;

Priesthood and Women; Women, Worth of

HAFEN, BRUCE C.

One of the greatest of the priesthood blessings is the opportunity of eternal marriage—and unless we obtain this blessing, either in this life or in the hereafter, we cannot receive exaltation in the celestial kingdom. In some sense, I suppose exaltation is the ultimate priesthood blessing, because it finally includes all other blessings. But this glorious privilege . . . is not available to a worthy priesthood holder unless he is sealed in eternal marriage to a worthy woman. How significant for our understanding of the interdependence and equality of men and women before the eyes of God to know that neither can achieve exaltation alone. (Brigham Young University Women's Conference, 1985, 15.)

HANKS, MARION D.

There are some women who come from the temple (thoughtful, very bright women, sensitive, sweet women) uneasily thinking that somehow they have less value than men in the eyes of God. I have the sure conviction that that is not true, not what we are meant to learn. Repeated exposure to the remarkable institution of the temple leaves me believing the opposite to be so. (As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989], 47.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

We had full equality as his spirit children. We have equality as recipients of God's perfected love for each of us. . . . Within those great assurances, however, our roles and assignments differ. These are eternal differences—with women being given many tremendous responsibilities of motherhood and sisterhood and men being given the tremendous responsibilities of fatherhood and the priesthood. (Women's Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 15 Sept. 1979.)

STAPLEY, DELBERT L.

Though man is given the priesthood and the woman is not, I cannot think of a woman as inferior to man. I can think of her as equal to him. I cannot consider woman as superior to man but I can believe both as being equal in the Lord. (Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, 7 Mar. 1967, 11.)

TALMAGE, JAMES E.

The status of woman in the world is a subject of present-day discussion and an element of current social unrest; it is, however, by no means a new topic. . . . [Woman] has suffered the greatest humiliation during periods of spiritual darkness, when the Gospel of Christ was forgotten. [But in the light of the gospel] woman occupies a position all her own in the eternal economy of the Creator; and in that position she is as truly superior to man as is he to her in his appointed place. Woman shall yet come to her own, exercising her rights and her privileges as a sanctified investiture which none shall dare profane. (Young Woman's Journal, Oct. 1914, 602.)

WIDTSOE, JOHN A.

She [woman] bears joint responsibility with man in establishing the kingdom of God . . . full equality has been provided in the Church between man and woman. They are equal in opportunity, privilege, and rights. They have a common destiny, which as free agents they may attain or lose through their own actions. . . .

It [the Church] has given her full rights of suffrage and property ownership. It recognizes her equal mental powers with those of man and the right to use her inborn talents to the full. . . .

This equality does not ignore the natural differences between man and woman. Woman is the child-bearer and child-rearer. . . . Man is provider of the necessities and comforts of the family. This does not reduce woman to a dependent. . . . It [family life] is . . . a cooperative

enterprise based upon a divinely ordained division of labor for forming, maintaining, and protecting the unit of society known as the family. . . . (Relief Society Magazine, June-July 1943, 372-75.)

Paul the Apostle, speaking in an earlier day said that "neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.)

This notable statement implies that woman has done her work well; that she bears joint responsibility with the man in establishing the Kingdom of God; and, that the work will fail unless both do their duty. . . .

This makes individuals of man and woman—persons with the right of free agency, with the power of individual decision, with individual opportunity of everlasting joy—for whom all the ordinances of the Gospel are available alike, and whose own actions throughout the eternities, with the loving aid of the Father, will determine individual achievement. There can be no question in the Church about man's rights versus woman's rights. They have the same rights.

The restored Gospel has brushed aside the age-old controversy over woman's rights. It has refused to fetter woman and make her, as in the past, little more than man's goods and chattels. It has given her full rights of suffrage and property ownership. It recognizes her equal mental powers with those of man; and her right to use her inborn talents to the full. It has placed her by the side of man, not behind him, nor in front of him, thus certifying to her complete emancipation, without limitation, from unlawful subjection. She has been made to understand that the Lord loves His daughters as completely as His sons, and the promised blessings are the same for both. (Relief Society Magazine, June-July 1943, 372.)

The privileges and requirements of the gospel are fundamentally alike for men and women. The Lord loves His daughters as well as He loves His sons. This makes individuals of man and woman—individuals with the right of free agency, with the power of individual decision, with individual opportunity for everlasting joy, whose own actions throughout the eternities, with the loving aid of the Father, will determine individual achievement. (Quoted in Great Thoughts for Latter-day Saint Sisters, comp. Marc Stephen Garrison [Orem, Utah: Aspen Books, 1990], S52.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

We wish, in our Sunday and day schools, that they who are inclined to any particular branch of study may have the privilege to study it. As I have often told my sisters in the Female Relief societies, we have sisters here who, if they had the privilege of studying, would make just as good mathematicians or accountants as any man; and we think they ought to have the privilege to study these branches of knowledge that they may develop the powers with which they are endowed. We believe that women are useful, not only to sweep houses, wash dishes, make beds, and raise babies, but that they should stand behind the counter, study law or physic, or become good book-keepers and be able to do the business in any counting house, and all this to enlarge their sphere of usefulness for the benefit of society at large. In following these things they but answer the design of their creation. These, and many more things of equal utility are incorporated in our religion, and we believe in and try to practice them. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 13:61.)

History, Women in

BENNION, FRANCINE R.

The wonder is not that there is so little about women in the Book of Mormon but that there is so much, given the times and traditions. Given the times and traditions, the wonder is not that the practices seem to contradict the doctrine but that the doctrine so powerfully proclaims the worth of women and men alike. (Women of Wisdom and Knowledge: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conference, ed. Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 177.)

CORNWALL, MARIE

If we do not seek out and discover the history of women, we have only remembered half the story. Do we want future generations of women to have only half the story, to wonder as we do now about Nephi's sisters, about the women who followed Alma to the Waters of Mormon? (Women of Wisdom and Knowledge: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conference, ed. Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 5-6.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

You will find few if any of their names inscribed on monuments erected to the brave. Some are not even known beyond their family circles; not a few lie in unmarked graves out on the plains, but the burdens they bore uncomplainingly, the contributions they made to the settlement of the arid West, the virtues they exemplified in the midst of trials and almost super-human endurance entitle them to an honored place among the heroines of the world. . . .

One of the most tragically heroic epochs in Church history, one in which are exemplified the dauntless faith and divine leadership of the men at the head of the Church, and the super-human, sublime patience, and resourcefulness of the women, is the period following the expulsion of the saints from Nauvoo. . . .

It is difficult for us who attempt to pay a feeble tribute to these pioneers . . . even to imagine, for example, what those shelterless mothers endured during the month of February 1846—note the month—as they passed through the throes of confinement on the banks of the Sugar Creek when nine babies were born [one night]. . . . The world will do well to pause and think what it was that inspired the women to endure uncomplainingly such trials. . . .

In that month, women, driven from their comfortable homes in Nauvoo, left their land, which many of them could not sell, . . . taking nothing with which they could do without, [and] crossed the Mississippi River to begin a trackless journey. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1948, 4-5, 6.)

STEGNER, WALLACE

I should prefer to deal with the Mormon pioneers, if I can, as human beings of their time and place. . . . I shall try to present them in their terms and judge them in mine. That I do not accept their faith that possessed them does not mean I doubt their frequent devotion and heroism in its service. Especially their women. Their women were incredible. (The Gathering of Zion, 13.)

WIDTSOE, JOHN A.

In the toilsome building of the Church, in the face of unspeakable persecution and hardship, woman did not flinch. She met the required sacrifices with a courage born of sublime faith. She looked heavenward when the husband was bowed down in apparent defeat. She brought heaven down to earth, and the family went on with renewed assurance of victory. This she did though confined with children and household cares, without the exhilaration of man's battle in the open field.

The story of the sacrifices of the Church is yet to be told. Perhaps it beggars the pen. But one thing may be said: Woman faced the tribulations without hesitation; and perhaps she accepted the heavier part. She met with high-flung disdain the horrors of the Missouri persecutions. She crossed the frozen Missouri towards the unknown wilderness without looking back at her happy Nauvoo home from which she had been driven. On the westward trail, sheltered thinly in a wagon box from the raging blizzard, she bore her children. She toiled undismayed across the dreary desert to find a hoped-for safe haven in distant mountain valleys. With tearful eyes, but with an unquenchable faith in the unfolding of God's eternal plan, she saw her child or husband laid away in a soon-to-be obliterated grave by the desert trail. With uncomplaining fortitude she shouldered her part of the burden of conquering the wilderness, of making the desert blossom as the rose. It was she who planted flowers around the log or adobe hut, which as they blossomed, lifted the souls of a driven but unconquered people, to whom beauty was a part of their faith.

Nor was the pioneer woman the only one who sacrificed. Many a woman elsewhere recognized the sweet voice of the Gospel, and because of her faith was driven from homes and loved ones. With a longing akin to agony in her faraway mountain home to which she had gathered, she awaited the word of love, which never came, from father and mother, brother and sister, who could not, or would not see the truth. But, in the midst of tribulation there was a singing within her heart, for she had found the truth.

The Mormon woman has not been content to keep the new-found Gospel to herself. She has wanted and wants the whole world to possess it. She has gone out by the thousands as a bearer of the good tidings. Or she has remained to care for home and family, often to provide the actual support, while her husband and sons were abroad, perhaps in foreign lands, as unpaid ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ. She toiled, she went without, she loved truth so well that she was not afraid. The heroic story of the Mormon woman, when told, will be an epic of human devotion. (Relief Society Magazine, June-July 1943, 373-74.)

Jesus Christ and Women

CANNON, ELAINE A.

I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers us. Such quality love—real, satisfying love that assuages loneliness. He gives us, as well, support, forgiveness, peace. Surely it is a special favor to us that our mission is to help him in his mission to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of all mankind. We gain power, strength, joy, and spiritual polish doing this. (Elaine Cannon's As a Woman Thinketh, ed. Elaine Cannon [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990], 128-29.)

DAVIDSON, KAREN LYNN

While some may think otherwise, the Savior never added a footnote to his life or to his of teachings that said, "By the way, everything that I have done and everything that I have said is relevant to only 48 percent of the population; the other 52 percent will have to look some-place else to find the way, the truth, and the light, because what I have said and what I have done are not relevant to women." Instead, he came to teach all people, both men and women, the kind of life our Father in heaven would have us lead.

Yet often, sometimes without even realizing it, we women hear certain of the Savior's teachings and we think that while it is a beautiful message, it doesn't apply to us, or at least not very forcefully. I would even guess that nearly every woman has at some time, in some way, excused herself from really responding to the admonitions of the Savior, simply because she is a woman. What a tragedy it is to think that the one perfect life that was ever lived, the one infallible example that we have, the one teacher we have as to what to do with our earth life, is somehow not fully for us.

Some may have a hard time believing that they do this. You may be thinking to yourself, "Maybe I don't live a perfectly Christlike life, but I don't use the fact that I'm a woman as an excuse for my shortcomings." I am sure that our rejection of the full responsibility of a Christlike life is rarely quite this conscious or this deliberate, but some things may be happening that are difficult to recognize. Those subtle rejections are what I would like to examine—some of the ways we as women consciously or unconsciously decline the responsibility of living a fully Christlike life.

As we look at what the scriptures tell us about the Savior's life, we see a personage of many facets. One side of his behavior is the side that is most often represented in verse, in music, and in paintings—the gentle side of Christ. He could shed tears, he could bless little children, he could be kind to someone who had been rejected by every other person. He rejected the worldly notions of dominion, power, and bosshood. On the other hand, no one who has ever lived has shown more strength, more courage, more perseverance, more willingness to stand up for truth or rebuke wrong, even at tremendous cost, than has the Savior. He spoke up for unpopular causes. He was willing to speak the truth, even when it cost him his life. If his inner inspiration told him something was right, he did it. That confirmation was all he needed. He didn't need an okay from any of his friends. He had the strength to stand alone. He had absolute confidence in himself and in his Father—confidence to lead out in what was right.

It is this side of the Savior's character—the side that grows, helps others to grow, leads, speaks out, and seeks first and foremost the approval of his Father—that too many women ignore. Many women assume, without really thinking about it, that this part of the Savior's example really has nothing to do with them.

But what on earth would cause a woman to decide that half of Christ's attributes were not relevant to her? Her Creator didn't give her a second-rate mind or second-rate talents. No General Authority ever told her to act weak or simple-minded or incompetent. The scriptures do not tell her that she is less than a whole person. What is the source of this dreadfully destructive message? What would cause a woman to shy away from the full responsibility of a Christlike life by saying, "These things are beyond what I'm expected to do. These teachings are not meant for me because I know I could never measure up"?

The fact is that we don't have to look too far. We are surrounded every day by influences that teach women these untruths. How happy Satan must be when he sees women, particularly Latter-day Saint women, absorbing day by day the idea that we are incompetent, unreliable, unimaginative, and unimportant. (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 102-3.)

To know that we are daughters of our Father in heaven should give us a tremendous sense of joy but also a tremendous sense of responsibility. I hope we can say to ourselves, "I am the daughter of my Father in heaven. As his daughter, I know that I am important because I am me. I know I am capable of great growth, capable of significant service. I will not cancel myself in any way by yielding to false influences that tell me that I am a shallow being or a being of lesser worth or lesser ability. I know that the Savior's examples and teachings were to all people. I will please my Father in heaven by taking his daughters seriously." (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 113.)

GEIKIE, CUNNINGHAM

[The Lord] swept away for ever from His Society the conception of woman as a mere toy or slave of man, and based true relations of the sexes on the eternal foundation of truth, right, honor, and love. To ennoble the House and the Family by raising woman to her true position was essential to the future stability of His Kingdom, as one of purity and spiritual worth. By making marriage indissoluble, He proclaimed the equal rights of woman and man within the limits of the family, and, in this, gave their charter of nobility to the mothers of the world. For her nobler position in the Christian era, compared with that granted her in antiquity, woman is indebted to Jesus Christ. (Life and Words of Christ, 2:349; quoted in James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1945], 484.)

HAFEN, BRUCE C.

Eve's experience as a mother opens our understanding of the Atonement's developmental nature. She found that the Lord heals our separation to make us "at one" with him, not by returning us magically to Eden but by leading us through a process of learning and growing day by day toward spiritual maturity. The Lord also draws on our understanding of a woman's perspective when he teaches us that he feels toward us the way a mother feels for her child: "For can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?" Just as a mother could never forget her child, he said, "Yet will I not forget thee." And just as a mother's body may be permanently marked with the signs of pregnancy and childbirth, he said, "I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands." (1 Ne. 21:15-16.) For both a mother and the Savior, those marks memorialize a wrenching sacrifice, the sacrifice of begetting life—for her, physical birth; for him, spiritual rebirth. (Women in the Covenant of Grace: Talks Selected from the 1993 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Susette Fletcher Green [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994], 29.)

The first mortal to see the resurrected Jesus was Mary. Why had Mary and the other women gone to the tomb so early that hushed Easter morning? Did they go in search of grand theological fulfillment? No. They went to care for the body and change the linen. Some would call that "woman's work." And Mary found him there, in the midst of her workaday tasks of compassionate drudgery. We too will most likely find him there—not in abstract experience detached from mortal cares, not solely at the end of life before the grand judgment bar, but here, now, in the tears and needs of obscure and lonely sorrow. (Women in the Covenant of Grace: Talks Selected from the 1993 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Susette Fletcher Green [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994], 32.)

OKAZAKI, CHIEKO N.

When I think about what I would wish for every sister in the Church, I wish for a gift so powerful that it will sustain us into the eternities, so personal that only you can understand how completely it matches who you are and what you need, so joy-producing that you will feel like shouting hallelujah. That gift is a true knowledge of our Savior, Jesus Christ. He is the light of the world. That's what will really bring light into our lives. We need to know him. Not just concepts about him. Not just lists of things he wants us to do. Not just stories from the scriptures or from other people's testimonies, but our very own stories. (Women and Christ—Living the Abundant Life: Talks Selected from the 1992 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson, Susette Fletcher Green, and Marie Cornwall [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1993], 5.)

SHIRTS, KATHRYN H.

As women we have several options in dealing with our own scriptural heritage. One alternative is to object to the male language and male culture saturating the scriptures and reject the scriptures as irrelevant to our needs as women. Another option is, as obedient daughters of God, to accept the scriptures but be overwhelmed by their predominantly male perspective and underestimate our own spiritual potential. Relying on the Savior as a model and as a mentor, however, we have yet another approach. We can immerse ourselves in the scriptures and, at the same time, by being open to the influence of his Spirit, relate them to our own lives and circumstances. In the intercessory prayer recorded in 3 Nephi, the resurrected Lord prays that those who believe in him might be purified, "that I may be in them as thou, Father, art in me." (19:29.) The intimacy of that relationship overcomes the distance that can be created by any particular form of scriptural language and brings women as well as men into the very center of the story. (Women Steadfast in Christ: Talks Selected from the 1991 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Marie Cornwall [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992], 101.)

So how do we handle the absence of information about our Heavenly Mother, the divine being who could embody the spiritual identity of women? Perhaps it is easier to understand this absence when we realize that we lack a detailed description of our Heavenly Father as well. The Savior spoke of the Father at every turn, but when Philip asked to be shown the Father, Jesus replied that the Father was made manifest through the Son. "Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?" (John 14:9.)

When we ask about the Mother, might not the Lord give us a similar reply? "He that hath seen me hath seen the Mother." We think of the Godhead as united in purpose and similar in character. If we as Mormons are going to assert the existence of a female Deity, shouldn't we assume that her Son mirrors her perfection as well as that of the Father?

When we take this approach, we see that both men and women can enter into the scriptural story and understand their spiritual potential by identifying with the Savior as "the way, the truth, and the life," the divine ideal and the divine mentor. (John 14:6.) But wait, we might ask. Isn't it important for women to have female role models? Can women learn about their own spiritual potential from a male? And can women be as much like Christ as can men?

In answering these questions, we need to consider the scriptural insistence that Jesus was not a man like other men. One of the limitations of human existence is to be locked into one's narrow perspective, based on one's nationality, social status, education, and gender. With perfect compassion the Savior transcended those limitations, descending below all things to be in all things and through all things the light of truth. (D&C 88:6.)

The Gospels record his ability to step outside the perspective of a Jewish male to see women simply as individuals. In a society where women were not allowed to study the scriptures, he taught the Samaritan woman at the well and he excused Mary from serving with Martha in order to study things of more value. Women were not permitted to function as legal witnesses, yet he allowed women to be the first witnesses to the resurrection. His parables balanced the shepherd hunting for the lost sheep with the woman hunting for the lost coin. (Women Steadfast in Christ: Talks Selected from the 1991 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Marie Cornwall [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992], 96-97.)

Just as the scriptures describe the Savior using both male and female imagery, the scriptures insist that God is serious about women identifying with Christ. In Genesis, we learn that God created man in his own image, male and female. (Gen. 1:27.) The book of Moses adds "in the image of his own body, male and female, created he them" and also "in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them." (Moses 6:9, 2:27.) There are important differences between the Savior and ourselves to be overcome during our mortal existence, but gender is not one of them. Being female is not something we have to repent of. (Women Steadfast in Christ: Talks Selected from the 1991 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Marie Cornwall [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992], 98.)

SMITH, IDA

Some women complain that they have no strong role models in the scriptures. That is not true, for we have many. And our main model is the same as for men—the Savior. Nowhere is it written that he is a model for men only; nowhere is it written that he came to save men only; nowhere is it written that men and women should each be allowed only half of his traits. The world has divided up character and personality traits and has labeled some of them masculine and some of them feminine. Latter-day Saints—of all people in the world—should know better than to be deceived by this. Nowhere does the Lord say that tenderness, kindness, charity, faithfulness, patience, gentleness, and compassion are female traits and should be exemplified by women only. And nowhere does he say that courage, strength, determination, leadership, and a willingness to fight—and, if necessary, die—for what is right should be the exclusive prerogatives of men. Any notion that God desires that women should remain passive bystanders should have been dispelled when the Prophet told women they are, from 1842 forward, responsible for their own salvation.

Not just women suffer with sexual categorization; man is also charged to become Christlike. A heavy burden is placed on him when he realizes that many of the traits that will make him Christlike have been labeled by the world as feminine, and that by taking upon himself those characteristics, he will run the risk of having his masculinity seriously questioned by his peers. In the world, in most societies throughout history, masculinity has been equated with virility, or, in today's vernacular, macho behavior. Women have usually been considered seductive and submissive. The world, unwilling to admit the Creation, has tried to explain existence and behavior as physical and has succumbed to the process of fragmenting the whole person. (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 46-47.)

TALMAGE, JAMES E.

The world's greatest champion of woman and womanhood is Jesus the Christ. (Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1945], 475.)

Joy and Womanhood

CLARK, J. REUBEN, JR.

When the souls shall return to the presence of the Father of All, the worthy mothers will be there to welcome their worthy children, and with humble pride born of righteous achievement, they will reverently bow and humbly speak:

"Father, we come back to thee with the righteous souls whose earthly bodies thou lettest us to build, `bone of our bone, flesh of our flesh,' all to thine everlasting honor and glory and to our blessing and exaltation forever.

"Blessed were our wombs, for they bore children, even as thou didst command, in the image of thine Only Begotten, who is in the image of thee.

"Richly fruitful have been our blessings on earth, for we come back home to thee with these thy children.

"Great is the joy of this the end of our labors, for these souls have been saved with eternal life.

"Blessed were we in our example set, for thou gavest us the power to live worthily; in the teaching of thy children, thou didst give us a goodly measure of wisdom.

"Blessed were we in our faith, for thou didst richly endow us with this thy gift.

"Blessed were we in our understanding, for thou didst cause the Holy Ghost to enlighten our minds.

"Blessed were we in our living, for thou didst give us patience and kindliness, and forgiving natures, with charity and unbounded love.

"Blessed were we that thou didst send these spirits to the bodies which we by thy power fashioned, for they were choice spirits.

"Blessed were we in their rearing, for they walked always in thy paths; and in their maturity they departed not from the ways of their youth.

"Blessed were we in their companionship, for they were loving and kind, respectful and obedient to us.

"Blessed were we in the mortal fathers of our children's bodies, for they gave us comfort and help, and love and kindness unmeasured, and likewise walked worthily before thee.

"Our souls cry out to thee, our Father, in worship of thee, for thou hast been with us from the beginning and hast covenanted to be with us during all eternity. Honor and Glory and Love to thee forever, and forever."

Then we shall believe the Father will say to the mothers:

"Well done, thou good and faithful handmaids, enter thou into the rest I have prepared for those who builded the mortal temples in which dwelt the spirits I created, that they might keep their second estate, for without the keeping of their second estate they could not have `glory added upon their heads for ever and ever' (Abr. 3:26)."

And then the Priesthood will wish to proclaim their debt to these their help-meets without whom the Priesthood could not have worked out their destiny. And the Priesthood shall bow in reverence and in love unbounded before these mothers who did the service the Priesthood could not do, and thank and praise them for bearing their children, a service without which God's purposes had failed and the intelligences which God called around him "in the beginning" had been deprived of the divine destiny God marked out for them in the Great Council held in Heaven before the earth was formed.

These, Wives and Mothers in Israel, are your rewards and your destinies. And your offspring, saved and exalted in the presence of God, will never forget you, will ever bless you, and will sing hymns of eternal gratitude for the bodies you gave them and taught them to make the Temples of the Spirit of God. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1946, 803-4.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Our beloved mother Eve began the human race with gladness, wanting children, glad for the joy that they would bring to her, willing to assume the problems connected with a family, but also the joys. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 326.)

SPAFFORD, BELLE S.

It was not intended that our lives should be a succession of confused, wearisome, frustrated days. Rather, it was intended that they should be orderly, fruitful days of true joy as we triumph over evil and rise above tribulation. This comes about as we approach our problems positively in the light of gospel teaching. (A Woman's Reach [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], 121.)

Latter-day Saint Women

BERGIN, ALLEN E.

Valiant Latter-day Saint women are carving out of the social matrix a new destiny for women in the generations to come. This is the day of women. The daughters of Zion are rising to the fullness of their eternal natures as intelligent beings who understand the principle of agency and act from it. For myself, I say God bless all who are participating in what seems to me a heroic effort, however public and dramatic or private and quiet their contributions may be. May the processes of change that they elect have the sanction of the Lord Jesus Christ, that thereby peace may be in their hearts and in the hearts of all those who are affected by this revolution. May it not be a revolution of this world but rather a revolution against the standards of the world and thus a latter-day witness of what eternal womanhood means. May we as men embrace the divine concept of masculinity and thereby nurture the processes of self-actualization in which so many women are now engaged. (Women of Wisdom and Knowledge: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conference, ed. Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 128.)

CANNON, ELAINE A.

We need more women who, having been willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, are then willing to take upon them the work he has designated for the sisters.

We need more women who know Jesus Christ and who will teach and testify of him. We need women who are studying the scriptures, who know the word of God and experiment upon the word; women who will move by knowledge and also by faith, who will "be no more as children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive." (Eph. 4:14.)

Dr. Charles D. McIver, in an address at the North Carolina College for Women, said, "When you educate a man, you educate an individual; when you educate a woman, you educate a whole family." Brigham Young admitted that if he had to educate either his sons or his daughters, he would choose his daughters because they would influence generations.

In the process of becoming educated, let us grow spiritually in our knowledge of Christ. This is the all-important knowledge. With this knowledge comes change.

We need women who are more valiant and who are not ashamed of the gospel of Jesus Christ, who can stand up and be counted, who use the spirit within them to discern. These are the peaceful women. Frustration and depression are not part of their being.

We need women who are willing to make a wholesome difference. Robert Frost's often-quoted poem regarding two roads comes to mind. The one not taken made all the difference. And isn't this true with Mormon women and the path we choose to take? Someone once suggested that for evil to flourish, it simply requires that good men and women do nothing. For good Mormon women to do nothing—to simply bask in their latter-day blessings—seems to me to be a pitiful breach of promise and purpose.

We need more diligent women to love their husbands into gentility or to just love their husbands and children better. If they haven't done either yet, then we need them to open their hearts and extend the reach of their affection and effectiveness to others.

So whether we are named Maren, Margit, Susan, Helen, Brigitta, or even Camilla, the Lord needs women who will take upon themselves his ways, his will, and his work, as well as his name.

If each of us will begin to do this with the power that is in us, we will soon notice a mighty change in our lives. Trials and troubles won't get the better of us. The gates of hell will not prevail against us, and the heavens will shake for our good. (See D&C 21:6.) Our hearts and our homes will be filled with unspeakable love. Our wards will be stronger and our numbers will swell. Good will be done.

You see, taking upon us the name of Christ, and then living as if we have, can make all the difference. (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 73-74.)

KIMBALL, CAMILLA EYRING

A woman of faith, then, is one whose heart and soul, mind and strength are committed to the pursuit of true values. First, in her heart and soul, a faithful woman acknowledges God's role in all things. Then, with her mind she seeks to understand the divine plan for this world. And finally, with the strength of her hands, she undertakes to carry out the fundamental tasks of mankind, which are to keep God's commandments and give unselfish service to His children. . . .

Women of faith will know that the Lord lives and will follow that knowledge, whatever the cost. (A Heritage of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988], 4, 10.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

For one thing, Mormon women are basically strong, independent, and faithful. They have chosen to live by a creed and a way of life that can be demanding at best. From the earliest days of the Church, active membership has meant faith, fortitude, denial, selflessness, and good service. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 15.)

SMITH, IDA

President Kimball, in essence, has been urging women to get in condition, to get involved in the life around them, and to have a greater influence for good on what is happening in the world. He has urged women to become educated, to become gospel scholars, to develop every talent with which the Lord has blessed them and then to use their talents for the benefit of mankind. We need to learn and then teach each other the exalted role of women as revealed by the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. We need to be sure our spouses understand it. And if we have children, we need to be sure that our sons and our daughters understand it. (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 47-48.)

SNOW, ELIZA R.

[Latter-day Saint women] occupy a more important position than is occupied by any other women on the earth. Associated as they are, with apostles and prophets inspired by the living God—with them sharing in the gifts and powers of the Holy Priesthood . . . participating in those sacred ordinances, without which, we could never be prepared to dwell in the presence of the Holy Ones. (Woman's Exponent, 15 July 1874, 28.)

It is the duty of each one of us to be a holy woman. We shall have elevated aims, if we are holy women. We shall feel that we are called to perform important duties. No one is exempt from them. There is no sister so isolated, and her sphere so narrow but what she can do a great deal towards establishing the Kingdom of God upon the earth. (Quoted in Chieko N. Okazaki, Cat's Cradle [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993], 88.)

TANNER, N. ELDON

Now as members of [Relief Society] and as mothers in Israel, as wives and those who are neither wives nor mothers but members of the families which make up the community, you have a marvelous opportunity and a heavy responsibility of making the family and community life exemplary in every way. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1964, 889.)

TAYLOR, JOHN

A great deal of credit is due to our sisters. God has provided them as helpmates to their husbands, and it is the duty of the latter to cherish and protect those whom God has given unto them, and show them how to make themselves happy. Teach them—our wives and daughters—the pure principles of the gospel that the daughters of Zion may be lovely and shine as the light and glory of the age in which we live. Sisters, put away from you the vanities and frivolities of the world, administer to the poor and the afflicted. The sisters know how to sympathize with and administer to those who are poor, afflicted, and downcast; and let the brethren help them in their kindly ministrations. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 19:142.)

Marriage Relationship

See also Equality between Women and Men; Patriarchal Order; Partnership between Women and Men

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

Adam and Eve provide us with an ideal example of a covenant marriage relationship. They labored together; they had children together; they prayed together; and they taught their children the gospel—together. This is the pattern God would have all righteous men and women imitate. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 70.)

BROWN, HUGH B.

Sisters, don't give up because your men are not all you would wish them to be, but maintain your faith, not only in them but in your Heavenly Father's help and your own ability to fulfill your role as a helpmate. Never cease to work and pray for divine guidance in your divine calling. Thus may you hold your families together and prepare them for the eternities to come. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1965, 888.)

CLARK, J. REUBEN, JR.

As to sex in marriage, the necessary treatise on that for Latter-day Saints can be written in two sentences: Remember the prime purpose of sex desire is to beget children. Sex gratification must be had at that hazard. You husbands: be kind and considerate of your wives. They are not your property; they are not mere conveniences; they are your partners for time and eternity. (Conference Report, Oct. 1949, 194-95.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Marriage is a partnership. Each is given a part of the work of life to do. The fact that some women and men disregard their work and their opportunities does not change the program. When we speak of marriage as a partnership, let us speak of marriage as a full partnership. We do not want our LDS women to be silent partners or limited partners in that eternal assignment! Please be a contributing and full partner. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 31.)

MCCONKIE, BRUCE R.

This is the very heart and core of the whole matter. God made man, male and female created he them, so they could marry; so they could provide bodies for his spirit children; so they could create for themselves eternal family units. God brought the woman unto the man and gave her to him to be his wife. He did it in Eden, before the fall; all things were then immortal; death had not entered the world. The first marriage—performed by the Lord God himself—was a celestial marriage, an eternal marriage, a union of Adam and Eve that was destined to last forever. There was no death; there was to be no divorce; the man and his wife were to be one flesh forever. Such was the pattern. All men thereafter should be as their first parents. Men and women should marry as did Adam and Eve—in celestial marriage—and should cleave unto each other as the divine pattern required. What God does is forever. And what he hath joined in eternal union, let not man put asunder. Divorce is no part of the eternal plan. (The Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-81], 3:294-95.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

Let us instruct young people who come to us, to know that a woman should be queen of her own body. The marriage covenant does not give the man the right to enslave her or to abuse her or to use her merely for the gratification of his passion. Your marriage ceremony does not give you that right.

Second, let them remember that gentleness and consideration after the ceremony [are] just as appropriate and necessary and beautiful as gentleness and consideration before the wedding.

Third, let us realize that manhood is not undermined by the practicing of continence, notwithstanding what some psychiatrists claim. Chastity is the crown of beautiful womanhood, and self-control is the source of true manhood, if you will know it, not indulgence. . . .

Let us teach our young men to enter into matrimony with the idea that each will be just as courteous and considerate of a wife after the ceremony as during courtship. (Conference Report, Apr. 1952, 86-87.)

MERRILL, JOSEPH F.

A Latter-day Saint marriage is a union of two equal partners, obligated to build a home where mutual love, respect, trust, fidelity, tolerance, patience, and kindness are some of the essential operating factors. And in the home where these prevail the ugly specter of divorce will never enter. (Conference Report, Apr. 1946, 29.)

RICHARDS, STEPHEN L

I always regret seeing a woman do anything to belittle her husband, even for his mistakes, before her children, and I have been hurt time and time again when I have been in homes and seen a man embarrassed, and I likewise have no sympathy with a husband who would embarrass his wife before her children. . . . So I draw that to your attention, because I believe as we preserve the integrity of the home as it was meant to be, we will do that which we should for the building up of the kingdom. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1951, 799.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

This patriarchal order has its divine spirit and purpose, and those who disregard it under one pretext or another are out of harmony with the spirit of God's laws as they are ordained for recognition in the home. It is not merely a question of who is perhaps the best qualified. Neither is it wholly a question of who is living the most worthy life. It is a question largely of law and order. (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 286-87.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

I know that you good women get annoyed and provoked and out of patience many times with your husbands, and at times justly so. They are not always as considerate of you as they ought to be; but if they provide for you and they are kind to you and otherwise treat you right, stay with them. I think it has been taught by some that as we lay down our bodies they will so rise in the resurrection with all the impediments and imperfections that they have here; and that if a wife does not love her husband in this estate, she cannot love him in the next. This is not so. Those who attain to the blessings of the first or celestial resurrection will be pure and perfect, perfect in body. Every man and woman that reaches to this unspeakable attainment will be as beautiful as the angels that surround the throne of God. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 10:24.)

I tell you the truth as it is in the bosom of eternity; and I say so to every man upon the face of the earth: if he wishes to be saved he cannot be saved without a woman by his side. (Times and Seasons 6:955.)

Mother in Heaven

BALLARD, MELVIN J.

No matter to what heights God has attained or may attain, he does not stand alone; for side by side with him, in all her glory, a glory like unto his, stands a companion, the Mother of his children. For as we have a Father in heaven, so also we have a Mother there, a glorified, exalted, ennobled Mother. That is a startling doctrine, I recognize, to some folk, and yet we ought to be governed by reason in giving consideration to this doctrine which is a revelation from God. . . .

Motherhood is eternal with Godhood, and there is no such thing as eternal or endless life without the eternal and endless continuation of motherhood. (Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, comp. Bryant S. Hinckley [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1949], 205-6.)

CANNON, GEORGE Q.

We existed with Him in a family relationship as His children. . . . When we see our Father in heaven we shall know Him; and the recollection that we were once with Him and that He was our Father will come back to us, and we will fall upon His neck, and He will fall upon us, and we will kiss each other. We will know our Mother, also. (Gospel Truth, sel. Jerreld L. Newquist, 2 vols. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957], 1:1, 3.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

When we sing that doctrinal hymn and anthem of affection, "O My Father," we get a sense of the ultimate in maternal modesty, of the restrained, queenly elegance of our heavenly mother, and knowing how profoundly our mortal mothers have shaped us here, do we suppose her influence on us as individuals to be less if we live so as to return there? (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 327.)

SMITH, JOSEPH FIELDING

Latter-day Saints believe that not only have we a Father in heaven, but a mother there. Why not have a mother as well as a Father? Is there any blasphemy in this teaching? Moreover, we believe that it is the purpose of the Almighty to crown those who keep his commandments in full, and endure to the end, with all the blessings of the celestial kingdom. The celestial kingdom is the kingdom where God and Christ dwell. Those who enter there in exaltation become sons and daughters of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, and the promise to them is that they who are married for time and all eternity and remain true to their covenants, shall be crowned with eternal increase. They become gods, even sons and daughters of God. (The Restoration of All Things [Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1973].)

SNOW, LORENZO

You sisters, I suppose, have read that poem which my sister composed years ago, and which is sung quite frequently now in our meetings—"O My Father." It tells us that we not only have a Father in "that high and glorious place," but that we have a Mother too; and you will become as great as your Mother, if you are faithful. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 7-8.)

Motherhood

See also Children, Teaching and Nurturing; Motherhood, Nobility of; Mothers, Influence of; Mothers, Love of; Mothers, Responsibilities of; Parenting

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

Mothers are, or should be, the very heart and soul of the family. No more sacred word exists in secular or holy writ than mother. (Parents' Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 22 Feb. 1987.)

CLARK, J. REUBEN, JR.

What a miracle is motherhood; how nearly infinite is mother. She fashions in her womb the most complex structure known to man, the whole visible universe being, in contrast, the simplest of creations. From the cell she herself has built from the dust of the earth, fructified by the father cell formed also of dust of the earth by the father, she mounts cell on cell, each born of clay, till the normal man is brought into the world—built of head and trunk and limbs, of bone and flesh and blood, of brain, eyes, ears, and mouth, of muscles and sinews and nerves, of heart and lungs and stomach and intestines, of liver and spleen and kidneys, of glands and lymphs, of arms, hands and fingers, of legs, feet and toes, all of these and every vein and artery and nerve, every nail upon the fingers, every joint and muscle, each and every one in its never-varying place (save some prank of malformation), never the feet where the head should be, never the heart and lungs below and the liver and spleen and kidneys above, but all in perfect order, every man brought forth organized as were those who went before, as they will be who come after, the pattern in all its infinite detail faithfully followed down to the last jot and tittle of the human frame—a body fashioned in the very image of the Son who was in the image of the Father. What an infinitely glorious concept, what a supreme destiny, and what a divine-like achievement.

This is wife's and mother's task and opportunity and did she fail so that new body-forms came or that none came, then the Great Plan would fail and God's purposes would come to naught. They must build in the likeness of the Father and the Son. This must never change.

Thus she must go forward always, from now till time, being no more, merges into eternity, that all the spirits keeping their "first estate," shall come into their "second estate" to prove whether they shall live that estate and be given life everlasting. Thus Eve's daughters, under the destiny God gave to them, must build for every spirit, a body that the spirit can call its own for the span of time not only, but for the expanse of eternity through the resurrection, so that every soul, willing to work and sacrifice for it, can "become perfect even as our Father in Heaven is perfect." Eve's daughters only can do the service that thus makes possible this perfection. The Priesthood cannot do this without the helpmeet.

Her spirit breathing to her mind this divine truth, the mother folds the newborn to her breast, and into her soul comes the mother love that lives thence forever, for this tiny being is "bone of her bone, flesh of her flesh." . . .

But the full glory of motherhood is not yet reached when her child comes forth into this world of trial, nor is her opportunity for service passed when her creation breathes the breath of life. Still from the dust of the earth she must fabricate the food that keeps alive and nourishes the little one. She feeds not only, but clothes it. She cares for it by day and watches over it by night. When illness comes, she nurses it with that near divine love that fills her heart. She gently leads its faltering steps, till it walks alone. She helps to frame its first lisps and teaches it the full art of speech. As consciousness matures, she deftly sows into the plastic mind the love of God, of truth, and, as the years flow by and youth comes on, she adds the love of honor, of honesty, of sobriety, of industry, of chastity. She teaches, bit by bit, loyalty and reverence and devotion. She implants and makes part of the growing, virgin intellect an understanding of the restored gospel. She steadies the swaying will when temptation first comes. She builds into the warp and woof of her creation, self-control, independence, righteousness, love of God, and a desire and will to serve him.

Thus to the full stature of manhood and womanhood, mother guides, incites, entreats, instructs, directs, on occasion commands, the soul for which she built the earthly home, in its march onward to exaltation. God gives the soul its destiny, but mother leads it along the way. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1946, 801-3.)

EDWARDS, JAROLDEEN

My wonderful conclusion on [a] long-ago night . . . as I put my children to bed, kissed them goodnight, and looked at my rumpled, bumbling house full of things to do . . . was that I had not missed my prime . . . my own personal, wonderful, wouldn't-change-it-for-the-world prime. I had been living it every day all through the years. . . . To me all the years, even the hard ones, had been prime. Better than prime: choice. (Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner . . .: Personal Discoveries of a Mother of Twelve [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 20-21.)

It is an irony that motherhood is the one profession that a dedicated and educated adult can practice for a decade and still not be considered an expert. Yet I confess I have confidence in myself and in my role. I believe I do it as well as I am capable of doing anything. I have chosen this life; it does not master me, I master it. I am not its victim, I am its recipient. And if there are times when I wistfully read a university catalogue, or wish that I could run instead of pushing a stroller and observing each leaf and stone, or get tired of the litany of "no's" and "do this's," those times are not frequent and they just serve to confirm that life is a banquet, and, even when filled, we hunger and thirst. (Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner . . .: Personal Discoveries of a Mother of Twelve [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 34.)

A child's eyes are the cathedral of a mother's soul: Through them she worships flawlessly. In them she sees eternity. (Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner . . .: Personal Discoveries of a Mother of Twelve [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 9.)

HARDISON, AMY

I never imagined that I would have a child that complained every night if we didn't have peanut butter and jelly sandwiches for dinner. I never thought that there would be winters when we never had everyone well at one time and that I wouldn't get an uninterrupted night's sleep for years on end. It never dawned on me that there would be times I would feel overwhelmed, exhausted, and inadequate. But neither did I imagine the joy of holding my own baby, the delight of listening to a three-year-old's imaginative play, or the pride of watching my own kindergartener in a school Christmas play. . . . The expectations of motherhood are not always fulfilled, but often they are surpassed. (How to Feel Great about Being a Mother [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987], 13.)

HARRISON, BEPPIE

Rocking a baby, walking hand-in-hand with a preschooler, watching your eight-year-old son chase your car up the driveway, his face alight with joy at having you home again, an after-midnight talk with your adolescent daughter struggling into her own womanhood—those will be the moments you will unfold and remember once the children are grown and launched on lives of their own. It seems only fair that we should enjoy them and give ourselves the time to enjoy them, while they're going on. The hours pass at the same steady pace, however we spend them. A certain number of them, in the inescapable nature of things, will get used up vacuuming and dusting and doing the grocery shopping and weeding the garden, but we must keep some of them for us and our children. The children need them, true enough. But we need them more. (Needles in the Basket [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 60-61.)

KAPP, ARDETH G.

I have come to know that we can all rejoice in the sacred calling of motherhood. To give birth is only one part of this sacred mission, the miracle of life. But to help another gain eternal life is a privilege that is neither denied to nor delayed for any worthy woman. And to be a mother in Israel may be within reach of every righteous woman even now. (My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 136.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

It was never easy to bear and rear children, but easy things do not make for growth and development. Loud, blatant voices today shout, "Fewer children," and offer the pill, surgery, and even ugly abortion, which has reached monumental numbers. It is an awful thing when mothers without righteous cause take the lives or participate in the taking of the lives of their unborn children.

Much is said about the drudgery and the confinement of the woman's role in the home. In the perspective of the gospel it is not so. There is divinity in each new life. There is challenge in creating the environment in which a child can grow and develop. There is partnership between the man and woman in building a family which can last throughout the eternities.

Mothers have a sacred role. They are partners with God, as well as with their own husbands, first in giving birth to the Lord's spirit children and then in rearing those children so they will serve the Lord and keep his commandments. Could there be a more sacred trust than to be a trustee for honorable, well-born, well-developed children? (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 31-32.)

WIDTSOE, JOHN A.

An understanding of the power of the Priesthood and its proper use precludes all feeling of any possible jealousy by either men or women. Where women choose to magnify their motherhood, either direct or vicarious, progress and happiness is the sure result. Indeed, a woman who would sacrifice the greatest of all earth professions, that of motherhood, which is hers by right of sex, for the silly reason of proving that she can do a man's work as well as any man, or for any other reason, is something less than a true woman, and is to be pitied as well as condemned. (Priesthood and Church Government [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 89-90.)

Motherhood, Nobility of

See also Motherhood; Mothers, Influence of; Mothers, Love of; Mothers, Responsibilities of

BALLARD, MELVIN J.

There is a passage in our scriptures which the Latter-day Saints accept as divine: "This is the glory of God—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Likewise we could say that this is the glory of men and women—to bring to pass the mortality of sons and daughters of God, to give earth-life to the waiting children of our Father. . . . The greatest mission of woman is to give life, earth-life, through honorable marriage, to the waiting spirits, our Father's spirit children who anxiously desire to come to dwell here in this mortal state. All the honor and glory that can come to men or women by the development of their talents, the homage and the praise they may receive from an applauding world, worshipping at their shrine of genius, is but a dim thing whose luster shall fade in comparison to the high honor, the eternal glory, the ever-enduring happiness that shall come to the woman who fulfills the first great duty and mission that devolves upon her to become the mother of the sons and daughters of God. The jewels in her crown, the stars that still glisten in her diadem, in time and in eternity, shall be the sons and the daughters to whom, through the blessing of the Lord, she has been instrumental in not only giving earth-life, but in bringing them, through care and devotion and faithfulness, into the paths that God has appointed for his children to follow. (Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, comp. Bryant S. Hinckley [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1949], 203-4.)

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

God bless our wonderful mothers. We pray for you. We sustain you. We honor you as you bear, nourish, train, teach, and love for eternity. I promise you the blessings of heaven and "all that [the] Father hath" (see D&C 84:38) as you magnify the noblest calling of all—a mother in Zion. (Parents' Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 22 Feb. 1987.)

One apparent impact of the women's movement has been the feelings of discontent it has created among young women who have chosen the role of wife and mother. They are often made to feel that there are more exciting and self-fulfilling roles for women than housework, diaper changing, and children calling for mother. This view loses sight of the eternal perspective that God elected women to the noble role of mother and that exaltation is eternal fatherhood and eternal motherhood. (Dedication of Relief Society Monument to Women, Nauvoo, Illinois, 30 June 1978.)

FIRST PRESIDENCY: HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK JR., DAVID O. MCKAY

Motherhood thus becomes a holy calling, a sacred dedication for carrying out the Lord's plans, a consecration of devotion to the uprearing and fostering, the nurturing in body, mind, and spirit, of those who kept their first estate and who come to this earth for their second estate "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abr. 3:25.) To lead them to keep their second estate is the work of motherhood, and "they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever."—(op. cit.)

This divine service of motherhood can be rendered only by mothers. It may not be passed on to others. Nurses cannot do it; public nurseries cannot do it; hired help cannot do it—only mother, aided as much as may be by the loving hands of father, brothers, and sisters, can give the full needed measure of watchful care.

The mother who entrusts her child to the care of others, that she may do non-motherly work, whether for gold, for fame, or for civic service should remember that "a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame." (Prov. 29:15.) In our day the Lord has said that unless parents teach their children the doctrines of the Church "the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68:25.)

Motherhood is near to Divinity. It is the highest, holiest service to be assumed by mankind. It places her who honors its holy calling and service next to the angels. To you mothers in Israel we say God bless and protect you, and give you the strength and courage, the faith and knowledge, the holy love and consecration to duty, that shall enable you to fill to the fullest measure the sacred calling which is yours. To you mothers and mothers-to-be we say: Be chaste, keep pure, live righteously, that your posterity to the last generation may call you blessed. (Deseret Weekly, 3 Oct. 1942, 4-5.)

HAFEN, BRUCE C.

Women are unquestionably the equal of men, having talents and interests that extend well beyond the home; yet, there are some God-given differences between the sexes that should be both appreciated and preserved. . . . Mother Eve's initial partaking of the forbidden fruit was neither stupid nor tragic; rather, what she and Adam did was, in the words of Elder John A. Widtsoe, an act of "sacrifice and courage," making Adam and Eve the "greatest and noblest of the human race." (John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, 171.) Even though the serpent "beguiled" Eve, she and Adam could have had no children had they remained in the Garden. (See 2 Ne. 2:23.) Thus, Elder Widtsoe wrote that God's commandment against eating the forbidden fruit was primarily a warning about the hazards and the sorrow that would accompany the choice to bear children in the lone and dreary world of mortality. (Evidences and Reconciliations, 193.) From the very beginning, the "mother of all living" showed that heroic maternal instinct that is willing to walk down into the valley of the shadow of death, not only to bring forth children but also to bring forth understanding and joy to the parents. (Brigham Young University Women's Conference, 1985, 11.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

This ability and willingness properly to rear children, the gift to love, and eagerness, yes, longing to express it in soul development, make motherhood the noblest office or calling in the world. It is the greatest of all professions, the most beautiful of all arts. She who can paint a masterpiece or write a book that will influence millions deserves the admiration and the plaudits of mankind; but she who rears successfully a family of healthy, beautiful sons and daughters, whose influence will be felt through generations to come, whose immortal souls will exert an influence throughout the ages long after paintings shall have faded, and books and statues shall have decayed or shall have been destroyed, deserves the highest honor that man can give, and the choicest blessings of God. In her high duty and service to humanity, endowing with immortality eternal spirits, she is co-partner with the Creator Himself. (Improvement Era, May 1936, 269.)

No nobler work in this world can be performed by any mother than to rear and love the children with whom God has blessed her. (Conference Report, Apr. 1951, 81.)

Motherhood is the one thing in all the world which most truly exemplifies the God-given virtues of creating and sacrificing. Though it carries the woman close to the brink of death, motherhood also leads her into the very realm of the fountains of life and makes her co-partner with the Creator in bestowing upon eternal spirits mortal life. (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], 456.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

When I think of our mothers, the mothers of our children, and realize that under the inspiration of the gospel they live virtuous, pure honorable lives, true to their husbands, true to their children, true to their convictions of the gospel, oh, how my soul goes out in pure love for them. How noble and how God-given, how choice, how desirable and how indispensable they are to the accomplishment of God's purposes and the fulfillment of his decrees! (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 284.)

SPAFFORD, BELLE S.

The Latter-day Saint woman knows that motherhood is a divine calling. . . . [She] knows that no other work to which she might set her hand could be so broad and inspiring, so filled with interest, so demanding of intelligence and capability, so rewarding. (A Woman's Reach [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], 117.)

Mothers, Influence of

See also Children, Teaching and Nurturing; Motherhood; Motherhood, Nobility of; Mothers, Love of; Mothers, Responsibilities of; Parenting

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

No society will long survive without mothers who care for their young and provide that nurturing care so essential for their normal development. (Families [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994], 8.)

As mothers and future mothers, you will influence the course of the Church in this great country, and the destiny of its coming leaders. If you are to provide the training for these future generations, you must stand firm in the faith, unwavering in the face of evil, and as Paul said, "Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil" (Eph. 6:11). (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], 518.)

COWLEY, MATTHEW

You do not know what your own lives and your own influences mean in the lives of young people, and the lives of children. . . .

. . . God bless you in this great and noble work of teaching your children and the children of others the ways of righteousness, because that which you implant in youth will crop up from time to time in later life, and it may be the very influence you are wielding, of which you do not see the immediate results, that will be an anchor to the faith of these young people.

. . . You are the co-creators with God of his children. Therefore, it is expected of you by a right divine that you be the saviors and the regenerating force in the lives of God's children here upon the earth. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1953, 7.)

DURRANT, GEORGE D.

Nothing a woman can ever do will have anywhere near as much importance as the influence she has as a mother. (Mother, Our Heavenly Connection [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 14-15.)

The deepest part of a child's heart is shaped more by his mother than by all other sources combined. (Mother, Our Heavenly Connection [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], ix.)

A mother relating to her child in the private intimacy of her home, with no audience but the unseen angels, is the predominant influence for all that is good and decent in the world. (Mother, Our Heavenly Connection [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], x.)

GATES, SUSA YOUNG

Do you know there are people in this world who need just mothering more than they need any other possible thing? (Motherhood: A Partnership with God, comp. Harold Lundstrom [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1956], 253.)

GRANT, HEBER J.

If a boy has a good mother he is apt to be just like her, and if a mother works early and late, the boy is very apt to work early and late too. . . . I rejoice in the Gospel. I rejoice in being able to say to you good sisters—than whom there are no better—you are the salt of the earth. (Relief Society Magazine, May 1942, 293.)

I have found that many men who have been successful in the battle of life are indebted principally to the example, the energy, and untiring labors of faithful mothers. (Relief Society Magazine, Oct. 1937, 624.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

The Lord said: "My sheep know my voice." So do the little ones responds to their own mothers. The maid, the neighbor, the sister, the grandmother may clothe and feed and diaper the child, but no one can take the place of mother. The six-year-old who got lost from his mother in a large supermarket began to call frantically, "Martha, Martha." When the mother was found and they were reunited, she said, "Honey, you should not call me Martha; I am `Mother' to you," to which the little fellow rejoined, "Yes, I know, but the store was full of mothers and I wanted mine." (Faith Precedes the Miracle [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 117.)

What mother, looking down with tenderness upon her chubby infant does not envision her child as the president of the Church or the leader of her nation! As he is nestled in her arms, she sees him a statesman, a leader, a prophet. Some dreams do come true! One mother gives us a Shakespeare; another a Michelangelo, and another a Joseph Smith. (Conference Report, Apr. 1960, 4.)

There has never been a time in the world when the role of woman has been more confused. There has never been a time in the Church when women are able to do more to show what their true role in the world can and ought to be. The impact and influence of women and mothers on our world is most important. The thought that "the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world" is more viable today than ever before. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 1.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

Motherhood is the greatest potential influence either for good or ill in human life. The mother's image is the first that stamps itself on the unwritten page of the young child's mind. It is her caress that first awakens a sense of security; her kiss, the first realization of affection; her sympathy and tenderness, the first assurance that there is love in the world. (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], 452.)

A few nights ago I dreamed of Mother. She seemed as happy and beautiful as when, years since, she comforted and guided four girls and four boys in the cherished home of our childhood. . . . The joy I experienced at being once again in her company seemed so real that I could scarcely believe it was only a dream. I wish that I might dream of her oftener, for only in dreamland can we now hold converse over the incidents of my youth and early manhood, now treasured because of her association with them. (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], 454.)

Mothers sow the seeds in childhood that determine to a great extent life's harvests in adulthood. (Improvement Era, May 1962, 308.)
