It is the mother who inculcates in the lives of children a nobility of soul that leads them instinctively to love the beautiful, the genuine, the virtuous, and, as instinctively, to turn from the ugly, the spurious, and the vile. Home is the center from which woman rules the world. It is there she teaches her child self-restraint, develops in him the confidence and strength that spring from self-control. It is there the child learns respect for the rights of others. It is in a well-directed home that men and women first develop a consciousness that true happiness lies in conforming one's life to the laws of nature and to the rules of social conduct. . . .

Yes, the woman wields a mighty influence! Let that influence be felt even more potently throughout the Church and our communities in the protection of our homes from the impurities that are now sweeping the nation. The Lord bless every mother, every woman, that she may be wise and strong in teaching our boys and girls in maintaining ethical standards and in being exemplary examples to young people in all the world! (Instructor, May 1966, 162-63.)

God bless our mothers! If we had in the world all good mothers, we could soon hasten the Millennium. (Motherhood: A Partnership with God, comp. Harold Lundstrom [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1956], 126.)

I believe a competent mother in every home is the greatest need of the world today. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1936, 4.)

One of the greatest needs in the world today is intelligent, conscientious motherhood. It is to the home we must look for the inculcation of the fundamental virtues which contribute to human welfare and happiness. . . . Motherhood is the greatest potential influence either for good or ill in human life. . . . God bless you mothers—home builders, angels of mercy! May your influence continue to spread, and your sweet, tender services bring comfort and consolation to those in need. (Relief Society Magazine, May 1942, 293.)

SMITH, GEORGE ALBERT

Look over the world and study the characters who have carved out of the conditions that surrounded them, the fame that has attached to great names, and I think you will agree with me that seldom may be found in this world a great man who did not have a great mother. (Sharing the Gospel with Others, comp. Preston Nibley [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948], 140.)

TANNER, N. ELDON

A mother has far greater influence on her children than anyone else has. . . . It is while the child is in the home that he gains from his mother the attitudes, hopes, and beliefs that will determine the kind of life he will live and the contribution he will make to society. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 4-5.)

WOODRUFF, WILFORD

I consider that the mother has a greater influence over her posterity than any other person can have. And the question has arisen some time: "When does this education begin?" Our prophets have said, "When the spirit life from God enters into the tabernacle." The condition of the mother at that time will have its effect upon the fruit of her womb; and from the birth of the child, and all through life, the teachings and the example of the mother govern and control in a great measure, that child, and her influence is felt by it through time and eternity.

I have long been satisfied that the devil was making great exertions to drive a wedge in between parents and children—trying to inspire and instil into the minds of the sons and daughters of the Saints those corrupting notions that will prevent them from following the footsteps of their fathers and mothers: but this cannot be done! The sons and daughters of this people, if we do our duty, will be held by the strength and in the name of Israel's God. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, sel. G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946], 269-70.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

The mothers are the moving instruments in the hands of Providence to guide the destinies of nations. Let the mothers of any nation teach their children not to make war, the children would grow up and never enter into it. . . . Mothers are the machinery that give zest to the whole man, and guide the destinies and lives of men upon the earth. . . .

Children have all confidence in their mothers; and if mothers would take proper pains, they can instill into the hearts of their children what they please. You will, no doubt, recollect reading in the Book of Mormon of two thousand young men who were brought up to believe that if they put their whole trust in God, and served him, no power would overcome them. You also recollect reading of them going out to fight, and so bold were they, and so mighty their faith, that it was impossible for their enemies to slay them. This power and faith they obtained through the teachings of their mothers. (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], 199-201.)

One thing is very true and we believe it, and that is that a woman is the glory of the man; but she was not made to be worshiped by him. As the scriptures say, Man is not without the woman, neither is woman without the man in the Lord. Yet woman was not made to be worshiped any more than man was. Woman has her influence, and she should use that in training her children in the way they should go; if she fails to do this she assumes fearful responsibilities. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 14:106.)

It is the mothers, after all, that rule the nations of the earth. They form, dictate, and direct the minds of statesmen, and the feelings, course, life, notions, and sentiments of the great and the small, of kings, rulers, governors, and of the people in general. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 9:38.)

Mothers, Love of

See also Motherhood; Motherhood, Nobility of;

Mothers, Influence of; Mothers, Responsibilities of

BALLARD, MELVIN J.

I grant you that there are many who approach the great responsibility of motherhood with fear and timidity, because of its dangers to the physical life of the mother, because of its pain, its sorrow and its distress; but in the very nature of things, if God should lighten the burdens, the sorrow, and the pain of child-bearing, he would endanger the enduring love of the mother for her children. There is nothing worthwhile we obtain unless we pay the price for it. That which is given to us freely, we consider of little value, and so, because a mother goes into the valley of death, lays her life upon the altar to bring life into the world, and because through the rearing of the children who come to her, she spends many sleepless nights, denies herself the personal pleasures of life, devotes herself with patience and care and strength almost more than she has, to the welfare of her children—this is what makes her love them. For where her treasure is, there her heart is, and the greatest treasure a woman has she gives in her service, her life itself. (Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin J. Ballard, comp. Bryant S. Hinckley [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1949], 203-4.)

CLARK, J. REUBEN, JR.

The truest, the holiest thing we know in our whole mortal existence is the mother's love; and its depth, its wisdom, its sympathy, its forgiveness, its hope, its belief, its compassion and faith, are the nearest the divine that we can know here.

For the great hazard our mothers took when we came, for their care when we were sick, for their watchfulness when we were well, for their hope and for their faith in us, for their prayers and entreaties in our behalf, we are grateful beyond measure. For their patience with and forgiveness for our follies, mayhap our sins, always beyond our merits, we give thanks.

Without the influence of their counsel, the inspiration of their example, we should be weak and frail indeed. (Relief Society Magazine, May 1942, 293.)

CRITCHLOW, WILLIAM J., JR.

God, choosing woman to be his partner in the creative process, tucked away somewhere in her bosom a spark of his divine love, which later, at the time of motherhood, glows to brilliancy in every mother's heart. (Conference Report, Oct. 1965, 38.)

GRANT, HEBER J.

There seems to be a power which the mother possesses in shaping the life of the child that is far superior. . . . A mother's love seems to be the most perfect and most sincere, the strongest of any love we know anything about. I, for one, rejoice in it because of its wonderful example to me. (Gospel Standards, comp. G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1941], 152, 154.)

HARRISON, BEPPIE

One of the truths about motherhood we all discover is that we can positively dislike our children when we are jolted out of sleep to go tend to them, and another is that once we get to their bedside we can be bowled over by the surge of love we feel for the small, soft, hopelessly dependent human beings nuzzling against our warm and sleepy bodies. In those moments we learn the lesson the Lord means us to learn about love and service: the deeper the space we hollow out by unselfish service to others, the greater the area available to be filled with the love that is our mortal link with divinity. (Needles in the Basket [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 50-51.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

In contrast, there are other women, who, denied the power to bear children, adopt some as their own, rear them with an ability characteristic of and inherent in true womanhood, and fill the lives of their darlings with a love that only the yearning soul of such a mother can know. Such are true mothers, indeed, though part of the experience of motherhood be denied them! (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], 453.)

Motherhood is just another name for sacrifice. From the moment the wee, helpless babe is laid on the pillow beside her, mother daily, even hourly, gives of her life to her loved one. It has been aptly said that babes draw strength at first from her bosom but always from her heart. All through the years of babyhood, childhood, and youth, aye, even after her girls themselves become mothers and her sons, fathers, she tenderly and lovingly sacrifices for them her time, her comfort, her pleasures, her needed rest and recreation, and if necessary, health and life itself! No language can express the power and beauty and heroism of a mother's love.

The sweetness as well as the greatness of motherhood lies in the overcoming of self-love by mother for her children. She is ever giving something of her life to make another happier—a Christlike virtue that makes motherhood sublime. (Improvement Era, May 1962, 309.)

The greatest thing about mothers . . . is not that they go down into the valley of the shadow of death to bring new life into the world, but that they dedicate their entire lives to the welfare of their children. Mother love, mother guidance and teaching are the greatest civilizing influences in the world. (Improvement Era, July 1965, 623.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

Wounds should never be left open to fester—they should be bound up and cared for until they are healed. Perhaps the most perfect ideal in the art of healing is the mother whose tender and gracious love asserts itself in taking away the sting of a deserved or undeserved punishment. How her love heals every wound! How quick her caresses bind up and soothe! The example of her life is the wisdom which love teaches. (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 264.)

The true mother, the mother who has the fear of God and the love of truth in her soul, would never hide from danger or evil and leave her child exposed to it. But as natural as it is to breathe the breath of life, if there were danger coming to her child, she would step between the child and that danger. . . . Her life would be nothing in the balance, in comparison with the life of her child. That is the love of true motherhood for children. (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 315.)

Only a little boy, . . . whenever temptations became most alluring and most tempting to me, the first thought that arose in my soul was this: Remember the love of your mother . . . and what she taught you. . . . This feeling toward my mother became a defense, a barrier between me and temptation, so that I could turn aside from temptation and sin by the help of the Lord and the love begotten in my soul, toward her whom I knew loved me more than anybody else in all the world, and more than any other living being could love me. (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 315.)

I have learned to place a high estimate upon the love of mother.

I have often said, and will repeat it, that the love of a true mother comes nearer being like the love of God than any other kind of love.

The father may love his children, too; and next to the love that the mother feels for her child, unquestionably and rightfully, too, comes the love that the father feels for his child.

But, the love of the father is of a different character, or degree, to the love of the mother for her child, illustrated by the fact of working with his boy, having him in his presence, becoming more intimate with him, learning his characteristics more clearly; becoming more familiar and more closely related to him; the result of which is that his love for him is increased, and the love of the boy is increased for his father, for the same reason, merely because of that closer association.

So the child learns to love his mother best, as a rule, when the mother is good, wise, prudent, and intelligent, because the child is with her more, they are more familiar with each other and understand each other better. (Instructor, Apr. 1944, 172.)

Mothers, Responsibilities of

See also Children, Teaching and Nurturing;

Motherhood; Mothers, Influence of; Parenting

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

There is no satisfactory substitute for mother, and no one can take care of her children as she can. No so-called social obligations, social enticements, or outside interests should impel any mother to neglect the sacred charge that is hers of caring for her own flesh and blood. I feel confident that while civic and social activities may be rewarding, a mother will serve her community and her nation best if she first devotes herself to the needs of her own children. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], 518.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Motherhood is a holy calling, a sacred dedication for carrying out the Lord's work, a consecration and devotion to the rearing and fostering and the nurturing of body, mind, and spirit of those who kept their first estate and who came to this earth for their second estate to learn and be tested and to work toward godhood. The role of mother, then, is to help those children keep their second estate, so that they might have glory added upon their heads forever and ever. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 84.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

No matter what they may be without, are your homes pure within? Are morning prayers offered there regularly? Or do the things of this world take you away from your home and make you deprive yourself of morning prayers with the children? Woe to that home where the mother abandons her holy mission or neglects the divine instruction, influence, and example—while she bows, a devotee, at the shrine of social pleasure; or neglects the essential duties in her own household, in her enthusiasm to promote public reform. (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], 481.)

MCKAY, EMMA RAY

There are many qualifications that a woman should have to be a good wife and mother, but the most important is patience. (Motherhood: A Partnership with God, comp. Harold Lundstrom [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1956], 56.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

In the home the mother is the principal disciplinarian in early child life, and her influence and discipline determine in a great measure the ability of her children to assume in manhood and womanhood the larger governments in church and state. (Juvenile Instructor, 38:371.)

TAYLOR, JOHN

Mothers, you ought to cultivate in your hearts the spirit of peace; you ought to be like angels of God, full of every virtue. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 22:315-16.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

The duty of the mother is to watch over her children and give them their early education, for impressions received in infancy are lasting. You know, yourselves, by experience, that the impressions you have received in the dawn of your mortal existence, bear, to this day, with the greatest weight upon your mind. . . .

These duties and responsibilities devolve upon mothers far more than upon fathers, for you know the latter . . . are frequently away from home, sometimes for several days together, attending to labors which compel them to be absent from home. But the mother is at home with the children continually; and if they are taught lessons of usefulness it depends upon her. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 14:105-6.)

Mothers, remember that when your husbands are engaged in the service of the Church, and are all the time occupied in the duties of the priesthood, so that they have not time to instruct their children, the duties devolve upon you. Then bring your children up in the ways of truth, and be to them both a father and mother until they are old enough to perform duties by the side, and under the immediate eye of their father. I like to see mothers bring their children to meeting, as soon as they can be brought without injuring them, and when they can tell what they want, and call for water when they are faint. As soon as they are old enough to receive instruction, bring them here to be taught. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 2:21.)

Origin and Destiny of Women

See also Equality between Women and Men;

Woman, Worth of

HANKS, MARION D.

Every woman is special, a somebody of intrinsic worth who has been a somebody for a very long time, indeed forever. Every child of God, born of divine heritage in the spirit before this world was formed, enters mortal life already a special eternal person. Each has already proved herself in lengthy and demanding periods of trial, has chosen the right course and pursued it with faith and courage, and comes here with credentials earned in action elsewhere.

Every girl, every woman, is a somebody, apart and aside from anyone else, husband or family or otherwise. If she is privileged to enjoy fruitful family association in this world—happy marriage and motherhood and the challenge of children—then she is favored indeed, and through obedience to the laws of the Lord she qualifies for the eternal union and all the other choice blessings that are promised for every faithful child of God who desires them and is willing to receive them.

If the anticipated timetable for establishing a base for those blessings is delayed in this world, or if the base, once established, is disrupted, the promises still pertain: ". . . all that God hath" can be hers if she desires it and lives for it.

In a sense, the old couplet about sin is also true of exaltation: "The sins we do by two and two, We must pay for one by one."

Eternal life, life with God, life of divine quality, creative progressive life—exaltation—is a loving life shared with dear ones, but we must qualify for it one by one. The ultimate enjoyment of this level of life is the consequence of individual choice in accepting, through obedience to his commandments, the invitation of the Lord to be with him and our other loved ones everlastingly.

The trail to earthly and eternal happiness always leads back to the individual and the way each uses her agency. The prophet Lehi taught that God's children are "free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life [through Christ], or to choose captivity and death. . . ." (2 Ne. 2:27.) (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 102-3.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

You women are daughters of God. You are precious. You are made in the image of our Heavenly Mother. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 25.)

Remember, in the world before we came here, faithful women were given certain assignments while faithful men were foreordained to certain priesthood tasks.

While we do not now remember the particulars, this does not alter the glorious reality of what we once agreed to. (Women's Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 15 Sept. 1979.)

MCCONKIE, BRUCE R.

Christ and Mary, Adam and Eve, Abraham and Sarah, and a host of mighty men and equally glorious women comprised that group of the "the noble and great ones," to whom the Lord Jesus said: "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell." (Abr. 3:22-24. Italics added.) This we know: Christ, under the Father, is the Creator; Michael, his companion and associate, presided over much of the creative work; and with them, as Abraham saw, were many of the noble and great ones. Can we do other than conclude that Mary and Eve and Sarah and myriads of our faithful sisters were numbered among them? Certainly these sisters labored as diligently then, and fought as valiantly in the war in heaven, as did the brethren, even as they in like manner stand firm today, in mortality, in the cause of truth and righteousness. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 59.)

Now what of Eve? Will she and the sisters play a part in this and other great events that lie ahead? The scriptures are silent on the point. We are left to formulate an answer that accords with the great and eternal principles that have been revealed. We know, to some extent, the part she played—at Adam's side—in the past. We cannot believe that she is other than by his side now, or that she will depart therefrom in future days.

In our hymnbook we have the song "Sons of Michael, He Approaches," in which we raise our voices in glad acclaim to Adam and sing of what he will do at Adam-ondi-Ahman. One of the verses is a paean of praise to Eve.

Mother of our generations,

Glorious by great Michael's side,

Take thy children's adoration;

Endless with thy Lord preside;

Lo, lo, to greet thee now advance,

Thousands in the glorious dance!

This of course, assumes that she and other faithful women will continue to stand and serve at the sides of their husbands in the glorious events ahead.

Speaking of the eternal state of exaltation and of those who then live in the married state, the Lord says: "Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them." (D&C 132:20. Italics added.)

What shall we say, then, of Eve—as an individual and as a generic name for all women who believe and obey as she did? Would we go far astray if we came up with such conclusions as the following?

Eve—a daughter of God, one of the spirit offspring of the Almighty Elohim—was among the noble and great in preexistence. She ranked in spiritual stature, in faith and devotion, in conformity to eternal law with Michael, who participated in the creation of the earth and who led the hosts of heaven when Lucifer and his rebels were cast out.

As she was at Michael's side before the foundations of the earth, so she came with him into Eden. The two of them there performed for all men the inestimably great service called the fall of man. Thus, mortality, the begetting of children, the probations of this life, and the hope of eternal life and exaltation—all these become available to all of the children of the Father of us all.

After the fall, Eve continued to receive revelation, to see visions, to walk in the spirit. As Adam became the pattern for all his sons, so did Eve for all her daughters. And as they twain have gone on to exaltation and sit upon their thrones in glorious immortality, so may all, both male and female, who walk as they walked.

As there are no words to extol the greatness of the Ancient of Days unto whom thousands of thousands shall minister and before whom "ten thousand times ten thousand" shall stand in a day of judgment, so there is no language that can do credit to our glorious mother Eve.

Let God be praised for the glorious plan of creation, redemption, and exaltation. And let Adam and Eve be praised for the infinitely great part they have played in the eternal plan of the Eternal One. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 66-68.)

SMITH, JOSEPH FIELDING

For us to envision what is meant by being mothers in Israel, we must have in mind our own position as the spirit children of God the Eternal Father.

. . . The plan of salvation and exaltation which we know as the gospel of Jesus Christ was given to us by the Eternal Father so that we might create for ourselves eternal family units which are patterned after his family. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1970, 884.)

TALMAGE, JAMES E.

When the frailties and imperfections of mortality are left behind, in the glorified state of the blessed hereafter, husband and wife will administer in their respective stations, seeing and understanding alike, and co-operating to the full in the government of their family kingdom. Then shall woman be recompensed in rich measure for all the injustice that womanhood has endured in mortality. Then shall woman reign by Divine right, a queen in the resplendent realm of her glorified state, even as exalted man shall stand, priest and king unto the Most High God. Mortal eye cannot see nor mind comprehend the beauty, glory, and majesty of a righteous woman made perfect in the celestial kingdom of God. (Young Woman's Journal, Oct. 1914, 602-3.)

TAYLOR, JOHN

Lady, whence comest thou? Thine origin? What art thou doing here? Whither art thou going, and what is thy destiny? Declare unto me if thou hast understanding? Knowest thou not, that thou art a spark of Deity, struck from the fire of his eternal blaze, and brought forth in the midst of eternal burnings?

Knowest thou not that eternities ago, thy spirit, pure and holy, dwelt in thy heavenly Father's bosom, and in his presence, with thy mother, one of the queens of heaven, thou wert surrounded by thy brother and sister spirits in the spirit world, among the Gods? That as thy spirit beheld the scenes transpiring there, and thou grew in intelligence, thou sawest worlds upon worlds organized and peopled with thy kindred spirits, take upon them tabernacles, die, be resurrected and receive their exaltation on the redeemed worlds they once dwelt upon. Thou, being willing and anxious to imitate them, waiting and desirous to obtain a body, a resurrection and exaltation also, and having obtained permission . . .

Now crowns, thrones, exaltations and dominions are in reserve for thee in the eternal worlds, and the way is opened for thee to return back into the presence of the heavenly Father, if thou wilt only abide by, and walk in a celestial law, fulfil the designs of thy creation, and hold out to the end. That when mortality is laid in the tomb, you may go down to your grave in peace, arise in glory, and receive your everlasting reward in the resurrection of the just, along with thy head and husband. Thou wilt be permitted to pass by the Gods and angels who guard the gates, and onward, upward to thy exaltation in a celestial world among the Gods, to be a priestess—queen unto thy heavenly Father, and a glory to thy husband and offspring, to bear the souls of men, to people other worlds, (as thou didst bear tabernacles in mortality) while eternity goes and eternity comes; and if you wilt receive it, lady, this is eternal life. And herein is the saying of the Apostle Paul fulfilled, "that the man is not without the woman in the Lord, neither is the woman without the man in the Lord," that "man is the head of the woman" and the glory of the man is the woman. Hence thy origin, the object of thy creation, and thy ultimate destiny, if faithful. Lady, the cup is within thy reach, drink then the heavenly draught and live. (Relief Society Magazine, Nov. 1921, 633, 634-35.)

TURNER, RODNEY

Woman is co-eternal in her being with that Father who gave her organized existence as one of his daughters. (Woman and the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 279.)

Parenting

See also Children, Teaching and Nurturing;

Motherhood; Mothers, Influence of; Mothers,

Responsibilities of

EDWARDS, JAROLDEEN

I wish I had known from the first moment of parenting what my father-in-law taught me. "Let `yes' be your natural response rather than `no,'" he counseled. I would like to have learned earlier to want to serve more as my children's "facilitator" and less as their "controller." (Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner . . .: Personal Discoveries of a Mother of Twelve [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 48.)

If we wish away the moments, they will be gone. The things we have wanted to leave—the mess, the noise, the obligations—will be gone, but so will the children! This is true of every moment of life. If we do not see its joys, if we do not make the most of it, it will pass—and so will its opportunities.(Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner . . .: Personal Discoveries of a Mother of Twelve [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 65.)

HARRISON, BEPPIE

It can be a surprise to discover that there are things about our children we can't change. They arrive, as we did, with individual temperaments that might mesh and blend with our own or might not. With our husbands, we're dealing with adults: we can fight fair. Our children are so young and so vulnerable, and what we say to them about themselves forms such a large part of what they think about themselves. What we have to learn with them is forbearance and self-control. (Needles in the Basket [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 51.)

There has been an enormous amount of nonsense talked about the relative merits of quantity and quality time—quantity time presumably being those hours when we just inhabit the same house, and quality time being when we actually pay attention to each other. Maybe what we need to consider is that we as mothers are the ones who need the quality time the most. We need those times when we can savor the sweetness of our children to sustain us through the rest of the times when the workload seems overwhelming and the end of the tunnel infinitely far. (Needles in the Basket [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 60.)

Sometimes weaknesses challenge weaknesses. Maybe the child who needs patience most has the trick of exasperating you almost past endurance. Maybe the child with a flaring temper that needs control repeatedly kindles your own temper. . . . Whether you are at peace or at loggerheads, the two of you are joined together. This is the child your Heavenly Father has sent to you, and one way or another, the two of you have to cope with each other. Hard as it may be sometimes to figure out, there is a reason the two of you were given to each other. You have lessons to teach each other, and once you've weathered the process, you will each be more of what your Heavenly Father knows you are capable of being. (Needles in the Basket [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 51-52.)

As we adjust our expectations closer to reality, we find that even if the ultimate reward of raising a child we are proud to lead back to our Heavenly Father still shimmers in the distance, we can relax more and enjoy what's happening now. We might still leave a lot to be desired when it comes to perfection, and so may the kids, but when we take it easy and don't tie ourselves into knots about it, there are still golden moments, and hours, and even long happy days when practically everything goes right and everyone charitably overlooks the rumples that don't. (Needles in the Basket [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 58.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

No mother would carelessly send her little children forth to school on a wintry morning without warm clothes to protect against the snow and rain and cold. But there are numerous fathers and mothers who send their children to school without the protective covering available to them through prayer—a protection against exposure to unknown hazards, evil people, and base temptations. (Faith Precedes the Miracle [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 207.)

MCKAY, EMMA RAY

The art of rearing children peacefully and pleasantly is the art of becoming a child again, of growing up with them. (Motherhood: A Partnership with God, comp. Harold Lundstrom [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1956], 66.)

NULL, KATHLEEN "CASEY"

Children teach us that sometimes it's much, much wiser to keep our meaning simple. As adults we often get bogged down in meanings, analysis, logic, and work. We become weighed down with our heavy minds. We ruminate the past and anxiously plan for the future. Children teach us to slow down, to appreciate dandelion seeds that can be blown all over a lawn in one puff, sow bugs, simplicity, and play—all the things that can be appreciated only in the present, which is the only place we can live anyway. (Elaine Cannon's As a Woman Thinketh, ed. Elaine Cannon [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990], 115.)

We watch our children struggle with the same lessons of life that we once struggled with, and we learn to have faith that we will get through our current struggles too. (Elaine Cannon's As a Woman Thinketh, ed. Elaine Cannon [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990], 116.)

Our children, at least until they become teenagers, grant us godlike qualities and abilities. And so we turn to the Creator, knowing where those qualities and abilities truly are to be found. (Elaine Cannon's As a Woman Thinketh, ed. Elaine Cannon [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990], 116.)

PENROSE, CHARLES W.

It is the privilege of every mother to have the spirit of the Lord to direct her in the course she shall take with her children. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 21:45-46.)

SNOW, ERASTUS

Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, ye mothers in Israel, and fast, and hunger and thirst after righteousness. Pray for and with your little children in your apartments. . . . Every mother should . . . with [her] own offspring . . . call down the blessings of heaven upon them, and they will learn from her. While they listen to her prayers, they will learn to lisp from her mouth the words of prayer and thanksgiving to God; and faith will rest upon them, and the Holy Ghost will rest upon them, and they will be inspired with faith and power, and draw down blessings upon her and upon their father; and the blessings of God will rest upon them. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 5:292.)

Partnership between Women and Men

See also Equality between Women and Men;

Marriage Relationship

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

In the beginning, God placed a woman in a companion role with the priesthood. The Gods counseled and said that "it was not good that the man should be alone; wherefore, I will make an help meet for him." (Moses 3:18.) Why was it not good for man to be alone? If it were only man's loneliness with which God was concerned, he might have provided other companionship. But he provided woman, for she was to be man's helpmeet. She was to act in partnership with him.

In this pronouncement that it was not good for man to be alone, God declared a fundamental truth. The Lord gave woman a different personality and temperament than man. By nature woman is charitable and benevolent, man is striving and competitive. Man is at his best when complemented by a good woman's natural influence. She tempers the home and marriage relationship with her compassionate and loving influence.

Yes, it is not good for man to be alone because a righteous woman complements what may be lacking in a man's natural personality and disposition. Nowhere is this complementary association more ideally portrayed than in the eternal marriage of our first parents, Adam and Eve.

(Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 69.)

HUNTER, HOWARD W.

As our Lord and Savior needed the women of his time for a comforting hand, a listening ear, a believing heart, a kind look, an encouraging word, loyalty—even in his hour of humiliation, agony, and death—so we, his servants all across the Church, need you, the women of the Church, to stand with us and for us in stemming the tide of evil that threatens to engulf us. Together we must stand faithful and firm in the faith against superior numbers of other-minded people. . . .

It seems to me that there is a great need to rally the women of the Church to stand with and for the Brethren in stemming the tide of evil that surrounds us and in moving forward the work of our Savior. . . . Obedient to him we are a majority. But only together can we accomplish the work he has given us to do and be prepared for the day when we shall see him. (To Rejoice as Women: Talks from the 1994 Women's Conference, ed. Susette Fletcher Green and Dawn Hall Anderson [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1995], 104-5.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Within those great assurances, however, our roles and assignments differ. These are eternal differences, with women being given many tremendous responsibilities of motherhood and sisterhood and the men the tremendous responsibilities of fatherhood and the priesthood—but the man is not without the woman nor the woman without the man in the Lord. (1 Cor. 11:11.) Both a righteous man and a righteous woman are a blessing to all those whom their lives touch. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 37.)

LEE, HAROLD B.

A wife in a home, a woman, is expected to be . . . an intelligent and inspired participant in the family partnership. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1946, 814.)

SMITH, IDA

The important thing for a woman to learn in this life is her eternal role so that when she is sealed, she will be prepared and ready—with all her heart—to function in and glorify that role. That means being ready and prepared to function as a full partner in a celestial team—without having to look up for help and direction or look down because of any feeling of superiority, but being able to look across into the eyes of an equally prepared, equally magnificent eternal mate. (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 45.)

SMITH, JOSEPH FIELDING

The Lord said he would give the man a companion who would be a help meet for him: that is, a help who would answer all the requirements, not only of companionship, but also through whom the fullness of the purposes of the Lord could be accomplished regarding the mission of man through mortal life and into eternity. (Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56], 2:70.)

In order to fulfill the purposes of our Eternal Father, there must be a union, husbands and wives receiving the blessings that are promised to those who are faithful and true that will exalt them to Godhood. A man cannot receive the fulness of the blessings of the kingdom of God alone, nor can the woman, but the two together can receive all the blessings and privileges that pertain to the fulness of the Father's kingdom. The women will become queens, priestesses, in the eternal order that the Lord has given for the fulness of his kingdom. (Take Heed to Yourselves [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971], 258.)

TURNER, RODNEY

The woman who fills the measure of her creation is as approved, successful and happy as any man can hope to be. Woman is spirit of man's spirit and bone of his bone. To the extent that she shares a common origin and divinity with him, she is one with him. (Woman and the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 279.)

Woman's primary role is in the home just as man's is in the fields—the world. Each has proper labors to perform and a proper place in which to perform them. If women do the work of men and men do the work of women the result is confusion, strife, insecurity and a loss of basic identities. . . .

A woman should no more covet the duties of her husband than he should covet the office and calling of his appointed leaders. It is for each to do his or her part as that part is designated by the Lord. (Woman and the Priesthood [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 285, 287.)

WIDTSOE, JOHN A.

Certainly, woman shall walk by the side of the man, for they two together shall solve the problems of eternity; they shall carry forward, endlessly, the purposes of the Almighty Father. (Relief Society Magazine, June-July 1943, 375.)

Patriarchal Order

See also Marriage Relationship

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

The father is the head of every home, and even though the mother may be just as brilliant or more so, the father has been set apart by the Lord to look after his family. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 344.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

There is no higher authority in matters relating to the family organization, and especially when that organization is presided over by one holding the higher Priesthood, than that of the father. The authority is time honored, and among the people of God in all dispensations it has been highly respected and often emphasized by the teachings of the prophets who were inspired of God. The patriarchal order is of divine origin and will continue throughout time and eternity. . . .

In the home the presiding authority is always vested in the father, and in all home affairs and family matters there is no other authority paramount. . . . The father presides at the table, at prayer, and gives general directions relating to his family life to whoever may be present. Wives and children should be taught to feel that the patriarchal order in the kingdom of God has been established for a wise and beneficent purpose, and should sustain the head of the household and encourage him in the discharge of his duties, and do all in their power to aid him in the exercise of the rights and privileges which God has bestowed upon the head of the home. This patriarchal order has its divine spirit and purpose, and those who disregard it under one pretext or another are out of harmony with the spirit of God's laws as they are ordained for recognition in the home. It is not merely a question of who is perhaps the best qualified. Neither is it wholly a question of who is living the most worthy life. It is a question largely of law and order, and its importance is seen often from the fact that the authority remains and is respected long after a man is really unworthy to exercise it.

This authority carries with it a responsibility and a grave one, as well as its rights and privileges, and men can not be too exemplary in their lives, nor fit themselves too carefully to live in harmony with this important God-ordained rule of conduct in the family organization. Upon this authority certain promises and blessings are predicated, and those who observe and respect this authority have certain claims on divine favor which they cannot have except they respect and observe the laws that God has established for the regulation and authority of the home. (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 286-88.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

The female sex have been deceived so long, and been trodden under foot of man so long, that a spirit has come upon them, and they want a place, and a name, and a head; for the man is the head of the woman, to lead her into the celestial kingdom of our Father and God. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 11:271.)

It is not my general practice to counsel the sisters to disobey their husbands. . . . But I never counselled a woman to follow her husband to the Devil. (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], 200-201.)

Priesthood and Women

See also Differences between Women and Men; Equality between Women and Men

BEECHER, MAUREEN URSENBACH

Elder Bruce R. McConkie clarified in a 1950 commentary what that key meant and how it would function in the twentieth-century Church. "By turning the key," he wrote, "the Prophet delegated to the duly appointed officers of the new organization a portion of the keys of the kingdom. Under the Priesthood they were now authorized to direct, control, and govern the affairs of the society. They thus became legal administrators holding the keys of presidency. Under this appointment their lawful acts would be recognized by the Lord and he would work with them in the rolling forth of the kingdom in the sphere assigned them."

What becomes apparent in reflection is how perfectly the inclusion of women within the structure of Church organization reflected the divine pattern of the perfect union of man and woman as seen in temple ordinances. It seems not mere coincidence that the initial impetus for their organization came from the women's desire to assist in the building of the temple. Their craving for the "knowledge and intelligence" promised them by the Prophet would connect them continually with that holy house. That principle of union, of "neither . . . the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Cor. 11:11), would become increasingly clear to the sisters of the Nauvoo Relief Society when the temple ordinances were extended to women in 1843. In a meeting prior to that time, Newel K. Whitney, himself recently endowed, clarified for the sisters their importance in the eternal plan: "In the beginning," he explained, "God created man male and female and bestow'd upon man certain blessings peculiar to a man of God, of which woman partook, so that without the female all things cannot be restor'd to the earth—it takes all to restore the Priesthood." With the organization of the Relief Society, the Lord had moved women, proven worthy by their faith and obedience, towards that final restoration. Inside the holy temple, as they ministered one to another, they would confirm their righteous receipt of the authority thus restored. On 20 September 1843 Emma Smith became the first woman of this dispensation to receive her endowment; before the Saints left Nauvoo, nearly three thousand women would be so blessed. (Women Steadfast in Christ: Talks Selected from the 1991 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Marie Cornwall [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992], 58-59.)

CLARK, J. REUBEN, JR.

The Only Begotten had fashioned the world, had filled it with beautiful flowers and lofty forests, with grasses and grains, and multitudes of living creatures; Adam had had some part in this. But the key to the glorious arch of temporal, earthly creation for man was still missing. So Eve came to build, to organize, through the power of the Father, the bodies of mortal men, to be a creator of bodies under the faculties given her by the Priesthood of God, so that God's design and the Great Plan might meet fruition.

This was her calling; this was her blessing, bestowed by the Priesthood. This is the place of our wives and of our mothers in the Eternal Plan. They are not bearers of the Priesthood; they are not charged with carrying out the duties and functions of the Priesthood; nor are they laden with its responsibilities; they are builders and organizers under its power, and partakers of its blessings, possessing the complement of the Priesthood powers and possessing a function as divinely called, as eternally important in its place as the Priesthood itself.

Millenniums later, Paul, under the inspiration of God, was to declare:

"Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God" (1 Cor. 11:11-12). (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1946, 800-801.)

HOLLAND, PATRICIA T.

In the years ahead, some of the great defenders of priesthood roles for men will be women speaking to other women. A woman can speak to another woman in language men would not normally use and with a fervor men would not dare invoke. God has a view of women, who they are, what they do incomparably, and what eternally they will be. Women must seize that vision and embrace it, or they—and the human family with it—will perish. (To Rejoice as Women: Talks from the 1994 Women's Conference, ed. Susette Fletcher Green and Dawn Hall Anderson [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1995], 107.)

KAPP, ARDETH G.

There are some sisters who ponder the administrative structure of the Church and trouble themselves with what they think they don't have without ever coming to a full understanding of their own special and unique mission and the great blessings reserved specifically for them. We hear it expressed in terms that suggest that because women don't have the priesthood, they are shortchanged.

Still other sisters have the misunderstanding that priesthood is synonymous with men, and so they excuse themselves and have no concern for studying its importance in their own lives. The term priesthood is used without qualification, whether it refers to a bearer of the priesthood, to priesthood blessings, or to priesthood ordinances. Regardless of how it is used, our hearts should cry and we should raise our voices and shout warnings to sisters whose dreams are built on such faulty foundations.

Our greatest dreams will be fulfilled only as we come to understand fully and experience the blessings of the priesthood, the power of the priesthood, and the ordinances of the priesthood in our own lives. (My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 75.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

A wife does not hold the priesthood in connection with her husband, but she enjoys the benefits thereof with him; and if she is requested to lay hands on the sick with him, or with any other officer holding the Melchizedek priesthood, she may do so with perfect propriety. It is no uncommon thing for a man and wife unitedly to administer to their children. (Improvement Era, Feb. 1907, 308.)

SMITH, JOSEPH FIELDING

There is nothing in the teachings of the gospel which declares that men are superior to women. The Lord has given unto men the power of the priesthood and sent them forth to labor in his service. A woman's calling is in a different direction. The most noble, exalting calling of all is that which has been given to women as the mothers of men. Women do not hold the priesthood, but if they are faithful and true, they will become priestesses and queens in the kingdom of God, and that implies that they will be given authority. The women do not hold the priesthood with their husbands, but they do reap the benefits coming from that priesthood. (Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56], 3:178.)

TALMAGE, JAMES E.

In the restored Church of Jesus Christ, the Holy Priesthood is conferred, as an individual bestowal, upon men only, and this in accordance with divine requirement. It is not given to woman to exercise the authority of the priesthood independently; nevertheless, in the sacred endowments associated with the ordinances pertaining to the house of the Lord, woman shares with man the blessings of the priesthood. When the frailties and imperfections of mortality are left behind, in the glorified state of the blessed hereafter, husband and wife will administer in their respective stations, seeing and understanding alike, and cooperating to the full in the government of their family kingdom. Then shall woman be recompensed in rich measure for all the injustice that womanhood has endured in mortality. Then shall woman reign by divine right, a queen in the resplendent realm of her glorified state, even as exalted man shall stand, priest and king unto the most high God. Mortal eye cannot see nor mind comprehend the beauty, glory, and majesty of a righteous woman made perfect in the celestial kingdom of God. (Young Woman's Journal, Oct. 1914, 602-3.)

WIDTSOE, JOHN A.

The possession of the Priesthood and its consequent family leadership should make men very considerate of woman. The man who arrogantly feels that he is better than his wife because he holds the Priesthood, has failed utterly to comprehend the meaning and purpose of Priesthood. He needs to remember that the Lord loves His daughters quite as well as His sons. It is but a small and puny-souled man who could wish to humiliate women as a class and keep them as an inferior sex; for men can never rise superior to the women who bear and nurture them. (Read D&C 121:41-46.) (Priesthood and Church Government [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 89.)

The wise recognition of the functional differences between husband and wife appears in the use of the Priesthood. The family must have organization. The man with his larger freedom to move about, is by divine decree the head or presiding officer or spokesman of the family. To him is committed the Priesthood, of fundamental need in Gospel life. But the benefits and blessings of the Priesthood thus conferred are shared by the wife and, as needed, by every member of the family. Indeed, Priesthood is first for the family, then for others if the man be called into official service. There is no lack of equality there; it is a matter of organization. The possession of the Priesthood does not indicate in any sense that man is superior to woman, but that he has a specific calling in Church government of which woman is relieved. In the ordinances of the Priesthood man and woman share alike. The temple doors are open to every faithful member of the Church. And, it is to be noted that the highest blessings therein available are only conferred upon a man and a woman, husband and wife, jointly. Neither can receive them alone. In the Church of Christ, woman is not an adjunct to, but an equal partner with man. (Relief Society Magazine, June-July 1943, 373.)

Priorities of Women

See also Challenges to Modern Women

ASHTON, NORMA B.

President Stone of the Modesto California Stake told us that his wife felt she should always serve home-baked bread to him and their eight children. He loved the bread and so did the children, but one day he banned homemade bread from their table. He helped his wife realize that there were more important things at that time in her life than homemade bread. She needed more time for him and for herself. It was one thing that helped her be less tired.

Can you give away a bushel of peaches instead of canning them if your husband wants you to go on a date with him? Can you choose to take a class instead of sewing all your children's clothes and not feel guilty when your neighbor's children march into church in their home-sewn dresses? On some days can you throw the covers up quickly on the bed so you can hurry off to play tennis because you decide you need exercise more than a perfectly made bed? Can you use your agency in these seemingly insignificant ways without feeling weighed down with guilt? If so, you are living well today.

(Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 22.)

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

The establishment of a home is not only a privilege, but marriage and the bearing, rearing, and proper training of children is a duty of the highest order. (Conference Report, Oct. 1947, 23.)

BROWN, HUGH B.

Women should never allow their role as mother to overshadow their role as wife. They are both obligations divinely imposed and they should be inseparable. Neither husband nor wife can coast in on the attainments of the other; salvation is a joint undertaking, a family affair. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1965, 887.)

EDWARDS, JAROLDEEN

It is a good thing to bake bread, but for many women this simply is not the best or wisest use of their precious time. We cannot do everything, all the time, all at once. We can, through the years, do many things, at different times, one at a time. It is important to see choices as opportunities, not as frustrations. It is even more important to believe in our free agency and the opportunity and responsibility to make those choices. (Things I Wish I'd Known Sooner . . .: Personal Discoveries of a Mother of Twelve [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 19-20.)

JENSEN, KATHLEEN BUSHNELL

Another way to keep perspective is to remember that "to every thing there is a season." (Eccl. 3:1.) When I had several small children, I tended to look at women who were out doing things—taking institute classes, tole painting, skiing—and I would think, "How do they do it? I'm so unorganized." As I look back, my advice is be content where you are. If you have young children, enjoy them! I'm old enough to know that you don't have young children very long. Those moments are fleeting. Don't wish away your toddlers and bright-eyed preschoolers. They will never be yours at that age again. Don't rush your seasons. I feel the most off balance when I'm trying to run faster than I have strength, when I'm trying to keep up with people who are single or who maybe don't have as many children at home. Our needs are different. When you have small children, you don't need to have a totally spotless home. When I go into a home that is full of young children and yet is totally spotless, I think, "What do the kids do all day? Live outdoors?" Be realistic; let your kids have some fun. Let them make messes. Don't worry about what everyone might be thinking. And don't compare your home to anyone else's. (Women and Christ—Living the Abundant Life: Talks Selected from the 1992 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson, Susette Fletcher Green, and Marie Cornwall [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1993], 51-52.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

The average woman today would do well to appraise her interests, evaluate the activities in which she is engaged, and then take steps to simplify her life, putting things of first importance first, placing emphasis where the rewards will be greatest and most enduring, and ridding herself of the less rewarding activities. The endless enticements and demands of life today require that we determine priorities in allocating our time and energies if we are to live happy, poised, productive lives. (A Woman's Reach [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], 23.)

God bless the women, the wonderful women of every time and age and place, who establish first in their lives their Lord, his work, and their families. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1958, 4.)

Wives, come home with all your interests, fidelity, yearnings, loyalties, and affections—working together to make your home a blessed heaven. Thus would you greatly please your Lord and Master and guarantee yourselves happiness supreme. (Faith Precedes the Miracle [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972], 148.)

I wish to say without equivocation that a woman will find no greater satisfaction and joy and peace and make no greater contribution to mankind than in being a wise and worthy woman and raising good children. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 327.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

I don't know that there is any objection to women entering the fields of literature, science, art, social economy, . . . and all kinds of learning, or participation in any and all things which contribute to the fullness of her womanhood and increase her upbuilding influence in the world; but I do know that there are three areas or realms in which women's influence should always be felt. No matter what changes take place, these three realms should be dominated always by the beauty, the virtue, and intelligence of womankind.

I should like to refer to those three: The first . . . is the realm of home building. Next to that is the realm of teaching, and the third, . . . the realm of compassionate service. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1958, 789.)

The greatest responsibility given to women is the divine gift to be a mother. (Conference Report, Oct. 1948, 119.)

POELMAN, ANNE OSBORN

When we contemplate all the various aspects of our personalities that must become developed on the long pathway to perfection and exaltation, it is all too easy to despair when confronted with seemingly unreachable ideals. Somehow we Mormon women often feel we need to cook like a Julia Child or Winnifred Jardine, have the intellect and wit of an Elaine Cannon, the leadership talents of a Barbara Smith, the deep, abiding spirituality of a Camilla Kimball. And, of course, this is in addition to keeping a daily journal, becoming scriptural scholars, writing our personal history, maintaining a garden that looks like something out of the Burpee seed catalog, completing our four-generation genealogical charts, rendering compassionate service, becoming involved in community activities, fulfilling Church callings, providing a nurturing home environment for our families, and so on. For many women in the Church it may also be in addition to acquiring an education, making a living, or both.

In fact, if we weren't so often on the verge of collapse from sheer fatigue we might have the perspective to chuckle at ourselves for our sometimes unrealistic expectations and the demands we place on our own shoulders. The tasks at hand and those that lie ahead are gargantuan only if we fail to see that ordering these very activities, putting them in proper perspective, is indeed part of our mortal learning process. (Joy [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1980], 44-45.)

SNOW, LORENZO

Proper recreation and amusement are good things, and I am glad to see you sisters indulging in a little rest and recreation, for you who work so hard day after day in your homes and in the Relief Society certainly deserve all the enjoyment you can get. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 141.)

SPAFFORD, BELLE S.

The average woman today would do well to appraise her interests, evaluate the activities in which she is engaged, and then take steps to simplify her life, putting things of first importance first, placing emphasis where the rewards will be greatest and most enduring, and ridding herself of the less rewarding activities. The endless enticements and demands of life today require that we determine priorities in allocating our time and energies if we are to live happy, poised, productive lives. (A Woman's Reach [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], 23.)

TALMAGE, JAMES E.

By inattention to household duties, the little touches that make or mar the family peace, many a woman has reduced her home to a comfortless house; and many another has eliminated the essential elements of home by her self-assumed and persistent drudgery, in which she denies to her dear ones the cheer of her loving companionship. One-sided service, however devoted, may become neglect. There is a time for labor inside the home as in the open; in every family time should be found for cultivating that better part, that one thing needful—true, spiritual development. (Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1945], 433-34.)

WIDTSOE, JOHN A.

If she [woman] accepts gladly the glorious gift of motherhood, she may use whatever time and strength remain in the exercise of her talents.

. . . The privilege of self-expression belongs to her. . . . She may enter industry, education, the professions—every worthwhile pursuit with the good will of all. . . .

Divinely commissioned, in her keeping are the choice spirits who have come to earth to win an earthly body. . . . In her hands lies the future of the race. (Relief Society Magazine, June-July 1943, 372-75.)

Relief Society

BROWN, HUGH B.

We call upon the Relief Society . . . to continue to build bridges which unite individual hearts, unite people, groups, and nations and thereby help to establish universal peace. . . . There never was a time when conviction and dedication were more needed than now. (Relief Society Magazine, Dec. 1961, 817.)

CLARK, J. REUBEN, JR.

In all that relates to the infinities of kindly attention and sympathy, in all that relates even remotely to the love and ritual of motherhood, the Women's Relief Society carries the burden. . . . They encourage the heavily burdened and despondent, they hold up the hands of the faint-hearted, they sweep despair out of the hearts of the distressed, they plant hope and faith and righteousness in every household. (Relief Society Magazine, Aug. 1939, 526.)

PETERSEN, MARK E.

To nurture this feminine factor in spirituality, a woman needs a woman's spiritual contact just as a man for his masculine type of faith, needs the power of the Priesthood quorum. Women need to unite with other women in the development of their own spiritual natures. They need to unite with other women of like faith and spirituality to obtain the added strength to take their place as the center of faith and devotion among their children. Knowing this, the Lord provided a special women's organization for his faithful daughters. It was established by the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1961, 7.)

ROBINSON, LOUISE YATES

Although our records are well kept, there is no human power which can give account of the deeds of loving kindness performed by our Relief Society members. (Relief Society Magazine, Mar. 1931, 143.)

SILVER, CHERRY B.

As members of this worldwide organization called Relief Society, our mission is clear. In all our diversity we combine our strengths to bless each other and to do the work of the Lord. (Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 18-19.)

SMITH, JOSEPH

[The primary objective of the Relief Society] is the relief of the poor, the destitute, the widow and the orphan, and for the exercise of all benevolent purposes. . . . They will pour in oil and wine to the wounded heart of the distressed; they will dry up the tears of the orphan and make the widow's heart to rejoice. (History of the Church, 7 vols., 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1967], 4:567.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

A word or two in relation to the Relief Society. This is an organization that was established by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is, therefore, the oldest auxiliary organization of the Church and it is of the first importance. It has not only to deal with the necessities of the poor, the sick and the needy, but a part of its duty—and the larger part, too—is to look after the spiritual welfare and salvation of the mothers and daughters of Zion; to see that none is neglected, but that all are guarded against misfortune, calamity, the powers of darkness, and the evils that threaten them in the world. It is the duty of the Relief Societies to look after the spiritual welfare of themselves and of all the female members of the Church. It is their duty to collect means from those who have in abundance, and distribute it wisely unto those in need. . . .

I would like to say that it is expected of the Relief Society, especially the general authorities of that great organization, that they will have a watchcare over all the organizations among the women of Zion. They stand at the head of all such; they ought to stand at the head, and they should magnify their calling, and see to it that error is not permitted to creep in, that cabals are not formed, that secret combinations may not get a foothold to mislead the sisters. They should see to it that the other organizations of women in the Church correspond and are in harmony with their organization. Why should this be? In order that the women of Zion may be united, that their interests may be in common, and not conflicting or segregated, and that the purpose of this organization may be realized and the organization itself be effective for good in every part of the Church throughout the world, wherever the Gospel is preached. (Conference Report, Apr. 1906, 3-4.)

I expect to see the day when this organization will be one of the most perfect, most efficient and effective organizations for good in the Church but that day will be when we shall have women who are not only imbued with the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and with the testimony of Christ in their hearts, but also with youth, vigor, and intelligence to enable them to discharge the great duties and responsibilities that rest upon them. . . . We want the young women, the intelligent women, women of faith, of courage, and of purity to be associated with the Relief Societies of the various stakes and wards of Zion. We want them to take hold of this work with vigor, with intelligence and unitedly, for the building up of Zion and the instruction of women in their duties—domestic duties, public duties, and every duty that may devolve upon them. (Conference Report, Apr. 1907, 6.)

SNOW, LORENZO

The Relief Society has been and is one of the most valuable adjuncts to the priesthood. It is in very deed a "help in government." And no wise bishop will fail to appreciate the labors of the Relief Society in his ward. What could a bishop do without a Relief Society? I would say to all the bishops in the Church, encourage the sisters of the Relief Society, and support them in their work of charity and benevolence, and they will prove a blessing to you and to the people. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 142.)

The future of the Society is full of promise. As the Church grows, its field of usefulness will be correspondingly enlarged, and it will be even more potent for good than it has been in the past. If all the sisters will rally to the support of the Society, it will accomplish a mighty work and be a continued blessing unto the Church. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 142.)

The mission of the Relief Society is to succor the distressed, to minister to the sick and feeble, to feed the poor, to clothe the naked, and to bless all the sons and daughters of God. No institution was ever founded with a nobler aim. Its basis is true charity, which is the pure love of Christ, and that spirit has been manifested in all the ministrations of the Society among the people. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 142.)

It might be thought by some that the labors connected with membership in the Relief Society would cause those sisters who belong to it to neglect their household duties. But this is not so. I will venture to say that the best wives and mothers and the most efficient housekeepers among us are members of the Relief Society, and I would advise the brethren to encourage their wives to join the society, where they can do so; for it would be a good thing to have the influence of this organization in every home. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 143.)

The Apostle James said that "pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." Accepting that as true, the members of the Relief Society have most surely exemplified in their lives pure and undefiled religion; for they have ministered to those in affliction, they have thrown their arms of love around the fatherless and the widows, and they have kept themselves unspotted from the world. I can testify that there are no purer and more God-fearing women in the world than are to be found within the ranks of the Relief Society. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 143.)

I feel to say, God bless the officers and members of the Relief Society. You are performing a grand mission, and I would exhort you to not weary in well-doing. We are all aiming for celestial glory, and the grandeur of the prospects before us cannot be expressed in human language. If you will continue faithful to the work in which you are engaged, you will attain unto this glory, and rejoice evermore in the presence of God and the Lamb. This is worth striving for; it is worth sacrificing for, and blessed is the man or the woman who is faithful unto the obtaining of it. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, ed. Clyde J. Williams [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], 143.)

SPAFFORD, BELLE S.

Grateful indeed we should be to live in a period of time when the gospel is upon the earth to show us the way. Favored are we to mingle with sisters who believe as we believe, who share experiences and who are comforted and sustained by the Spirit of the Lord and by the wisdom and love of one another. (A Woman's Reach [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], 121.)

YOUNG, LEVI EDGAR

The members of the Relief Society of the Church go among the people who suffer in their feelings; who need the blessings of human helpfulness; who crave for some loving word in time of death; who hunger for some blessing in days of sorrow. They are messengers of happiness to the oppressed and the needy. They love mercy. They show mercy. It is their action of love and charity that brings the most subtle and tingling sense of happiness that can be felt by any human being. It is a conduct of life built up by faith and a feeling of joy which comes from service to mankind. (Relief Society Magazine, Mar. 1942, 157.)

Single Women

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

Not all women in the Church will have an opportunity for marriage and motherhood in mortality. But if you in this situation are worthy and endure faithfully, you can be assured of all blessings from a kind and loving Heavenly Father—and I emphasize all blessings. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], 550.)

CAHOON, MARION JANE

As a single person, I've never been particularly depressed that my garden hasn't yielded a bridal bouquet yet. Instead of focusing on the flowers that aren't there, I've chosen to truly savor the flowers that have bloomed. The Lord has blessed me with a rich variety of challenges, people, and opportunities. I have a life like my mother's English country garden—full of drifts and banks and spots of variety, full of spiritual harvest, and some stubborn weeds that keep me on my knees. (A Singular Life: Perspectives on Being Single by Sixteen Latter-day Saint Women, ed. Carol L. Clark and Blythe Darlyn Thatcher [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987], 74.)

CLARK, CAROL L.

Sometimes being single is like having emotional hiccups. It's uncomfortable and a little embarrassing. I feel these hiccups coming on whenever I don't have anyone to invite to an important social function or when the women at work discuss their children or when I am left off party lists because I don't have a marriage partner. I never like these moments, but on my odyssey through mortality I have found much more contentment in living the gospel and in nurturing my relationship with the Savior than I have found distress from emotional hiccups. (A Singular Life: Perspectives on Being Single by Sixteen Latter-day Saint Women, ed. Carol L. Clark and Blythe Darlyn Thatcher [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987], 41.)

It is from [my friend Blythe that] I learned the great line, "family by affection." She acknowledges that none of us can alter our blood family relationships. We are born into our families by blood. But because of the agency Heavenly Father has given us, we can choose our family by affection.

Just think of it—we can feel related to the people we love. And this means we can choose to make our family by blood also our family by affection. We can "adopt" and enfold them through the love we feel for them. (Knit Together in Love: A Focus for LDS Women in the 1990s [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991], 72.)

CLISSOLD, JOAN OKELBERRY

As I have tried to encourage other single women, I have also reminded myself that the Lord knows us, our feelings, our dreams, our disappointments. He has work for us to do, and we should strive to know it and be about it. It is not that singles have all the problems and the married people around us are sailing along well. It is that we have problems and challenges different from those of married people, and we will not entirely understand their problems, nor they ours. . . . I avoid comparing myself and my situation to others' because I have found that it usually brings either a return to self-pity or a false sense of my own importance. I have had a little quotation taped to my cupboard for a number of years now that never seems to lose its power to help me keep a healthy perspective on my life. It says: "Remember, contentment is not the fulfillment of what you want but the realization of what you already have." I have used that thought many times in keeping myself on a steady course between striving for the future and being at peace with the present. (A Singular Life: Perspectives on Being Single by Sixteen Latter-day Saint Women, ed. Carol L. Clark and Blythe Darlyn Thatcher [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987], 174-75.)

One of the most difficult adjustments for me as a single person was to find meaning in the role I play rather than wishing for a different role. This was particularly hard because I wanted and enjoyed marriage. I had never even entertained the possibility of being single. While I continue to be sustained by the expectation of marriage and an eternal partnership, I have come to appreciate and enjoy the different dimensions single life affords. Feeling secure in the marriage covenant, I was aware of the responsibility for my exaltation, although my emphasis in achieving this goal was mainly through my roles as wife and mother. Now, it is much clearer to me that exaltation is an individual process, achievable through a variety of roles.

Single life has also provided me with equal, and perhaps more, opportunities to feel the Lord's hand in my life and to develop my ability to respond to promptings and guidance. I enjoy peace of mind as I live my life as a single woman, understanding that to be a disciple of the Savior means that I will be obedient to his will and follow his timetable for the fulfillment of my dreams. (A Singular Life: Perspectives on Being Single by Sixteen Latter-day Saint Women, ed. Carol L. Clark and Blythe Darlyn Thatcher [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987], 175.)

EDMUNDS, MARY ELLEN

What seems critical to me, then, is not whether I am married or single, but that I am striving towards being perfect: whole, complete, and pure, prepared for what God has in mind for me. (A Singular Life: Perspectives on Being Single by Sixteen Latter-day Saint Women, ed. Carol L. Clark and Blythe Darlyn Thatcher [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987], 151.)

HANKS, MARION D.

One of the sweetest and tenderest of modern proverbs is this, penned by a wise and lovely unmarried daughter of God: "To believe in God is to know that all the rules will be fair and that there will be wonderful surprises." (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 113.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Marriage is honorable. It's a plan of God. It is not a whim, a choice, a preference only; it's a must.

We are talking to normal young people. Generally there are husbands for most young women. There might be an occasional young woman who does not find her companion, but there is little excuse for the normal young man. I tell young women who seem to have missed their chance for desirable marriage that they should do all in their power to make themselves attractive physically in dress and grooming, mentally in being knowledgeable on many subjects, spiritually in being responsive, emotionally in being genuine and worthy. And if one fails to find a companion after having done everything possible, then there will be provision for her in eternity. (Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, 1974, 261-62.)

Now, the General Authorities are very much aware of the fact that many of our sisters are widows. Others have become divorced. Still others have never had the privilege of temple marriage. We want all such sisters to understand that when we speak of family life, it is not done to make them feel sad or unappreciated. The leaders of the Church have said often, and clearly, that women in such circumstances include some of the most noble spirits of our Father in heaven. Those who make the best of what life has given to them will be rewarded for all that they have done in the service of our Heavenly Father and their fellowman.

Those of you who do not now experience the traditional woman's role, not by choice, but for reasons beyond control, can still do so much to help others. Your talents and time must not be misused simply because not all of the preferred ways of sharing and giving are open to you presently. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 11.)

Remember, too, as you focus on the glories and importance of family life here, that all of us belong to the eternal family of our Father in heaven. Be assured that all faithful sisters who, through no fault of their own, do not have the privilege during their second estate of being sealed to a worthy man will have that blessing in eternity. On occasions when you ache for the acceptance and affection that belong to family life on earth, please know that our Father in heaven is aware of your anguish, and that one day he will bless you beyond your capacity to express.

Sometimes to be tested and proved requires that we be temporarily deprived—but righteous women and men will one day receive all that our Father has. It is not only worth waiting for—it is worth living for! Meanwhile, one does not need to be married or a mother in order to keep the first and second great commandments—to love God and our fellowmen—on which, Jesus said, hang all the law and all the prophets. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 39, 41.)

LEE, HAROLD B.

You young women advancing in years who have not yet accepted a proposal of marriage, if you make yourselves worthy and ready to go to the house of the Lord and have faith in this sacred principle of celestial marriage for eternity, even though the privilege of marriage does not come to you now in mortality, the Lord will reward you in due time and no blessing will be denied you. You are not under obligation to accept a proposal from someone unworthy of you for fear you will fail of your blessings. Likewise, you young men who may lose your life in early life by accident, or a fatal illness, or in the terrible conflict of war before you have had an opportunity for marriage, the Lord knows the intent of your hearts, and in His own due time He will reward you with opportunities made possible through temple ordinances instituted in the Church for that purpose.

Do all you can to comply with the laws of God pertaining to an exaltation in the kingdom of God. The Lord will judge you too by your works, as well as by the desires of your hearts, and your reward will be assured. (Ye Are the Light of the World [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974], 308-9.)

OLSEN, SHEILA

The advice I would give to any woman, especially those who are managing alone, is to assume responsibility for your own emotional welfare. People are well-meaning, and they do care, but they—friends and children included—are necessarily busy with their own lives and affairs. It is wonderful when friends are concerned and include us. I have an incomparable support system, for which I am very grateful. But in the final analysis, we alone are responsible for our own well-being, together with a loving Heavenly Father, and we alone must take charge of our own feelings of self-worth. Along with that, we also have a responsibility to reach out in love and service to others. If a woman—or anyone—will do that, everything else seems to follow. (Women of Wisdom and Knowledge: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conference, ed. Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 47.)

SMITH, JOSEPH FIELDING

You good sisters, who are single and alone, do not fear, do not feel that blessings are going to be withheld from you. You are not under any obligation or necessity of accepting some proposal that comes to you which is distasteful for fear you will come under condemnation. If in your hearts you feel that the gospel is true, and would under proper conditions receive these ordinances and sealing blessings in the temple of the Lord; and that is your faith and your hope and your desire, and that does not come to you now; the Lord will make it up, and you shall be blessed—for no blessing shall be withheld.

The Lord will judge you according to the desires of your hearts when blessings are withheld in this life, and he is not going to condemn you for that which you cannot help. (Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56], 2:76.)

Sisterhood among Women

CANNON, ELAINE A.

The things that matter most must not be sacrificed for those that matter least. It seems to me that it is time, then, for the women of the Church to behave with a sense of belonging instead of a sense of separateness. We are not women of the world, after all. We are sisters. We are daughters of God. We are children of the covenant who are marching to the same drummer, though we may be singing a separate song. Matthew Arnold wrote this truth: "Such a price the Gods exact for song: To become what we sing." (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 66.)

HINCKLEY, MARJORIE P.

Sisters, we are all in this together. We need each other. Oh, how we need each other. Those of us who are old need you who are young. And, hopefully, you who are young need some of us who are old. It is a sociological fact that women need women. We need deep and satisfying and loyal friendships with each other. These friendships are a necessary source of sustenance. We need to renew our faith every day. We need to lock arms and help build the kingdom so that it will roll forth and fill the whole earth.

May I close with these words attributed to Lucy Mack Smith: Let us "watch over one another . . . that we may all sit down in heaven together." (As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989], 11-12.)

LEE, HAROLD B.

Don't gossip about matters relating to your sisters. Never remember nor publicize what you do for another, but never forget a favor a sister renders to you. Yes, be loyal to each other, as sisters in the gospel of the kingdom. (Relief Society Magazine, Feb. 1964, 85.)

MAVIMBELA, JULIA

I give thanks to God that He has made me a woman. I give thanks to my creator that He has made me black; that he has fashioned me as I am, with hands, heart, head to serve my people. It can, it should be a glorious thing to be a woman. It is important for women to be aware of their common lot. It is important for women to stand together and rise together to meet our common enemies—illiteracy, poverty, crime, disease, and stupid unjust laws that have made women feel so helpless as to be hopeless. (Women of Wisdom and Knowledge: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conference, ed. Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990], 63.)

PRESTON, CHERYL B.

Our code as Christian soldiers, our handbook of instructions, is the scriptures. They reverberate with pleas for solidarity and refraining from judgment. They urge us to seek the unity that underlies a Zion society. (4 Ne. 1:17; Moses 7:18.) They remind, "Every [sisterhood] divided against itself is brought to desolation; and a house divided against a house falleth." (Luke 11:17; see also Mark 3:24-25; Matt. 12:25.) As sisters in the gospel, we have promised to bear one another's burdens, not increase them. (Mosiah 18:8; Gal. 6:2.) Moreover, we have been told by "Christ, the royal Master, [who] leads against the foe" that, if we are not one, we are not his. (D&C 38:27.) (Women in the Covenant of Grace: Talks Selected from the 1993 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Susette Fletcher Green [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994], 183.)

SMITH, LUCY MACK

We must cherish one another, watch over one another, comfort one another and gain instruction, that we may all sit down in heaven together. (Relief Society Minutes, 24 Mar. 1842.)

SPAFFORD, BELLE S.

Grateful indeed we should be to live in a period of time when the gospel is upon the earth to show us the way. Favored are we to mingle with sisters who believe as we believe, who share experiences and who are comforted and sustained by the Spirit of the Lord and by the wisdom and love of one another. (A Woman's Reach [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], 121.)

STOVALL, MARY

Each of us will experience over our lifetime physical pain, emotional anguish, heartache, grief, even betrayal in one form or another. If we attempt to deny the problem or to cover it with a facade of forced sweetness and light, we imperil both ourselves and each other—ourselves because we deny the healing that can result from the love, strength, and insights of true friends, and each other because people then assume we are our facades and feel even more isolated with their problems. (As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989], viii.)

Society, Women's Responsibility in

See also Woman, Influence of

ASHTON, MARVIN J.

Women with clear-sighted vision must see that the greatest contribution a woman can make to community life is to maintain a home where spiritual and ethical values are internalized in family members—a home from which will go forth responsible citizens dedicated to high moral standards, industrious work habits, love of God, and concern for fellowman. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 91.)

CAMPBELL, BEVERLY

I think of the story of our own beloved Sister Belle Spafford. As you know, the Church has long maintained membership in the National Council of Women. Shortly after Belle Spafford was sustained as general president of the Relief Society, a letter came across her desk advising of the NCW's annual meeting to be held in New York City.

Now, Sister Spafford had attended these meetings before. She was aware of their agenda and the workings within the organization. Based on this previous experience, she prepared a statement of recommendation to go to President George Albert Smith. In this letter, she listed all the reasons for such a recommendation. Uncertain and trembling just a bit, Sister Spafford placed the paper on the prophet's desk. He carefully read her letter. In it she explained how costly the membership of this organization was. She described the humiliation occasionally experienced because her views and those of the Church often did not fall into the mainstream of the views of the membership. She ended by saying, "We don't get a thing from these councils."

The wise old prophet tapped the letter on his desk, put it down, laced his fingers together, and then, tipping back in his chair, looked at her with a disturbed expression. "You want to withdraw because you get nothing from it. Do you always think in terms of what you get? Don't you think in terms of what you have to give?" He returned the paper and with considerable firmness said, "You continue your membership in these councils and make your influence felt." (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 93-94.)

Spiritual Growth of Women

See also Blessings Available to Women; Spirituality of Women; Study, Women's Responsibility to

BARNES, DONNA LEE BOWEN

Although through the Spirit of Christ we can be given all the help, strength, and comfort necessary, to gain this spiritual help for ourselves certain things are expected: that we are righteous, that we obey the precepts and commands of the gospel, and that we seek help from the Lord on our knees in prayer. Access to the Spirit is not granted by office held in the Church, or by wealth, by status, by gender or color. It is available to those who truly desire it and are willing to humbly do as they are commanded.

Thus, all the power of God is at our disposal to be used in our behalf when we need it, dependent only upon our righteousness, our spirituality, our desire to bow to God's command. (As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989], 80-81.)

SNOW, LORENZO

If the Lord has made one woman more perfect than another, and given her more intelligence than her sisters, let her show more mercy and patience in overlooking their faults. By this means a wife will gain influence and favor with her husband, with her sisters, and with her Heavenly Father. She thus advances herself and puts herself in a position to enjoy all that is for the righteous. The whole is summed up in this—Do right. (Journal of Discourses, 5:316.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

She who is worthy of the title of lady adorns her mind with the rich things of the kingdom of God; she is modest in her attire and manners; she is prudent, discreet and faithful, and full of all goodness, charity, love, and kindness, with the love of God in her heart. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 17:118.)

Spirituality of Women

See also Blessings Available to Women; Spiritual Growth of Women

BEECHER, MAUREEN URSENBACH

Women of the Restoration were spiritually gifted, as were their brothers, and they were also full voting members of the organized Church of Christ. As Margaret Smoot commented in 1870, "I have always sought to vote in conference, and then I felt I had done all I desired to do." The sisters' sense of equality with their brethren was reinforced, as Carol Madsen has pointed out, in the texts of patriarchal and other blessings women were given: "Thou shalt be blessed with spiritual gifts," one was promised; "Great wisdom from the Lord to decide the most difficult questions," received another. "Thou shalt have power given unto thee to heal the sick, and to cast out evil spirits, and . . . power to keep the destroyer from thy household," another woman was assured. "The spirit of prophecy and revelation shall rest upon you, and the light of the Lord shall dwell within you and wisdom shall be given unto you to enable you to become perfected in the Lord," was the promise to yet another woman. In matters of the Spirit, women received with men from the Lord's store of gifts. (Women Steadfast in Christ: Talks Selected from the 1991 Women's Conference, ed. Dawn Hall Anderson and Marie Cornwall [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992], 55.)

BROWN, HUGH B.

Spiritually, morally, religiously, and in faith, what man can match a woman who is really converted to the gospel! Women are more willing to make sacrifices than are men, more patient in suffering, more earnest in prayer. They are the peers and often superior to men in resilience, in goodness, in morality, and in faith. (Quoted in Great Thoughts for Latter-day Saint Sisters, comp. Marc Stephen Garrison [Orem, Utah: Aspen Books, 1990], S51.)

HOLLAND, PATRICIA T.

Women of covenant can be a powerful force for righteousness in this world. It is our nature to kindle spirituality within every sphere of our influence. We are bearers of light, even as John saw the woman in his marvelous revelation, and I know we can be the instrument for conveying that light from one realm to another and another and another (Rev. 12:1). That is at the heart of our "sanctified investiture," which none shall dare profane. Let us reach out enthusiastically for our assignment and rejoice in our God-given appointment. As we do so, we will enjoy divine rights and powers and privileges surpassing any other earthly satisfaction. (To Rejoice as Women: Talks from the 1994 Women's Conference, ed. Susette Fletcher Green and Dawn Hall Anderson [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1995], 114.)

PETERSEN, MARK E.

I have learned that there is a feminine side to spirituality which we men seldom, if ever, truly appreciate. That feminine type of spirituality is truly divine. It is what makes good mothers great. It is what makes them partners with God in a very real and literal sense. It is what makes them the queens of their homes, the spiritual centers of their families. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1961, 7.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

There are people fond of saying that women are the weaker vessels. I don't believe it. Physically, they may be; but spiritually, morally, religiously and in faith, what man can match a woman who is really convinced? Daniel had faith to sustain him in the lion's den, but women have seen their sons torn limb from limb, and endured every torture satanic cruelty could invent because they believed. They are always more willing to make sacrifices, and are the peers of men in stability, Godliness, morality and faith. (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], 352.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

Women are more ready to do and love the right than men are. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 12:194.)

The men are the lords of the earth, and they are more inclined to reject the Gospel than the women. The women are a great deal more inclined to believe the truth than the men; they comprehend it more quickly, and they are submissive and easy to teach. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 14:120.)

[Man] is by nature coarser and more prone to . . . wickedness than [woman] is. Woman is altogether of a finer nature, and has stronger moral inclinations; it is not natural for her to indulge in wickedness that man takes common delight in. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 18:233.)

Study, Women's Responsibility to

See also Spiritual Growth of Women

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Even though the eternal roles of men and women differ, there is much to be done by way of parallel personal development—of both men and women. In this connection, I stress again the deep need each woman has to study the scriptures. We want our homes to be blessed with sister scriptorians—whether you are single or married, young or old, widowed or living in a family. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 37.)

Study the scriptures. Thus you may gain strength through the understanding of eternal things. You young women need this close relationship with the mind and will of our Eternal Father. We want our sisters as well as our men to be scholars of the scriptures. You need an acquaintanceship with God's eternal truths for your own well-being, and for the purposes of teaching your children and all others who come within your influence. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 7-8.)

SMITH, JOSEPH F.

The word and law of God are as important for women who would reach wise conclusions as they are for men; and women should study and consider the problems of this great latter-day work from the standpoint of God's revelations, and as they may be actuated by his Spirit, which it is their right to receive through the medium of sincere and heartfelt prayer. (Juvenile Instructor, 38:371-72.)

SMITH, JOSEPH FIELDING

It is the duty of our sisters, as well as it is of our brethren, to search the scriptures, to become familiar with the things the Lord has revealed . . . and to walk with understanding and in faith. (Relief Society Magazine, Jan. 1962, 4.)

Woman, Influence of

See also Society, Women's Responsibility in

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

Often a woman shapes the career of her husband, or brother, or son. "A man succeeds and reaps the honors of public applause, when in truth," a steadfast and courageous woman has in large measure "made it all possible—has by her tact and encouragement held him to his best, has had faith in him when his own faith has languished, has cheered him with the unfailing assurance, `You can, you must, you will.'" (David O. McKay, Treasures of Life, pp. 53-54.) (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], 551.)

DURHAM, G. HOMER

Woman is endowed by the Creator with the capacity to wield the most civilizing of influences in society. When this influence becomes that of a Jezebel, a Herodias, or a reckless, wicked Julia, daughter of Julius Caesar, society descends to unspeakable degradation. Accordingly, woman has not only to learn, but also to use wisely that which she learns; she must exemplify and teach well the ultimate and intimate things. The world of knowledge is before her. She must enter it and proceed to the limits of her capacity. But, as with man, she will be well-advised to begin with the foundation, the fundamental things: who she is, what she may become, and her role in transmitting those foundation stones so other lives may be built on a solid foundation. She begins by knowing that she is a child of God and recognizing what that portends. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 32-33.)

The influence of woman on mature man is as profoundly significant as her influence on children. All human beings are involved in each other's lives. It would appear from scripture, from history, and from observation that women have a capacity to exercise unusual influence for the uplift of culture, character, morals, high ideals, and true religion. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 38.)

Here is a significant clue for women throughout time and history. Not only is there "someone out there" who needs you; there are tens, hundreds, thousands. In most cases, what you achieve and what you do as a consequence of what you know and learn can affect a multitude—even the very course of events. (Woman [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 40.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Each of you should be grateful to be a woman! Self-pity is always a sad thing to see, and especially when there is no justification for it. To be a righteous woman is a glorious thing in any age. To be a righteous woman during the winding-up scenes on this earth, before the second coming of our Savior, is an especially noble calling. The righteous woman's strength and influence today can be tenfold what it might be in more tranquil times. She has been placed here to help to enrich, to protect, and to guard the home—which is society's basic and most noble institution. Other institutions in society may falter and even fail, but the righteous woman can help to save the home, which may be the last and only sanctuary some mortals know in the midst of storm and strife.

One of the important messages that emerges from the history of great women in all ages is that they cared more for the future of their families than for their own comfort. Such good women had a grasp of what matters in life. When called upon to do so, they could fashion a lovely city in the midst of a swamp or make the desert blossom as a rose.

. . . We have grown strong as a people because our mothers and our women have been so selfless. That ennobling quality must not be lost, even though some of the people of the world may try to persuade otherwise. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 15, 17, 19.)

SWINTON, HEIDI

The Lord placed women in the middle of the family on purpose. It's the one place where we have the chance to touch everyone around us, to lead and be led. (Elaine Cannon's As a Woman Thinketh, ed. Elaine Cannon [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990], 36.)

If we as women, sheltering the family from the adverse effects of a haphazard and misguided life-style, can keep our own perspective, we can make a most remarkable impact. That is not to say that great contributions are not made by women in the work force or in community service. But visibility does not necessarily mean influence, while a woman's place in the family is undeniably significant. (Elaine Cannon's As a Woman Thinketh, ed. Elaine Cannon [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990], 40.)

YOUNG, BRIGHAM

I have a word to say to my sisters. When I reflect upon the duties and responsibilities devolving upon our mothers and sisters, and the influence they wield, I look upon them as the mainspring and soul of our being here. It is true that man is first. Father Adam was placed here as king of the earth, to bring it into subjection. But when Mother Eve came she had a splendid influence over him. A great many have thought it was not very good; I think it was excellent. . . .

Now, I say the women have great influence. Look at the nations of the earth. Any nation you like, no matter which, and you enlist the sympathies of the female portion of it and what is there you cannot perform? If the government wants soldiers, they are on hand; if means, it is forthcoming. If you want influence and power, and have the ladies on your side, they will give it to you. (Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. [Liverpool, England: Albert Carrington and others, 1853-1886], 14:102.)

Woman, Worth of

See also Equality between Women and Men

CRITCHLOW, WILLIAM J., JR.

If God made man "a little lower than the angels" (Ps. 8:5), he must then have made women his very angels. (Conference Report, Oct. 1965, 39.)

FIRST PRESIDENCY: HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY

The true spirit of the Church gives to women the highest place of honor in human life. To maintain and merit this high dignity, she must possess those virtues which have always demanded and which will ever demand the respect and love of mankind. (Improvement Era, May 1935, 276.)

KIMBALL, CAMILLA EYRING

The opportunities for women to excel are greater today than ever before. We should all be resourceful and ambitious, expanding our interests. Forget self-pity and look for mountains to climb. (Woman to Woman: Selected Talks from the BYU Women's Conferences [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 9.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

No greater recognition can come to you in this world than to be known as a woman of God. No greater status can be conferred upon you than being a daughter of God who experiences true sisterhood, wifehood, and motherhood or other tasks that influence lives for good. True, there are some temporary differences and some constraining circumstances. Some of our sisters have lost their husbands through death, others through divorce. Some have not yet had the great privilege of marriage. But, on the scale of eternity, the missing of these blessings shall be "but for a small moment." (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 38-39.)

LEE, HAROLD B.

A lovely mother in a nearby community wrote this to me.

"I love America, I love my husband, I love my children, I love my God, and why is this possible? Because I truly love myself." (Stand Ye in Holy Places [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974], 5.)

LINFORD, MARILYNNE TODD

Be the best you can be. Climb your own ladder to the celestial kingdom—one rung at a time. Use your individual talents, aspirations, faults, and trials to mold a woman, a mother, who paces her running with her strength, her desires with reality, and who travels life's journey with high self-esteem. (Is Anyone Out There Building Mother's Self-Esteem? [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986], 110.)

MCKAY, DAVID O.

There is nothing so sacred as true womanhood. (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], 353.)

A beautiful, modest, gracious woman is creation's masterpiece. (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], 449.)

There is nothing in life so admirable as true manhood; there is nothing so sacred as true womanhood. (Conference Report, Oct. 1908, 108.)

Working Mothers

See also Challenges to Modern Women

BENSON, EZRA TAFT

Our beloved prophet, Spencer W. Kimball, had much to say about the role of mothers in the home and their callings and responsibilities. I am impressed to share with you some of his inspired pronouncements. I fear that much of his counsel has gone unheeded, and families have suffered because of it. But I stand as a second witness to the truthfulness of what President Spencer W. Kimball said. He spoke as a true prophet of God.

President Kimball declared: "Women are to take care of the family—the Lord has so stated—to be an assistant to the husband, to work with him, but not to earn the living, except in unusual circumstances. Men ought to be men indeed and earn the living under normal circumstances." (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 318.)

Remember the counsel of President Kimball to John and Mary: "Mary, you are to become a career woman in the greatest career on earth—that of homemaker, wife, and mother. It was never intended by the Lord that married women should compete with men in employment. They have a far greater and more important service to render."

Again President Kimball speaks: "The husband is expected to support his family and only in an emergency should a wife secure outside employment. Her place is in the home, to build the home into a haven of delight.

"Numerous divorces can be traced directly to the day when the wife left the home and went out into the world into employment. Two incomes raise the standard of living beyond its norm. Two spouses working prevents the complete and proper home life, breaks into the family prayers, creates an independence which is not cooperative, causes distortion, limits the family, and frustrates the children already born." (Spencer W. Kimball, San Antonio Fireside, 3 December 1977, pp. 9-10.)

Finally, President Kimball counsels: "I beg of you, you who could and should be bearing and rearing a family: Wives, come home from the typewriter, the laundry, the nursing, come home from the factory, the cafe. No career approaches in importance that of wife, homemaker, mother—cooking meals, washing dishes, making beds for one's precious husband and children. Come home, wives, to your husbands. Make home a heaven for them. Come home, wives, to your children, born and unborn. Wrap the motherly cloak about you and, unembarrassed, help in a major role to create the bodies for the immortal souls who anxiously await.

"When you have fully complemented your husband in home life and borne the children, growing up full of faith, integrity, responsibility, and goodness, then you have achieved your accomplishment supreme, without peer, and you will be the envy [of all] through time and eternity." (Spencer W. Kimball, San Antonio Fireside, 3 December 1977, pp. 11-12.) President Kimball spoke the truth. His words are prophetic. (Parents' Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 22 Feb. 1987.)

In the beginning, Adam—not Eve—was instructed to earn the bread by the sweat of his brow. Contrary to conventional wisdom, a mother's calling is in the home, not in the marketplace.

"Women have claim on their husbands for their maintenance, until their husbands are taken" (D&C 83:2). This is the divine right of a wife and mother. She cares for and nourishes her children at home. Her husband earns the living for the family, which makes this nourishing possible. With that claim on their husbands for their financial support, the counsel of the Church has always been for mothers to spend their full time in the home in rearing and caring for their children. (Parents' Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 22 Feb. 1987.)

It is divinely ordained what a woman should do, but a man must seek out his work. The divine work of women involves companionship, homemaking, and motherhood. It is well if skills in these three areas can first be learned in the parents' home and then be supplemented at school if the need presents itself. The first priority for a woman is to prepare herself for her divine and eternal mission, whether she is married soon or late. It is folly to neglect that preparation for education in unrelated fields just to prepare temporarily to earn money. Women, when you are married it is the husband's role to provide, not yours.

Do not sacrifice your preparation for an eternally ordained mission for the temporary expediency of money-making skills which you may or may not use. (1979 Devotional Speeches of the Year [Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1980], 84.)

We realize that some of our choice sisters are widowed and divorced and that others find themselves in unusual circumstances where, out of necessity, they are required to work for a period of time. But these instances are the exception, not the rule.

In a home where there is an ablebodied husband, he is expected to be the breadwinner. Sometimes we hear of husbands who, because of economic conditions, have lost their jobs and expect their wives to go out of the home and work even though the husband is still capable of providing for his family. In these cases, we urge the husband to do all in his power to allow his wife to remain in the home caring for the children while he continues to provide for his family the best he can, even though the job he is able to secure may not be ideal and family budgeting will have to be tighter. (Parents' Fireside, Salt Lake City, Utah, 22 Feb. 1987.)

Young women, we hope you will keep yourselves clean. We hope you will look forward to the time when you can become honorable mothers—homemakers. There is no higher calling for woman. We hope you will prepare for it, look forward to it, and that you will enjoy it. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], 550-51.)

KIMBALL, SPENCER W.

Some women, because of circumstances beyond their control, must work. We understand that. We understand further that as families are raised, the talents God has given you and blessed you with can often be put to effective use in additional service to mankind. Do not, however, make the mistake of being drawn off into secondary tasks that will cause the neglect of such eternal assignments as giving birth to and rearing the spirit children of our Father in heaven. Pray carefully over all the decisions you make. (My Beloved Sisters [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], 41.)

TUTTLE, A. THEODORE

Before you count the profit, count the cost of a working mother. (Conference Report, Apr. 1967, 94.)
