Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

Foreword

For thirteen years President Joseph Fielding Smith has been answering questions from members of the Church and others in a monthly article in pages of The Improvement Era. In addition to these answers, hundreds of letters have been answered personally for members and nonmembers alike. In a Church now numbering considerably more than two million members the amount of mail from many of them that crosses his desk each day is too voluminous for one person to handle. However, President Smith has endeavored to answer as many questions as humanly possible. With his added responsibilities as a Counselor in the First Presidency, his days are busy, and little time is left to answer all the requests made of him.

It is hoped that members of the Church, as a first recourse, will seek information from their bishops or stake presidents.

The compilation of the five volumes of Answers to Gospel Questions has been done for the purpose of limiting the requests made of General Authorities. Too frequently, questions in letters are repetitious and have been answered previously in the volumes of Answers to Gospel Questions. For the benefit of the members of the Church, a complete appendix listing alphabetically all the questions answered in the five volumes of Answers is included in this volume.

The purpose of these volumes of Answers is to help members of the Church to know and walk in the light of truth. We have been commanded by the Lord to study the standard works. The scriptures are replete with admonishment to gain knowledge and understanding of gospel principles. "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D. &C. 93:36.)

In preparation for this volume, appreciation is again expressed to The Improvement Era for permission to use the articles that have appeared in their feature, "Your Question." Additional answers have been included from President Smith's private files. Questions asked, as has been true in previous volumes, have come from nonmembers and members of the Church.

Appreciation is also expressed to the Deseret Book Company for publication of this volume.

—JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH JR.
