Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

INTRODUCTION

Four volumes of Answers to Gospel Questions have been published preceding this volume. We may be sure that the time will never come while mortality endures when there will not be a need for answers to be given to gospel principles. The following paragraph is taken from the Foreword to the fourth volume, published in the year 1961:

"As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints the Lord has admonished us to be 'ready always to give an answer to every man, for our faith in the restored gospel.' " This we owe to the inhabitants of this mortal world. For hundreds of years, following the universal apostasy, the inhabitants of the earth walked in spiritual darkness. They became divided and sub-divided. Satan had obtained such power over their thinking that the fundamental principles of the gospel ceased to exist among them. They were running too and fro and following uninspired leaders in the midst of confusion. Then came the day of restoration. The heavens were opened and messengers were sent from the presence of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and the divine authority was once more restored.

From that day forth men holding this divine authority, or priesthood, were called and sent forth into all parts of the world once more to preach the everlasting gospel, being endowed with power with the promise that it should never again be taken from the earth but should remain until the great day of the coming of the Son of God to take his place as King of kings and reign upon the earth during the millennial period of at least one thousand years.

This present volume is an addition to a number which have preceded it in which the fundamental teachings as they have been restored are now proclaimed. There are many events in the world today which indicate that the great day of the Lord is drawing near when the Redeemer will again appear to set up his kingdom in righteousness preparatory to the millennial reign. In the meantime it is the duty of members of the Church to seek for knowledge and to prepare themselves by study and by faith for the ushering in of that great and glorious day.

It is our sincere hope that this volume will help to teach and prepare those who read its pages for the coming of the Son of God to take his place as the scriptures have declared as King of kings over all the earth.

—JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH
