Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

1

The Priesthood of John the Baptist

Question: "In our quorum meeting the question was asked: 'Who conferred the Aaronic Priesthood on John the Baptist?' We looked the question up and discovered that he was ordained by an angel. We also learned that John's father held the office of a priest. Since a priest has the authority to ordain a deacon, teacher, or priest in the Aaronic Priesthood, and his father had authority to ordain deacons, teachers, and priests and was living on the earth at the time, why was not he instead of an angel commanded to ordain his son?"

Answer: For some unknown reason this question has come to me several times in the past few weeks. The reason why it has been submitted is a mystery to me since the Lord made the matter perfectly clear in the revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants which is as follows:

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb.

For he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power. (D. & C. 84:27-28.)

ZACHARIAS DID NOT HAVE CERTAIN AUTHORITY

The Lord was pleased not to reveal the name of the angel who ministered to John. The reason Zacharias could not ordain John is because of the fact that John received certain keys of authority which his father Zacharias did not possess. Therefore this special authority had to be conferred by this heavenly messenger, who was duly authorized and sent to confer it. John's ordination was not merely the bestowal of the Aaronic Priesthood, which his father held, but also the conferring of certain essential powers peculiar to the time among which was the authority to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews and "to make straight the way of the Lord." Moreover, it was to prepare the Jews and other Israelites for the coming of the Son of God. This great authority required a special ordination beyond the delegated power that had been given to Zacharias or any other priest who went before him, so the angel of the Lord was sent to John in his childhood to confer it.

IMPORTANT TO KNOW FACTS

The trouble with so many of us is the fact that we reach conclusions in relation to some matters without knowing all the facts pertaining to the specific events. It is very apparent that a large proportion of the members of the Church do not prepare themselves thoroughly by study, prayer, and faith to understand many of the revelations which have been placed before us. This lack of comprehension is not the fault of the Lord, but the fault of the individual.

Perhaps I may be pardoned for this thought which I present without any desire to find fault, but merely to impress upon our minds the need of a more thorough search of the revealed word of the Lord in sincere prayer and humility of spirit. It is a simple matter to reach incorrect conclusions when only a part of the facts is understood. Therefore the members of the Church, and especially those holding the Divine Priesthood, should be diligent in their study with the spirit of humility and prayer. It is plainly revealed that John was sent to prepare the way before the Lord by teaching the people to repent and receive baptism preparatory to the advent and opening of the ministry of the Son of God. This was a very special ordination beyond the authority of Zacharias or any other previously ordained priest who held the office before him.

When John the Baptist sent men unto Jesus to ask him the question: "Art thou he that should come? Or look we for another?" the Savior bore testimony in relation to the greatness of John in the following words:

. . . What went ye out . . . to see? A reed shaken with the wind?

But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings' courts.

But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet.

This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. (Luke 7:24-28. )

PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH'S COMMENT

The Prophet Joseph Smith commenting on this statement has presented before us the following:

First. He [John] was entrusted with a divine mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. Whoever had such a trust committed to him before or since? No man.

Secondly. He was entrusted with the important mission and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of Man. . . . Whoever led the Son of God into the waters of baptism, and had the privilege of beholding the Holy Ghost descend in the form of a dove, or rather in the sign of the dove, in witness of that administration? The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove. . . .

Thirdly. John at that time, was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth, and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned, by their own law; and Christ himself fulfilled all righteousness in becoming obedient to the law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made it honorable, instead of destroying it. The son of Zacharias wrested the keys, the kingdom, the power, the glory from the Jews, by the holy anointing and decree of heaven, and these three reasons constitute him the greatest prophet born of a woman. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 275-276. )
