Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

2

Whose Sins Are Remitted by the Atonement?

Question: "In our discussion of doctrinal subjects the question arose whether or not the Savior by virtue of his atonement paid for the sins of all the human family of Adam, or was he suffering for sins of Adam and those who obey the gospel only? It was understood by all that the resurrection is to be universal, so that all creatures who live in mortality through the fall will receive the resurrection. Whether the Savior's sacrifice cleansed all mortals from their transgressions or not was a disputed problem. Will you kindly clear our minds on this point?"

Answer: The question of salvation to mankind was clearly answered by the Redeemer in many discourses while he was with the Jews in his ministry. He offered peace and rest in his Father's kingdom to all who would repent and accept the ordinances and teachings of his gospel. He clearly stated that those who reject the plan of salvation are not cleansed from their sins. In the wonderful epistles of Peter and Paul the plan of salvation is clearly portrayed, as well as in the many discourses of our Redeemer.

THE CONSTANT PLEA OF OUR REDEEMER

This is the constant plea of our Redeemer:

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. (Matthew 11:28-29.)

The atonement of the Savior accomplished two wonderful things: First, it restored every living thing in mortal life to eternal life, that is, it gives to every mortal creature the resurrection and eternal power over death; second, the remission of sins.

In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in September 1830, we find the following wonderful and clear explanation of the resurrection and the completeness or universal nature of this restoration:

And the great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall be cast down by devouring fire, according as it is spoken by the mouth of Ezekiel the prophet, who spoke of these things, which have not come to pass but surely must, as I live, for abominations shall not reign.

And again, verily, verily, I say unto you that when the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season;

And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of my hand.

But, behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth—yea, even all. (D. & C. 29:21-26.)

AN INCONSISTENT NOTION

It is a very inconsistent notion which is held by some, that the resurrection will only come to human souls, that the animals and plants have no spirits and therefore are not redeemed by the sacrifice of the Son of God, and hence they are not entitled to the resurrection.

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1832, this answer to a question by one of the brethren was given:

What are we to understand by the four beasts, spoken of in the same verse? (i.e., Revelation 4:6.)

They are figurative expressions, used by the Revelator, John, in describing heaven, the paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of the fowls of the air; that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, and also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created. (Ibid., 77:2.)

From the revelations of the Lord we learn that there was no death in this world before the transgression of Adam and Eve. Elder Parley P. Pratt in his Voice of Warning has portrayed a beautiful picture of the conditions which then prevailed. When Adam and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit they brought mortality not only upon themselves, but upon the whole earth and every living thing upon it, in the air, the waters, or on the face of the land. Even the earth itself partook of the seeds of death. Since that day all living things, including the earth itself, have partaken of mortal existence.

Notwithstanding this universal restoration, the inhabitants of the earth will be rewarded according to their works. Some will receive the exaltation in the kingdom of God to become gods themselves and have blessings of eternal increase. Some will be assigned to the terrestrial kingdom to remain separately and singly forever, and some will be cast out into "outer darkness, where there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth." (Ibid., 101:91.)

A VERY SERIOUS QUESTION

There is a very serious question that arises in the minds of many who endeavor to comprehend the great suffering and sacrifice of the Son of God as to whether or not the members of the Church grasp the significance of the Savior's atonement. Do we when we partake of the emblems, representing his death and suffering, endeavor to visualize, as best we can, the extreme and dreadful ordeal through which our Redeemer passed in order that we, through the keeping of his commandments, may escape the torment of our transgressions? He has described to some extent that terrible ordeal, which we mortals cannot fully visualize, in the following touching words in the revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men. (Ibid., 19:16-19. )

How many members of the Church, when partaking of the emblems of the sacrament, try to visualize the extreme suffering of the Son of God as he went through his torment in our behalf in the Garden of Gethsemane?
