Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

3

Baptism before the Coming of Our Savior in the Flesh

Question: "In our discussion of principles of the gospel the point was raised as to why baptism for the remission of sins is mentioned in the Book of Mormon as an ordinance which the Nephites practiced from the days of Nephi to the end of their history, that would be from 600 years before the coming of the Savior, while in the Bible there is no mention of baptism for the remission of sins until the coming of John the Baptist. It seems to us that if baptism was an ordinance required of people before the time of John, that surely there would be some indication that this was the practice. It was the view of some that baptism was something that belonged to the dispensation of Jesus and John and an ordinance given to Israel by revelation in the days of John the Baptist. Will you please clear this question for us?"

Baptism, Antiquity of/It is true that in the translations of the books of the Old Testament, the ordinance of baptism is not clearly defined as an ordinance of the gospel. However in the writings of Moses found in the Pearl of Great Price, we discover that baptism was one of the first commandments given to Adam after he was driven from the Garden of Eden. We read in the Book of Moses that after Adam and Eve were driven out of the Garden they were instructed by an angel who taught them the need of repentance and the remission of sins and that in due time the Savior would come to atone for their transgression.

Baptism, Antiquity of/BAPTISM INTRODUCED IN DAYS OF ADAM

Baptism, Antiquity of/In that instruction, we find the following:

Baptism, Antiquity of/That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

Baptism, Antiquity of/For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified;

Baptism, Antiquity of/Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment.

Baptism, Antiquity of/And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time.

Baptism, Antiquity of/And behold, all things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me, both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath; all things bear record of me.

Baptism, Antiquity of/And it came to pass, when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water.

Baptism, Antiquity of/And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man. (Moses 6:59-65. )

Baptism, Antiquity of/OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES

Baptism, Antiquity of/One of the responsibilities which the Lord has placed upon the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that they search the scriptures and lay up a store of knowledge, otherwise they cannot have the guidance of the Holy Ghost, notwithstanding they have been baptized and confirmed. Those who are ignorant of the gospel truths and unacquainted with the teachings that the Lord gave to the Fathers, cannot have the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. Such people leave themselves open to temptation and deception by wicked, unscrupulous souls and are in grave danger of being led into folly and forbidden paths because they have no foundation in faith on which to build.

Baptism, Antiquity of/It is verily true that the Bible as it has come down to us has very little to say about baptism in the Old Testament. Yet there are passages in the writings of Moses and the old prophets which clearly indicate to the prayerful student that baptism was a principle which was practiced all through the days of old Israel. When the temple of Solomon was built, we read of a "molten sea," ten cubics from one brim to the other, it stood on the backs of twelve carved oxen. This font, or brazen sea, was not used for baptisms for the dead, for there were no baptisms for the dead until after the resurrection of the Lord. It is a logical venture to say that it was used for baptizing the living for the remission of their sins.

Baptism, Antiquity of/It is a well-known fact acknowledged by Bible students who have studied the doctrines and customs of ancient Israel, that baptism was an ordinance performed in ancient Israel in full attestation of the word of the Lord as revealed in the writings of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price.
