Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

4

The Question of Forgiveness of Sin

Question: "In our study group the question of forgiveness of sin was discussed. It was the opinion of some members that sin never is forgiven without [sic.] the transgressor pays a price in suffering to compensate for the wrong which was done. Others felt that on true repentance and sorrow for sin, the transgressor would be forgiven. Will you please enlighten us in relation to this question?"

Answer: It is true that justice demands reparation for every sin that is committed. The unrepentant sinner will have to pay the price of his transgression, for this is a divine law. To relieve mankind from paying the penalty of sins, the Son of God came into this world and offered himself a sacrifice for sin, not for his sin, for he was without sin, but for the sins of every soul who is willing to repent and keep his commandments and walk in the light of the everlasting gospel. On this point our Savior said:

UNREPENTANT MUST SUFFER

For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men. (D. & C. 19:16-19.)

No mortal man knows the severe mental and physical suffering that our Lord had to endure. He has thrown some light upon it in his revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, but his severe agony and mental suffering is known only to himself. He has informed us that it was so severe that the blood came forth from every pore of his body, and he was forced to cry in the anguish of his soul, yet he obtained no relief until his severe suffering was completed. And all of this was done because he loved the world!

JESUS' LOVE FOR THE CHILDREN OF GOD

This great love and compassion which Jesus had and made manifest in behalf of the world is grossly misunderstood by the great majority of the inhabitants of this world. He came into this world to fulfil a great mission of mercy and to grant to every living creature the restoration of life after the mortal death, through the resurrection. This restoration is a gift as extensive in its application as was the "fall." Adam brought mortality into this world through the "transgression" of a law which was essential to mortal life.

Mortal life is preparatory to eternal life. The "fall" of Adam and Eve was not a sin but an essential act upon which mortality depends. Mortality is a condition essential to exaltation, and men came into this world to be tried and tested preparatory to an exaltation in the kingdom of God or banishment from his presence, according to the individual deeds in mortality. Therefore mortality has been spoken of as a "probationary" state, for it is here the soul is tested and tried preparatory for a place in the eternity which is to come.

There is a divine law of compensation. Mortality is therefore a testing ground. Men are to be judged by their deeds, and there is a reward or punishment for the deeds done in the mortal body. There is no partiality in the kingdom of God. What the individual receives is what he merits. Speaking on this point Alma, while giving advice to his wayward son Corianton, made this wonderful declaration:

ALMA'S WONDERFUL DECLARATION

I say unto thee, my son, that the plan of restoration is requisite with the justice of God; for it is requisite that all things should be restored to their proper order. Behold, it is requisite and just, according to the power and resurrection of Christ that the soul of man should be restored to its body, and that every part of the body should be restored to itself.

And it is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works; and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good.

And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil. Therefore, all things shall be restored to their proper order, every thing to its natural frame—mortality raised to immortality, corruption to incorruption—raised to endless happiness to inherit the kingdom of God, or to endless misery to inherit the kingdom of the devil, the one on one hand, the other on the other—

The one raised to happiness according to his desires of happiness, or good according to his desires of good; and the other to evil according to his desires of evil; for as he has desired to do evil all the day long even so shall he have his reward of evil when the night cometh.

And so it is on the other hand. If he hath repented of his sins, and desired righteousness until the end of his days, even so he shall be rewarded unto righteousness.

These are they that are redeemed of the Lord; yea, these are they that are taken out, that are delivered from that endless night of darkness; and thus they stand or fall; for behold, they are their own judges, whether to do good or do evil.

Now, the decrees of God are unalterable; therefore, the way is prepared that whosoever will may walk therein and be saved.

And now behold, my son, do not risk one more offense against your God upon those points of doctrine, which ye have hitherto risked to commit sin.

Do not suppose, because it has been spoken concerning restoration, that ye shall be restored from sin to happiness. Behold, I say unto you, wickedness never was happiness. (Alma 41:2-10.)
