Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

5

Why Should There Be Temples?

Question: "Why should there be temples and what are the significant duties which are to be performed therein?"

Answer: The temple as designated by revelation is a sacred house in which certain important blessings and covenants are given to faithful members of the Church preparatory to their exaltation in the kingdom of God.

We have no record of the building of temples before the flood nor for several centuries following. This lack of information does not mean that such sacred structures were not known. The Bible account of humanity covering the years from Adam to the flood and down to Abraham is extremely limited, and the detailed history is not given. We do know that in the days of Enoch, before the flood and following to the days of Abraham, the seers holding the priesthood when they wished to converse with the Lord, did so usually on mountaintops, and it is likely that these exalted places served the purpose of a temple. It was on such a mountain that Enoch talked with the Lord as did the Brother of Jared, the leader of the Jaredites following the flood, thus these exalted places took the place of edifices as hallowed spots.

MOSES COMMANDED TO BUILD A TEMPLE

When Israel was released from Egyptian bondage and went into the wilderness of Arabia, one of the first commandments given to Moses was to build a temple. It had to be a portable building that could be set up and taken down and moved from place to place as Israel journeyed for forty years in the wilderness. However the Lord required this portable tabernacle, or temple, to be of the most expensive materials that Israel could afford. In this portable temple Moses and Aaron received commandments from the Lord. As Israel moved from place to place on this forty-year journey, this building had to be taken apart and set up again constantly. When Israel became settled in the land the Lord had given them, this tabernacle (temple) served until the days of King Solomon. The Lord gave a commandment that a regular temple should be built, therefore the magnificent temple of Solomon was built in the city of Jerusalem, wherein the Lord gave revelation where sacred ordinances were performed.

THE TEMPLE SERVED ISRAEL FOR SACRED PURPOSES

This temple served Israel for sacred purposes through the years. During the captivity of Israel the temple was desecrated, for it had fallen into the hands of enemies. On the return of the Jews from captivity the temple was repaired and served the Jews until its destruction after the crucifixion of our Savior. The time will come according to sacred promises when it will be restored again.

During all the years of apostasy and until after the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, there was no sacred temple to the name of the Lord. The Latter-day Saints were commanded to build a temple, which they did in Kirtland, Ohio. This was essential for the Lord who said so by revelation, had to have a place where he could come to his servants to restore the keys of authority so essential to the eternal blessings of the Latter-day Saints in this dispensation. Since that day the Latter-day Saints have been true to this commandment and, notwithstanding their persecutions, and poverty, they built such a temple in Nauvoo, which, however, through persecution they were able to use but for a very short period. However, hundreds of faithful members of the Church received their endowments and sacred blessings and were married in the Nauvoo Temple before they were driven away by enemies of the Church. When the first pioneers arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, steps were taken to build a temple, for they realized its importance and the need of the sacred ordinances which belong and are essential to the eternal salvation and exaltation of Latter-day Saints in the celestial kingdom of God.

THE OAKLAND TEMPLE IN CALIFORNIA

The temple in Oakland is nearing dedication (President David O. McKay dedicated the Oakland Temple Nov. 17, 1964.) and brings rejoicing to the good Saints in the great state of California. Moreover, the great work for the salvation of the living and the dead who never had the opportunity of salvation when on the earth, and the perpetual union of "the whole family in heaven and earth is named," is faithfully being performed.
