Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

6

Tithing—the Law of the Tenth

Question: "I have heard so many explanations about the paying of tithing that I am confused. I have read everything I could lay my hands on, but have never found a straight explanation. I suggest that you prepare an article including examples of how people in unique situations, such as the farmer, salesman, barber, and others should pay their tithing."

Answer: There is no revelation or commandment given to mankind by the Lord that is more simple and understandable than the law of the tenth, or tithing. In the beginning of time the people of the Lord practiced the law of the United Order. That is to say, they had all things in common, and there were no poor among them. Latter-day Saints used to sing frequently the wonderful hymn by Elder William W. Phelps, the first verse is as follows:

"This earth was once a garden place, With all her glories common, And men did live a holy race In Adam ondi Ahman."

LAW OF TITHING INTRODUCED AFTER THE FLOOD

However, times changed, and instead of having all things in common, men became selfish, and the perfect condition was lost to mankind. Following the flood the Lord called Abraham and placed his name upon him. It appears that at some period following the flood the law of tithing was introduced. There is little written about it in the book of Genesis, due no doubt to the fact that several hundred years are passed over within a very few sentences in the Old Testament.

When Jacob fled from the wrath of his brother and arrived at Beth-el, he made a vow and said:

If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,

So that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God:

And this stone, which I have set up for a pillar, shall be God's house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee. (Genesis 28:20-22.)

When Israel came into the promised land out of Egypt, the Lord by revelation expounded to them the law of the tithe. As you may well know, the Israelites were keepers of cattle and sheep as well as tillers of the soil. In declaring his law to them after they had arrived in the promised land and the terms of this law were stated they were not to be broken. If any man wished to redeem the tenth cow, sheep, horse, or whatever it might be, he was penalized.

THE LAW OF TITHING WAS STRICT

It is written:

And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall add thereto the fifth part thereof.

And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord.

He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed. (Leviticus 27:31-33.)

From this we discover that the law of the tithe was strict; moreover, that all of the possessions were to be tithed, and one-tenth was the Lord's.

As time went on, Israel forgot, just as many members of the Church do today, that this is a commandment of the Lord and that he expects members of the Church to be honest with him in the paying of their tithes. From many letters received, I am forced to conclude that we have members of the Church who figuratively are "cutting the corners" and seeking for means to do so and at the same time ease their consciences in the paying of their tithes.

From what is written we discover that the paying of the tithe is a simple matter. Even the weakest among us know what the tenth part of a dollar is. Therefore out of every dollar that we receive as wages or increase coming no matter from what source, one-tenth part belongs to the Lord. It is a difficult thing for any honest tithepayer to comprehend the gymnastics of the mind of any person who endeavors to "cut corners" in the payment of the tithe. When a man receives, let us say, one thousand dollars in increase, wages, income from dividends or whatever it may be, one-tenth of that sum belongs as tithing.

WITHHELD TAXES PART OF INCOME

It seems that there are some individuals who in their employment have taxes withheld from their income. They cannot justify themselves by saying that the amount withheld, but which is to their credit, should not be tithed. The fact that they did not handle or see it does not indicate that the tenth is not of their tithing. Unfortunately there are some who have taken that view of the situation.

Tithing is a matter of conscience. Does your conscience tell you that you should deduct all of your expenses before tithing? Does it tell you that you do not have to pay on money that was withheld and which you never did see? If so, would you feel that you had to pay if it did come into your hands?

The Lord said something about rewards, and he who gives a skimp measure will receive likewise; he who gives a measure full and running over will receive a measure of like proportions.

What the Lord said to Malachi in relation to the tithe is just as true and applies to members of the Church today as well as in ancient times.

Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. . . .

Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. (Malachi 3:8, 10.)

PAYMENT OF TITHES IS NOT A COMPLICATED SYSTEM

The payment of tithes is not a complicated system even with the farmer, stockman, barber, or a person employed in any other pursuit in life. Today by edict of the government, every wage earner, no matter what his occupation may be, is taxed on his income. The storekeeper will take an "inventory" of his substance. He will learn just what his expenses have been from all sources. Likewise he will determine just what his profit has been by this means of careful accounting; he will learn just what his "intake" free from expenses has been. This will require, of course, a careful system of record keeping. The system of taxation by the government compels, or should compel, every merchant, farmer, salesman, barber, or whatever he may be, to keep an accurate account both of his expenses and his profit, hence the government assists each of these individuals to have an accurate knowledge of what his expenses are and what his income or profit will be. The wage earner who receives a certain stipulated amount in wages should pay the tenth according to divine law.
