Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

7

For Whom Is Vicarious Work Done?

Question: In the gospel doctrine class when we were discussing salvation for the dead, I asked the question: 'For whom are we to do the vicarious work?' One of the members answered, 'For everybody.' Then I read from the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 85, verses 3-5, as follows:

" 'It is contrary to the will and commandment of God that those who receive not their inheritance by consecration, agreeable to his law, which he has given, that he may tithe his people, to prepare them against the day of vengeance and burning, should have their names enrolled with the people of God.

" 'Neither is their genealogy to be kept, or to be had where it may be found on any of the records or history of the church.

" 'Their names shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the names of the children written in the book of the law of God, saith the Lord of Hosts.'

"We read also in the book of Ezra, second chapter, verses 62 and 63, that those who were not found on the register were put from the priesthood. Moreover we read in chapter ten that those who had taken strange wives were barred from the priesthood. It has been my impression that vicarious work for the dead, such as baptism, endowment, etc., was for people who had no opportunity to partake of the blessings of the gospel and who had passed on to the other side."

Answer: When the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the glorious provision which had been prepared for the dead, the Prophet wrote to his brethren who had gone to England to open the mission in that land the following words:

THE PROPHET'S FIRST MENTION OF THE DOCTRINE

I first mentioned this doctrine in public when preaching the funeral sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson; and have since then given general instructions to the Church on the subject. The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, who they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison.

Without enlarging on the subject, you will undoubtedly see its consistency and reasonableness; and it presents the Gospel of Christ in probably a more enlarged scale than some have imagined it. But as the performance of the rite is more particularly confined to this place, it will not be necessary to enter into particulars; at the same time I always feel glad to give all the information in my power, but my space will not allow me to do it. (D. H. C. 4, 231.)

Again in a discourse delivered Sunday, May 12, 1844, the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

Every man that has been baptized and belongs to the kingdom has a right to be baptized for those who have gone before; and as soon as the law of the Gospel is obeyed here by their friends who act as proxy for them, the Lord has administrators there to set them free. A man may act as proxy for his own relatives; the ordinances of the Gospel which were laid out before the foundations of the world have thus been fulfilled by them, and we may be baptized for those whom we have much friendship for. . . . "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive," all shall be raised from the dead. The Lamb of God hath brought to pass the resurrection, so that all shall rise from the dead. (1bid., 6, pp. 365-366. )

SAVIOR WAS POSITIVE IN HIS TEACHINGS

Since the Savior was positive in his teachings that baptism is essential for salvation, every adult person— that is over eight years of age—must be baptized by divine authority if he has understanding. Baptism would not apply to the incompetent who are not capable of understanding. All little children, no matter who they are, who die before the years of accountability, are saved in the kingdom of God. In proof of this, reference is given to the Doctrine and Covenants Section 29, verses 46-50, and Moroni 8:19-22. Therefore provision has been made from the beginning for the ordinances to be applied vicariously where they cannot be given in mortal life. The gospel teaches a vicarious salvation. No soul could be saved from death had not Jesus our Lord paid the sacrifice by the shedding of his blood and by this means opening every grave, not for mankind alone, but for every other living creature that partook of death through the fall.

The counsel that was given to the Zoramites by Amulek (Alma 32:32-34) has no reference whatever to the dead who died without a knowledge of the gospel. These Zoramites had apostatized from the Church and were in absolute spiritual darkness. Therefore they were without excuse in their transgressions.
