Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

8

Why Does Our Eternal Father Love Sinners?

Question: "In the gospel doctrine class in our Sunday School, the question was asked: 'Why does our Eternal Father love sinners as well as the righteous?" Surely he cannot love the unrepentant sinner as he does those who are willing to abide in his commandments. Is there anything in the scriptures that indicates that our Eternal Father loves Satan as he does those who are righteous and do not rebel against him?'

Answer: Let us look at this question from a natural point of view. In any family where the parents are righteous, and they have a son or a daughter who is rebellious, is it not the most natural thing for the parent to love that son or that daughter and earnestly wish that he or she might repent and keep the commandments? Moreover, does not the love of the parent burn intensely, notwithstanding there are rebellious tendencies on the part of a child? It is a very reasonable thought for us to think that our Eternal Father yearns for and wishes the repentance of a wayward child. Naturally we are led to believe that our Eternal Father would have exactly the same feeling as a mortal father toward his wayward children and desire that they might repent.

ETERNAL LAWS BASED ON LAW OF RIGHTEOUSNESS

While there are eternal laws by which the kingdom of God is governed, these laws have been based on the principle of righteousness and justice and could not be maintained on any other principle. It is perfectly reasonable for us to believe, as Alma has stated it in his counsel to a wayward son, that it is ". . . requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works; and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good.

"And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil. Therefore, all things shall be restored to their proper order, every thing to its natural frame. . . ." (Alma 41:3-4.)

It has been decreed that ". . . no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end." (3 Nephi 27:19. )

FREE AGENCY IS EVIDENCE OF GOD'S JUSTICE

Righteousness and obedience to divine law are and must be a requirement based upon the principle of eternal justice. The fact that man has been given his free agency is an evidence of the justice and mercy of our Eternal Father. He will teach, persuade, and encourage his children to walk in ways of righteousness, but even his divine love cannot transcend the decree of justice and the edict that none but the clean can dwell in his kingdom. We are taught that the heavens wept over the rebellion of Lucifer and those who followed him. Moreover, it was the justice of a kind Heavenly Father that grants to every soul the great gift of free agency which makes individuals morally responsible for their own deeds.

Naturally, the expression that our Eternal Father loves Satan needs some qualification. There is no doubt that there was a deep sorrow and weeping when Lucifer rebelled. From all that we have received pertaining to the pre-existence, we learn that there was a time when Lucifer held great authority and was known as the light bearer. No doubt at that time he was well received and greatly honored. His great sin lay in the fact that he rebelled against giving to every soul the great gift of free agency. He advocated a doctrine of compulsion. He, if the doctrine he advocated had prevailed, would have forced all to be saved. This, however, would have been a salvation in slavery minus the great gift of free agency. Compulsion to his decrees would have taken place; confusion and slavery would have been the result. We are informed that the heavens wept over this rebellion, but righteous principles including the freedom to think and to act were decreed in the divine plan.

NATURAL FOR HEAVENLY FATHER TO LOVE CHILDREN

That our Eternal Father should love his children is just as natural as it is for a mortal parent to love his offspring. We are instructed that our Eternal Father would have every soul saved if that could be accomplished on righteous principles. Satan's plan was to take away from them their free agency and introduce compulsion. Such a thing would have been destructive of every righteous principle, and heaven would have ceased to exist.

Salvation is based on two divine principles of paramount importance: first, redemption from death through the atonement of Jesus Christ, and, second, obedience to divine law on the part of every individual who obtains the kingdom of God.

Naturally, there was weeping in heaven when the rebellion of Lucifer was introduced, and our Eternal Father wept, just as a mortal father who loves righteousness would weep over a rebellious son.
