Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

9

Jesus Christ the Literal Son of God

Question: "On page 466 in the book, The Articles of Faith, by Elder James E. Talmage, there appears a quotation from the First Presidency which states that Elohim is the literal parent of our Savior Jesus Christ and also of the spirits of all the human family. This statement is disputed by some of my friends, and I cannot understand how it is true according to what is written in the New Testament.

"Will you please present this point and give us the definite evidence that it is true?"

Answer: Any person who accepts the New Testament as a correct record will not dispute the fact that Jesus, our Redeemer and Elder Brother, is the literal Son of Mary as is recorded in the New Testament. Neither can they dispute the statement that the evidence points to the fact that he is also the Only Begotten Son of God our Eternal Father!

JESUS CHRIST IS THE LITERAL SON OF GOD

All through the ministry of our Savior he acknowledged the fact that he is the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. Moreover, he frequently prayed to his Father. In John, chapter 17, is a prayer of our Savior shortly before his arrest, condemnation, and crucifixion as a sacrifice for the redemption of the entire world and all creatures placed upon it from death, for through Adam's transgression this earth on which we live and every living thing upon it became subject to death and therefore must be redeemed. This redemption comes through the death by martyrdom and the shedding of his blood to atone for Adam's fall. The revelations of the Lord proclaim that this earth was not subject to death nor to mortal conditions until after the partaking of the forbidden fruit by Adam and Eve. The eating of the forbidden fruit not only brought death upon Adam and Eve, but also upon every living creature and even the earth itself.

We read in a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith a clear account of this condition. Moreover, Elder Parley P. Pratt in his interesting work, The Key to Theology, has given us a beautiful picture of former conditions, the nature of the fall, and the glorious redemption which is to come through the mission and atonement of our Savior. All these changes have come about based upon the original plan. We learn from the writings of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price that the fall was part of the great plan prepared in the heavens before the earth was formed. Mortality was decreed, and the passing through all the conditions of mortal life was part of the plan, and Jesus our Savior is spoken of as the "Lamb slain from the foundation of the world"; in other words, chosen to come to earth and be our Redeemer from mortality.

THE SAVIOR SPOKE OF HIS GLORY

In his wonderful prayer shortly before the crucifixion, the Savior spoke of the glory that was his before the world was. Moreover, he came to this world voluntarily to be its Redeemer and save not only all flesh but also the earth itself from temporal death and also those who would keep his commandments from eternal death or banishment from the presence of his Father, through obedience to his Father's commandments.

We learn through the commandments given by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith that through the atonement of our Savior all things are to be restored. It is written:

And again, verily, verily, I say unto you that when the thousand years are ended, [meaning the millennium] and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season;

And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the earth and all the fulness thereof, both of men and beasts, and fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

And not one hair, neither mote shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand. (D. & C. 29:22-25. )
