Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

11

How Will the Body Arise in the Resurrection?

Question: "In the priesthood class we were discussing the resurrection and in what manner the body will come forth from the grave. It was the opinion of some members of the class that when the body comes forth it will be just as it was when it was laid down. That is to say, if an arm or a leg were missing or the person otherwise maimed, the body would come forth as it was laid down and the restoration of any missing part would be added later. Others thought that it would come forth in physical and mental perfection. We certainly need some proper instruction in relation to this question."

Answer: Fortunately the Lord has revealed much concerning the resurrection and has made known that it will be universal. There is a current notion in the world that the resurrection of the dead will be limited to the human family, and even then to only a portion of that family. The revelations of the Lord are extremely clear, however, and the fact is declared that the restoration will be universal. This is to say that every creature that has life shall be restored to eternal life. This is made definitely clear in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in September 1830 in the following words:

And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand. (D. & C. 29:23-25.)

JACOB'S DISCOURSE TO THE NEPHITES

Jacob, brother of Nephi, in a discourse to the Nephites said:

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel. (2 Nephi 9:10-12. )

Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,

And shall come forth; they that have done good unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. (John 5:28-29.)

THE RESURRECTION WILL BE UNIVERSAL

Thus we learn that the resurrection will be universal. Not only will this blessing come to the human family but to every other creature. Moreover, the earth itself, which partook of the fall, is to be restored and receive its exaltation.

Hundreds of years before the coming of our Savior, Ezekiel the Prophet had shown to him in vision the resurrection of the dead. Describing this, he wrote the following:

The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which was full of bones,

And caused me to pass by them round about: and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they were very dry.

And he said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord God, thou knowest.

Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.

Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones, Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live:

And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone.

And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in them.

Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord God; Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.

So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army.

Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut off for our parts.

Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves. (Ezekiel 37:1-13.)

It is customary in parts of the so-called Christian world for scholars to interpret this passage as a figure of speech, having no meaning whatsoever to the general resurrection of the house of Israel. There are many passages of scripture, however, including the statement of the Savior himself, to the general resurrection of all mankind. One of these is as follows:

For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,

And shall come forth; they that have done good unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. (John 5:26-29.)

MATTER CANNOT BE DESTROYED

The discoveries that man has made in these modern years prove that matter cannot be destroyed. A body may be burned in the furnace or at the stake; it may be eaten by sharks in the great ocean, or in some other manner be consumed; but we have the assurance through the teachings of our Redeemer that the resurrection will be universal and not one soul shall be forgotten and his body be left in the grave. We are assured that the particles, all that are essential to the body, will be brought back again to their proper places and the great vision shown to Ezekiel definitely will be fulfilled. Moreover, memory will likewise be maintained, and we are informed that the wicked will have a bright recollection of all their guilt. Jacob, the brother of Nephi, in teaching the Nephites said this in the previously quoted passage.

There would be no purpose whatever in having the body of any individual come forth from the dead just as it is laid down, showing the effects of disease which would have to be eliminated following the resurrection. Some critical person may arise after reading this and say: "If what you have written is true, and the body will not come forth with its imperfections, then why, when the Savior stood before his disciples after his resurrection, did he have the wounds in his hands, feet, and side, for he asked them to 'handle' him and see that it was really himself they were beholding? Moreover, to convince them, he asked for something to eat."

ANSWER TO THE QUESTION

The answer to this question is that it was done to convince them that they were not beholding a spirit, for a spirit did not have flesh and bones as he had. For a divine purpose of bearing witness, when the Savior appeared to the Nephites, he showed them his hands and his feet. From this we maintain that these wounds continued to appear to the convincing of the Nephites that they might become witnesses of his crucifixion. We are informed by the Prophet Zechariah that when the Savior appears to the Jews at his second coming, he will appear to them just as he appeared to his disciples following his resurrection. The Jews will ask the same question: "What are these wounds in thine hands?" And the Savior will answer, "Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zechariah 13:6.)
