Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

12

Home Teaching

Question: "We have been instructed that at regular intervals special teachers, called home teachers, will come into our homes to teach us and keep us in the path of duty, according to divine commandments. The Lord gave the Church this commandment through the Prophet Joseph Smith in the beginning of this dispensation, and this responsibility was definitely assigned as a regular practice in the Church under the direction of the several bishops of the several wards. We certainly hope that this move does not mean that the commandment the Lord gave to the Prophet Joseph Smith has failed, and therefore brethren with this special appointment are necessary to carry on this important work which the Lord has given by divine edict. Are we failing in the keeping of this commandment?"

Answer: The direct commandment of the Lord as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants is not to be set aside. The regularly appointed teachers by the several bishops may and should continue to carry on with their appointed duties given them by divine revelation. These special appointments are to augment and stimulate this important obligation given by divine decree.

What a wonderful thing it would be if the members of the Church, one and all, would spend more time reading and studying what the Lord has revealed in the sacred volumes which are within the reach of all members of the Church. It would save us from many difficulties and false conclusions. If I may be pardoned for saying it, I think many members of the Church will be condemned for their failure to search for knowledge which is given in clearness in our standard works. When will the time come which was spoken of by the Prophet Jeremiah:

JEREMIAH'S PROPHECY

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:

Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord:

But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of them, saith the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more. (Jeremiah 31:31-34.)

It has always been an astonishment to me that so many members of the Church fail to prepare themselves by study and by faith to know the truth. How many fathers in Israel take time out once a week, or every two weeks, or even once a month, to sit down with the members of their families and have an hour or two in study, reflection, and consideration of the fundamental teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ? This is a duty which each parent owes to his family. No male member of this Church should be so busy or so completely occupied in this world's affairs that he cannot take out time an evening each week to sit down with his family and teach them and have a discussion on the fundamental principles of the gospel. I often think of the rebuke the Lord gave to Frederick G. Williams and Sidney Rigdon because they had failed to teach their children and bring them up "in light and truth." How many other parents in Israel are worthy of a similar rebuke?

SPECIAL TEACHERS APPOINTED

Now we are appointing special teachers to go into the homes and teach the several families of the Church. I would like to suggest to every father of a family that this directive is not enough and by no means relieves the father in the home of the responsibility which the Lord has placed on him to instruct the members of his own family and bring them up in light and truth. Special teachers coming into the homes are not, and must not be, something that relieves the father in the home from his responsibility to teach his own family and bring them up "in light and truth," and nothing provided by the Authorities of the Church must relieve the father of the family from his privilege and bounden duty which the Lord has placed upon him to teach the members of his family by example and precept, and the holding of the weekly family evening meetings as being promoted presently by the Church will be a great help in this regard.

How many fathers take time out to gather their children around them and have weekly family hours in which free and interesting discussions of the fundamental principles of the gospel are considered, where the children are privileged to ask questions and receive instruction on these vital topics? May I ask this important question: How many families in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have regular night and morning family prayer? Those who neglect to do so are displeasing the Lord and are entitled to the same rebuke which the Lord gave some of the leading elders of the Church in the early days. No parent should depend solely on the organizations of the Church for the training of the children. They should be taught to pray regularly, secretly as well as in the family circle. The counsel that Alma and Amulek gave to the straying Zoramites is just as essential to the Latter-day Saints today as it was two thousand years ago.

Yea, cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save.

Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him.

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening.

Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies.

Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. (Alma 34:18-27. )
