Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

13

Were There Physical Deformities in the Pre-existence?

Question: "In discussing principles of the gospel and conditions in the pre-existence, the question was asked whether or not those who are born into this world with some mental or physical defect were being punished for acts performed by them in the spirit world. Will you please state whether this is a true doctrine or not? It does not seem to me to be a reasonable doctrine."

Answer: The simple answer to this question is that it is not true and is without one iota of justification. The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the following:

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again . . . innocent before God.

And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers. (D. & C. 93:38-39.)

We must in all reason conclude that some physical defect at birth is due to some accident or other cause that can be laid at the door of mortal conditions and not to some premortal defect or punishment in the spirit world. When the disciples came to the Savior and asked the question concerning the man who was born blind, the question whether this defect came upon him because of a condition existing in the spirit world, he gave them the assurance that such was not the case. We have reason to believe that every spirit that comes into this world was whole and free from such defects in the pre-existence.

MORTALITY SUBJECT TO DIFFERENT LAWS

Mortality is subject to far different laws from those which exist in the world of spirits, evidently. The defects at birth must be considered to be due to misfortunate conditions prevailing in this mortal world. We came here in a world that is subject to mortal conditions. Sickness, disease, deformities, and such must be considered to be misfortunate conditions which are confined to the imperfect conditions in mortality. It does not seem to be consistent with heavenly conditions for defects of a physical nature, which evidently belong to the body, not the spirit, to be existing in the spirit world.

We are definitely taught in the scriptures that we, the children of this world, are the offspring of God. This is taught us in the scriptures. Here are two passages that are accepted by all Latter-day Saints covering this point. One is in the vision given to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, February 16, 1832, when they were taught that the children of men are spiritually "begotten sons and daughters of God." (Ibid., 76:24.) The other is in the prophetic utterance of the Apostle Paul as he stood on Mars' hill teaching the Greeks, before the altar with the inscription: "TO THE UNKNOWN GOD." Evidently these Greeks had before them a statement that we are the "offspring" of God. Therefore Paul in his discourse called their attention to this correct statement and then argued in behalf of the proper worship of the Supreme Being, calling their attention to the fact that even in their national belief they were ignorantly worshiping the Divine Creator, and he said to them:

PAUL'S STATEMENT ABOUT GODS

God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands;

Neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things;

And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation;

That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us:

For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring.

Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device. (Acts 17:24-29. )

This idea that people could be deformed, blind, or otherwise maimed before they were born, it seems, was believed in ancient times.

However, it is a ridiculous notion that the spiritual offspring of God would be subject to spiritual defects before they were born into mortality. We are subject to all the vicissitudes that go with a temporal existence, sickness and physical defects as well as health, but such things will not exist in the world of spirits nor in the kingdom of God after the resurrection. The Lord has made this perfectly clear.
