Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

14

Those Who Die without Law

Question: "In teaching a nonmember the gospel I have met with something I cannot explain. This friend declares that the eighth chapter of Moroni, verses 22 and 23, wherein the statement is made that ". . . it is mockery before God, denying the mercies of Christ, and the power of the Holy Spirit, and putting trust in dead works," to baptize little children, for they are "alive in Christ," as are "all they that are without the law," is so emphatically stated that it seems to come in conflict with the words of Amulek recorded in Alma, chapter 34, verses 32-34, wherein he says:

"For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

"And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

"Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world."

Answer: It is the simplest thing in the world to receive a false impression and reach an erroneous conclusion in regard to matters when we do not have before us all the facts. Also, to enter by misunderstanding into criticism and at times contention over every simple thing contributes to our individual harm. This brings to mind the story of the blind men who went to "see" the elephant. I do not have the poem but the substance is as follows: One of these men got hold of the ear of the elephant and declared that the elephant was "verily like a fan." Another took hold of the elephant's tail and declared the elephant was like a rope; another a leg and said the elephant was like a tree; and so each obtained a different idea as to what the elephant was like. Each satisfied himself by what he discovered.

EVERY SINNER MUST REPENT

The divine records declare positively that every sinner should repent and that baptism is for remission of sins, based on the great atonement of the Son of God. It is a very reasonable doctrine to believe positively that every sinner should repent and that baptism is for the remission of sins, based on the great atonement of the Savior of the world. It is also reasonable to believe that he who has no understanding of right and wrong should not be punished as one who has full understanding.

It is, however, a merciful and just decree of the Father of us all, that men are to be punished for their own sins when they are capable of sinning. By capability of sin, I mean having an understanding concerning right and wrong. No man who has never heard of Jesus Christ and who has never come in contact with the saving principles of the gospel should be punished with the same decree of punishment as would one who has been taught the correct plan of salvation. The Lord has said that little children are without sin, and should they die in their early childhood they would be saved in the kingdom of God. The word of the Lord on this is perfectly clear. I quote from the Doctrine and Covenants:

But behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten;

Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt children, until they begin to become accountable before me;

For it is given unto them even as I will, according to mine own pleasure, that great things may be required at the hand of their fathers.

And, again, I say unto you, that whoso having knowledge, have I not commanded to repent?

And he that hath no understanding, it remaineth in me to do according as it is written. And now I declare no more unto you at this time. Amen. (D. & C. 29:46-50.)

ALMA AND AMULEK SPOKE TO FORMER ACTIVE MEMBERS

Now Amulek was not speaking of a class of people who have never known the truth and who were innocent of wilful sin. He was speaking to a group of people who at one time had been active members of the Church, but because of wickedness their minds had become darkened; and Amulek was pleading with them to return and do their first works over again, for if they persisted in the course they were taking there was no salvation for them. Mormon made this doctrine perfectly clear in his writings to his son Moroni. Moreover, he declared that all those who had reached maturity but had been without the divine light of the gospel belonged to the same class as did little children. His statement is as follows:

For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing—

But it is mockery before God, denying the mercies of Christ and the power of his Holy Spirit, and putting trust in dead works.

Behold, my son, this thing ought not to be; for repentance is unto them that are under condemnation and under the curse of a broken law.

And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins;

And the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart, and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God. (Moroni 8:22-26.)
