Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

15

Why Did Our Eternal Father Create a World Where Suffering and Sorrow Exist?

Question: "If God is all-powerful he could have created a world where no sorrow and suffering would exist. Since in this world there is sorrow and suffering, either God is not all-powerful or else he is cruel to his children to make them suffer as many of them do. I cannot worship a God nor formulate a conception which justifies human suffering. Prayer to such a God seems to be mockery."

Answer: One who maintains such a thought is without understanding in relation to the purpose of mortal life. We were not sent here to have a life merely of pleasure, free from trials, sickness and some physical pain, and disappointments. The real purpose of mortality is twofold: first, to obtain tabernacles of flesh and bones; second, to obtain experiences which could only be had in mortality.

The simple fact is that we came here to partake of the bitter as well as the sweet, to gain knowledge and wisdom through the experiences which mortality affords that would prepare us to go back and advance to eternal perfection.

In mortal life we are in school where we are being trained in all the necessary experiences that will prepare us for eternal life. Therefore some pain, some sorrow, perhaps disappointments are essential in preparing us to go back as sons and daughters of our Eternal Father, as well as the pleasant things in life in our preparation for the blessings of eternal life. Thus we prepare ourselves for the life to come. Here we are in school being trained in all the necessary preparation for the future existence. Therefore, it is essential that we come in contact with some things that are bitter that we may appreciate the sweet and our earthly education may be complete. If we did not have access to these conditions, our mortal training would be defective and lacking in many features which are essential to the exaltation which awaits us if we are faithful and true.

MORTALITY IS A SCHOOL

If we had been born into this life merely for the purpose of obtaining pleasure, the whole purpose of life would fail. Mortality is in all respects a necessary school—a school where we are trained and receive knowledge and experience that could not come to us in any other way.

An ancient prophet on the American Hemisphere gave us some wonderful counsel in teaching his son on the purpose of this mortal life:

For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, my first-born in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore, all things must needs be a compound in one; wherefore, if it should be one body it must needs remain as dead, having no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility.

"Wherefore, it must needs have been created for a thing of naught; wherefore there would have been no purpose in the end of its creation. Wherefore, this thing must needs destroy the wisdom of God and his eternal purposes, and also the power, and the mercy, and the justice of God. (2 Nephi 2:11-12.)

Let us never forget that no mortal person ever suffered as intensely as our divine Savior Jesus Christ. His entire life in mortality was filled with sorrow as well as the joy which life affords. His description of his suffering is recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants in the following words:

For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men. (D. & C. 19:16-19. )

AN EXPRESSION FROM THE SON OF GOD

Here, my young brother, we have an expression from the Son of God of how he took upon himself suffering, and for whom? For you and for me, for every other soul that will repent and receive his gospel. And why this great suffering? That we, the children of God, might obtain the resurrection and, if faithful to the Father's commandments, a place of salvation and exaltation in our Father's kingdom.

What right have we who are so greatly blessed to complain because the world in which we live is subject to pain, sickness, and sorrow when we commit sin? Has our Eternal Father required more from us than he at one time suffered? Have you ever thought of the suffering of his Beloved Son which, we are informed, was so great that his body shook with pain and blood burst forth from every pore of his body? And for whom did he suffer? Not for himself, but for every living soul who will repent and accept his gospel. That was a manifestation of his great love for all of us mortal beings!

Yes, our Redeemer did all of this for you and for me and for every other creature who receives mortal life in this world. How grateful we should be for this manifestation of his great love for us. For by this means we are able to obtain the resurrection from death and if faithful to his commandments the exaltation in the Father's kingdom.

A MISTAKEN AND FOOLISH NOTION

It is a mistaken and foolish notion to think that mortality should be a place for the children of our Eternal Father that should be free from any pain, sickness, or trial of our faith, and eventually mortal death. To come face to face with pain as well as pleasure, sickness as well as happiness and health, and eventually death—we came here definitely to obtain these experiences. They will be essential to our progress in the world to come, which progress would have been retarded if we had been freed from all these things. It is absolutely essential that every soul should partake of these experiences. They help to make us strong.

Let us consider a comparison. Here are two men, each the same height and weight. One of them exercises his muscles by daily toil and exercise; the other does nothing but sit or lie around. One informs his mind by study; the other cannot take time to put forth an effort to learn. Which do you wish to be, the man who is busy and studious or the man who is slothful and at ease? In the one case the man is active, vigorous, and strong. The other becomes weak, sickly, and a burden to himself as well as to others.

AN EXAMPLE OF TWO OTHER MEN

Here are two other men. One is studious, humble, and prayerful. He has the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord because he is willing to keep God's commandments. He has received the knowledge through his humility and faith that God his Eternal Father lives and that his Son Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world. He is happy and loves his fellow men.

The other is without hope. He has no assurance of salvation in the kingdom that will come. The future is to him an abyss, a place of perpetual darkness. He is without hope or assurance or a perpetual life that will eventually come. Death of the mortal body is not the end!

Yes, our Lord and Redeemer came here and suffered as no other human being was ever called on to suffer, and he went through this awful ordeal for you and for me and for every living creature on the face of this earth and for the earth itself, that all may obtain the resurrection and live again where there is no death.

This being true, should not we mortals upon the earth love him and learn to keep his commandments and prove our gratitude and love for all that he did for us?
