Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

16

Status of Husbands and Wives Worthy of the Celestial Kingdom

Question: "In the Journal of Discourses, Volume 10, on page 24, President Brigham Young states that those who attain the first or celestial resurrection will be pure and holy and perfect in body. Every man and woman who reaches this unspeakable attainment will be beautiful as the angels who surround the throne of God. The wife will not be dissatisfied with her husband or the husband with the wife. If one is sealed to a spouse who does not merit this exaltation, what happens? Will the one who is unworthy have to accept a lesser glory, or is the sealing annulled?"

Answer: Naturally, a person who is unworthy of a place in the celestial kingdom will not receive the blessings pertaining to that kingdom. All blessings are based on worthiness of the individual. We are taught that it is he who endures to the end that is saved. Naturally, the Lord will judge each individual according to opportunities to know and obey his commandments. Thousands of those who died without the knowledge of the gospel and therefore failed to keep the commandments and covenants of the gospel while in mortality will enter the celestial kingdom. It is for this class of people that we do temple work and thus perform vicariously the ordinances of the gospel according to the revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

THE JUSTICE OF OUR HEAVENLY FATHER

Common sense teaches us that the justice of our Eternal Father would cause that provision would be made for those who lived on this earth through the many years when the fulness of the gospel was not among men, and they were left to walk in spiritual darkness. In the heavens when the plan of salvation was prepared, provision was made to meet every vicissitude and condition that would exist among mortals upon the earth. The gospel of salvation would certainly not be complete if some measures had not been provided to meet the conditions which would prevail in mortality. The gospel of salvation is as broad as eternity. It was perfectly understood before the foundation of the earth was laid that there would be conditions arising in the mortal condition wherein many of the children of our Eternal Father would dwell on the earth when there would be no opportunity for mankind to partake of the blessings of the gospel and receive the ordinances essential to their eternal existence in the kingdom of God. It is a well-known fact to all Latter-day Saints, at least, that such a period really did exist. For hundreds of years the world was in spiritual darkness, and it became necessary for the Lord to open the heavens again and send messengers from his presence to restore, as our scriptures say, the fulness of the plan of salvation.

It has been taught by some that as we lay our bodies down, they will rise again in the resurrection with all the impediments and imperfections that they had here, and that if a wife does not love her husband in this state, she cannot love him in the next. This is not so. If a man is worthy of the celestial glory, he will be on the way to eternal perfection, and he is designed to become as perfect and holy as are the angels in heaven.

VIOLATION OF LAW BRINGS PENALTY

If men or women who are married by the eternal covenant should violate that covenant, they will, of course, have to pay the price, which is a dreadful one, for according to the word of the Lord, they will be turned over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of their redemption, if they do not lose the exaltation itself.

Marriage for time and all eternity is the privilege of all faithful members of the Church. Moreover, this blessing seals upon them the continuation of their lives forever, and they will not be denied posterity in the celestial kingdom of God. The Lord never intended that marriage was to be for "time" only. There was no death when Adam and Eve were sealed by the Lord. It was a union that was to endure forever. Death came upon them later by the "transgression" of a law, but this did not break their eternal covenant. Moreover, we all owe a debt of gratitude to Mother Eve for partaking of the "forbidden fruit." It was not a sin, as many Bible commentators would have you believe, but an eternal blessing which caused Eve to rejoice and thank the Lord; and in her joy she praised the Lord and said:

Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient (Moses 5:11. )
