Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

17

Why Administer the Sacrament to Little Children?

Question: "While discussing the ordinance of the sacrament in seminary, one of the members mentioned the lack of full understanding that many of the church members seem to have concerning this ordinance. It was stated that the sacrament is administered to small children of Junior Sunday School age, and some members stated that the familiarity with this ordinance at this age detracted from its sacred meaning, and since the sacrament is the renewal of the covenant made in baptism and these young children have not yet been baptized, why is the sacrament administered to them?"

Answer: We are instructed in the revelation that little children are innocent before the Lord. We read in the nineteenth chapter of Matthew that when children were brought to the Savior, some of the disciples intervened and rebuked those who endeavored to have them blessed, but Jesus rebuked these disciples, saying:

Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

On another occasion he called a little child unto him and set him in the midst of them and then said:

Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me.

But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. (Matthew 18:3-6.)

YOUNG CHILDREN HAVE RECEPTIVE MINDS

Contrary to the expressed opinion of some who think that the partaking of the sacrament at such an early age "detracts from its meaning," we sincerely proclaim that the permitting of small children to partake when it is explained to them acts upon their minds exactly to the contrary. Perhaps some of us fail to comprehend the depth of a small child's mind. Surely little children in the Primary class can understand that the sacrament is a sacred ordinance when they are carefully taught. Then again we may say, even if they are too small to comprehend, the practice is teaching them that it is a sacred ordinance, and this will eventually bare fruit. It seems that a child in the kindergarten class is surely capable of realizing that the sacrament is a special privilege, having relationship to the sacrifice of our Redeemer on the cross. One of the most beautiful passages in the Book of Mormon in relation to the appearance of the Savior to the Nephites is in the following words:

And it came to pass that when they had knelt upon the ground, Jesus groaned within himself, and said: Father, I am troubled because of the wickedness of the people of the house of Israel.

And when he had said these words, he himself also knelt upon the earth; and behold he prayed unto the Father, and the things which he prayed cannot be written, and the multitude did bear record who heard him.

And after this manner do they bear record: The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father;

And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father.

And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of praying unto the Father, he arose; but so great was the joy of the multitude that they were overcome.

And it came to pass that Jesus spake unto them, and bade them arise.

And they arose from the earth, and he said unto them: Blessed are ye because of your faith. And now behold, my joy is full.

And when he had said these words, he wept, and the multitude bare record of it, and he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them.

And when he had done this he wept again;

And he spake unto the multitude, and said unto them: Behold your little ones.

And as they looked to behold they cast their eyes towards heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them. (3 Nephi 17:14-24. )

TOO HASTY IN OUR JUDGMENT

No one will doubt that these little ones were so deeply impressed that they remembered this glorious occasion all the days of their lives. Perhaps we at times are too hasty in our judgment in relation to the capacity of small children to understand.

Surely it would be an act displeasing in the sight of our Eternal Father should we who are older withhold from the children the sacred ordinance of the sacrament simply because we feel that they are too young to understand. Children should be taught from the very beginning the purpose of prayer and that we have a Heavenly Father and that his Beloved Son Jesus Christ died that we might live and obtain the blessings of the kingdom of God.

It has been my privilege to meet with the Primary children when they have been taught by their Primary teachers to pray and to thank our Heavenly Father and his Beloved Son Jesus Christ for the many blessings that we receive. It is very touching, at least to me, to hear a group of Primary children singing the hymn, "I Am a Child of God," and seemingly understanding it.
