Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

18

Blessings of the Descendants of Ephraim

Question: "In discussing the blessings of the twelve tribes of Israel, especially verses thirty-three and thirty-four in section eighty-four in the Doctrine and Covenants, we are informed that we are of the lineage of Ephraim. Is this by blood or by adoption? Are the lost tribes really lost or are they in the world where we do not recognize them?"

Answer: At this present time most of those who are receiving the gospel are of the tribe of Ephraim. The Lamanites, as we learn from the Book of Mormon, are descendants of both Ephraim and Manasseh. The record obtained by Lehi when he sent his sons back to Jerusalem declared that he was a descendant of Manasseh. We have been informed by revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith that the daughters of Ishmael who married the sons of Lehi were descendants of Ephraim. Therefore the prophecy of Jacob upon the head of Joseph was fulfilled. The blessing is as follows:

Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:

The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel: )

Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren. (Genesis 49:22-26.)

AN APOSTASY WAS FORETOLD

When the Lord sent forth his disciples to proclaim the message of the gospel in all the world, he informed them that there would come a time of apostasy when the love of many would wax cold. After saying this he declared:

And again, this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked; (Joseph Smith 1-31.)

This prophetic utterance was an indication that the gospel would have to be restored and that it would be taught in all the world. Following these days of restoration, ". . . the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken." (Ibid., 1:33.)

During this period of restoration, the burden of the preaching of the gospel would rest on the descendants of Ephraim, in other words, the Latter-day Saints.

Today this prophetic statement is being fulfilled. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 133, the Lord has given us the definite information:

Watch, therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour.

Let them, therefore, who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion.

And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house.

Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon.

But verily, thus saith the Lord, let not your flight be in haste, but let all things be prepared before you; and he that goeth, let him not look back lest sudden destruction shall come upon him. (D. & C. 133:11-16.)

THE JEWS ARE TO GATHER AT JERUSALEM

From this and other revelations in the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants, we are informed that the Jews are to gather at Jerusalem. On this, the American Continent, the converted Israelites and Gentiles are to gather with the Latter-Day Saints and the revelation states that those who come from among the Gentiles are to "flee" unto Zion. However, they are not to go out "in haste," that is to say, the Latter-day Saints are preparing they way. They are building the temples and the highways and performing the labors which are necessary for the tribes of Israel when their prophets shall speak to them and they shall receive their call to come to Zion. We know very little about the "lost tribes," who they are or whence they will come. For our present needs, it is sufficient to rely on the word of the Lord concerning these tribes and of their coming, and the Lord has revealed the following:

And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people;

And it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found.

He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land;

And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided. (Ibid., 133:21-24.)

We read in Genesis that in the beginning all of the land surface was in one place as it was in the days of Peleg, (Genesis 10:25.) that the earth was divided. Some Bible commentators have concluded that this division was one concerning the migrations of the inhabitants of the earth between them, but this is not the case. While this is but a very brief statement, yet it speaks of a most important event. The dividing of the earth was not an act of division by the inhabitants of the earth by tribes and peoples, but a breaking asunder of the continents, thus dividing the land surface and creating the Eastern Hemisphere and Western Hemisphere. By looking at a wall map of the world, you will discover how the land surface along the northern and southern coast of the American Hemisphere and Europe and Africa has the appearance of having been together at one time. Of course, there have been many changes on the earth's surface since the beginning. We are informed by revelation that the time will come when this condition will be changed and that the land surface of the earth will come back again as it was in the beginning and all be in one place. This is definitely stated in the Doctrine and Covenants in the following words:

When the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads.

Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out to meet him.

For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion. (D. & C. l33:18-20.)

TIME OF EARTH'S RENEWAL NOT KNOWN

Just when this great change shall come we do not know. If, however, the earth is to be restored as it was in the beginning, then all the land surface will again be in one place as it was before the days of Peleg, when this great division was accomplished. Europe, Africa, and the islands of the sea including Australia, New Zealand, and other places in the Pacific must be brought back and joined together as they were in the beginning.

Before this great work will be accomplished, the prophecy in relation to the tribes of Israel as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants must be fulfilled. Through the preaching of the gospel in all parts of the world, the preparatory work is being accomplished. The "lost tribes" will be discovered and, as the revelation states, the lost sheep among the gentiles will flee to Zion and the Jews to Jerusalem as the Lord has decreed. The Redeemer will come to take his place as King of kings, and the great day of the millennial reign will be ushered in.
