Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

19

Use of Cola Drinks and Playing Games of Chance

Question: "Please enlighten me in relation to the use of cola drinks and the playing of bingo games at parties given by members of the Church. Our neighborhood is starting a group of wives who will play once a month, and each person will bring one small item to be played for. I do not like to go and would like to know our policy in relation to such gatherings or groups."

Answer: Time is precious and should be occupied in some useful pursuit or study in which the mind may be enlightened and spirituality increased. While there is no objection to the brethren and sisters meeting together from time to time to engage in some relaxation, the devoting of the time to some foolish practice as the playing of cards or games of chance is contrary to the spirit and teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I was definitely informed by a chemist that the cola drinks are just as harmful as tea or coffee, and his advice was to leave all such substances alone.

A MILD GAME OF CHANCE

Bingo, if I understand correctly, is a mild game of chance. How much better it would be if when a group of members of the Church comes together for some relaxation their time could be spent in a discussion of some of the vital principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ or listening to some historical narration pertaining to the history of the Church or a remarkable experience that would be faith-promoting as well as interesting to all who are assembled. There are so many ways in which groups, when they come together, might be entertained and at the same time edified by the relating of some remarkable incident particularly in connection with the preaching of the gospel, the establishing of pioneer communities, and a thousand other things that would be faith-promoting.

The Old Testament, the Book of Mormon, and even the history of the Church are replete with faith-promoting incidents that should never be forgotten and which never grow old by repetition. The Lord has commanded members of the Church to improve their minds by study and by faith, and the ancient prophets have predicted a glorious day to come before the second advent of the Son of God, a day when, as it is written, the Lord will make a new covenant with the house of Israel:

A NEW COVENANT WITH THE HOUSE OF ISRAEL

And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. (Jeremiah 31:34. )

What a glorious day this will be. Moreover, that day, according to the revelation of the Lord, is near at hand. It is written:

Verily, I say unto you, this generation, in which these things shall be shown forth, shall not pass away until all I have told you shall be fulfilled. (Joseph Smith 1:34.)
