Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

20

"If Thy Hand Offend Thee Cut It Off"

Question: "We were discussing the early ministry of our Savior and particularly the statement:

" 'And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: . . .

" 'And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched:' (Mark 9:43, 45.)

"I am of the opinion that we cannot comply with the Savior's injunction to cut off a hand or a foot or to pluck out an eye. It would not be safe for anyone to cut off a hand or otherwise to mutilate the body.

"Would you please tell us how these teachings are to be applied."

Answer: In reading the Old Testament as well as the New Testament, we should keep in mind the fact that the Hebrews were a people who indulged constantly in figures of speech to convey their thoughts and impress upon the minds of the people the importance of what they had to say. The Old Testament, as well as the New, is filled with excellent figures of this kind intended to impress upon the minds of the people important doctrines and prophetic utterances. There is little doubt that can be raised against the fact that the people who heard these remarks were deeply impressed with the forceful and correct meaning of what was intended. They would not take such a remark literally according to the words which were uttered.

CREDIT ANCIENT PEOPLE WITH INTELLIGENCE

We should give these ancient people credit for enough intelligence to grasp correctly the full intent of such a statement and the correct meaning of the Savior's remark. When the Lord spoke of parts of the body, it is evident that he had in mind close friends or relatives who endeavored to lead us from the path of rectitude and humble obedience to the divine commandments we receive from the Lord.

If any friend or relative endeavors to lead a person away from the commandments, it is better to dispense with his friendship and association rather than to follow him in evil practices to destruction. This use of comparison or illustration was as common in ancient days as it is in the present age. We should not, in reading these ancient expressions in the New Testament, take such a statement as this referred to in the words of the Savior recorded by Mark in the literal interpretation. When properly understood it becomes a very impressive figure of speech.

If you have friends or associates who endeavor to entice you to commit sin, cut them off. Withdraw from their association lest they drag you down to the committing of some sin or transgression against divine will. It is better to forsake friends or companions who indulge in improper conduct than to be led by them into the committing of some sin or transgression against the divine will. This comparison made by our Redeemer is very impressive and should appeal to each of us and assist us in rejecting the enticings of friends whenever some improper project or action is contemplated, even if it should mean the loss of such friendship no matter how dear it has been to us.
