Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

21

Significance of Temporal and Spiritual Law

Question: "In the twenty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verses thirty to the end, there are statements concerning temporal and spiritual laws which are not very clear to me. For instance in verses thirty-four and thirty-five, the Lord says:

" 'Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created.

" 'Behold, I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself; and I gave unto him commandment, but no temporal commandment gave I unto him, for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither carnal nor sensual.'

"Will you please explain the meaning of this statement from the thirtieth verse to the end of the section?"

Answer: The great difference between our Eternal Father and mortal man is the fact that he has gained perfection and to him there is nothing temporal. Even the mortal life that we are now in, while to us it has a beginning and an end, to our Eternal Father is only a necessary step in his eternal plan for the benefit of man. We were privileged to come here to gain experience which is essential to our eternal progress and perfection. All that we have to go through in mortality is part of the divine plan. We are taught that there was never a beginning and there never will be an end. Mortal life is only a step on the road of eternal progression. Here we are subject to change.

WE COME INTO THIS LIFE AS INFANTS

We come into this world as infants, and our bodies grow under natural conditions to the full stature of the spirits which possess them. Mortality is therefore only a step in our eternal existence. We see most everything subject to change, and when our mortal journey is done, we will pass on, the body going to the grave and the spirit returning to the spirit world to await the resurrection. In the resurrection the spirit and the body will again be united never again to be separated. If we have lived in faithful obedience to the divine plan given to Adam and handed down by duly appointed servants of the Lord, we are promised a glorious resurrection. And we will become gods, even sons and daughters of God with power eventually to gain perfection, ruling over our own posterity and thus laying a foundation of eternal progress as sons and daughters of our Eternal Father and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, our Eldest Brother, who redeemed us from eternal death by the shedding of his blood on the cross.

This mortal life is granted us that we may be schooled properly and trained through the plan of salvation to be worthy to become in very deed sons and daughters of God. Our Eternal Father would have every soul saved if that were feasible. Salvation, however, is based on merit and obedience to divine law and therefore is only obtained through compliance with divine commandments. Mortality is a training school. It is here where we are tried and tested to see if we will be true to our Redeemer and our Eternal Father under the mortal conditions which confront us. We are shut out of the presence of our Eternal Father and are subject to the various conditions peculiar to mortality.

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES WERE DECLARED FROM THE BEGINNING

Among the lessons which we are expected to learn is to walk by faith and not by sight. We are not left to grope and find our way in total darkness. The fundamental principles of the gospel have been declared from the beginning so that any who will may receive the divine light and knowledge. Part of our schooling is that we may become acquainted with pain, sickness, disappointments as well as receive the pleasures which mortality affords. Through this mortal school we gain by experience many lessons which could not be obtained in any other way. Mortal life was never intended to be free from toil, tribulation, and diverse conditions. All of these increase our knowledge through experience, and for this we were assigned to come to this mortal world. Therefore, mortality should be looked on as a period of schooling all of which is essential to our eternal progression and exaltation in the kingdom of our Eternal Father.
