Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

22

Without the Ordinances No Man Can See the Face of God

Question: "I would appreciate an explanation of a passage in the Doctrine and Covenants which is as follows:

" 'And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

" 'Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

" 'And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

" 'For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

" 'Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

" 'But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.' " (D. & C. 84:19-24.)

Answer: If you will look at the date of this revelation, you will discover that it was given in September 1832, which was two years after the organization of the Church and several years after the appearance of the Father and the Son to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Therefore, permit me to emphasize this fact: There is no law or commandment which declares that the Father could not appear to a man in person when the Holy Priesthood was not among men on the earth. In this day when the divine authority is here and men are appointed to officiate in its ordinances, there is no occasion for the Father to come to any man who has no divine authority. At a time when the priesthood is conferred, and there are authorized servants who bear divine authority, there could hardly arise a time when the Father and the Son should have occasion to appear to any man who was without that authority.

THE DIVINE LAW OF WITNESSES

There is one thing, however, that is of the greatest importance. The divine law has always been that there should be at least two witnesses to every manifestation of vital importance. It is written in the book of Deuteronomy:

One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established. (Deuteronomy 19:15.)

The Savior also said:

Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.

But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.

And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican.

Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. (Matthew 18:15-18. )

COUNSEL OF THE SAVIOR NEEDS TO BE FOLLOWED

How wonderful it would be if this counsel of our Savior were universally followed and, when differences arise between brethren, they would take time to sit down calmly and consider their differences in the spirit of charity, humility, and prayer. It has occurred many times that a trivial matter could have been easily settled among brethren by a calm and humble discussion of differences in the spirit of prayer. Many a heart is aching and many a friendship has been permanently broken because the power of Satan has entered into the hearts of men and brethren.
