Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

23

Israel, Jew, and Gentile

Question: "In the scriptures we frequently see the terms Israel, Jew, Gentile. Will you kindly explain these terms? Does the term Gentile include those of the descent of Cain?"

Answer: The name Israel is one that the Lord gave to Jacob, son of Isaac, as we find recorded in Genesis, Chapter 32, which reads as follows:

And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day.

And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him.

And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.

And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed.

And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him there.

And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved. (Genesis 32:24-30.)

This is how the name Israel came into existence and became the name of the descendants of Jacob from that time forth.

GENERAL USE OF TITLE

The term Jew or Jews is one given quite generally to the Israelites who were living in the days of our Redeemer. It had become the national name to all the Israelites then living in the borders of Palestine. For instance, Paul was known as a Jew, but he informs us that he was a descendant of Benjamin.

The descendants of Jacob from the time of the sojourn in Egypt were known as Israelites. This name, coming down from the divine naming of Jacob as previously stated, has continued to this day.

The name Gentile is a name that was given to the people of foreign countries by the Jews and has prevailed to the present day. The expression "Jew or Gentile" is very common, and the latter has reference very generally to most non-Israelite peoples, except the descendants of Cain. This term is used frequently in the scriptures and is applied to all of the white inhabitants of Europe and the western hemisphere.

In the days of Peter and the ancient apostles, the inhabitants of Europe and part of Asia were generally spoken of as Gentiles. When the Savior left his disciples he sent them first to teach and convert the Jews and their fellows of the seed of Abraham, and the ancient apostles felt that their mission was only to the scattered sheep of the house of Israel. Paul and his associates who went forth on missionary journeys in that day confined their labors to the Jews who were scattered through Asia Minor. When they were stoned, persecuted, and sorely abused, Paul said to his companions, ". . . we [will] turn to the Gentiles," (Acts 13:46.) and thus the time of the Gentiles, as far as Paul and his companions were concerned, was ushered in.

THE LORD TAUGHT PETER A LESSON

Then, again, we read of Peter, who thought that the gospel was intended solely for the Jews. The Lord had to teach him a lesson and convince him that the gospel was also for the Gentiles by giving him a vision of unclean beasts and fowls and telling Peter to kill and eat. He answered,

Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean.

And the voice spake unto him again the second time, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.

This vision was repeated, and Peter became convinced that the gospel was for the Gentiles as well as for the Jews. (Ibid., 10:9 ff.)

So, likewise, Paul, after being stoned and driven from the Jewish synagogues, turned to the Gentiles. So we see that in that dispensation the Jews were first to hear the gospel, and when they rejected the message, the Lord commanded the apostles to turn to the Gentiles. In this dispensation the Gentiles have their day for the gospel first, and when they refuse, it will be taken to the Jews.

For added information I refer you to the title page of the Book of Mormon, first paragraph.
