Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

24

Temporal and Spiritual Law

Question: A friend passed me a copy of the November Improvement Era, and I was intrigued with Joseph Fielding Smith's explanation of temporal and spiritual law. He stated that 'all that we have to go through in mortality is part of the divine plan.' Are we to understand from this statement that God is responsible for all the evil and suffering in the world? that it was the plan of the Lord to allow such mass killings as Alexander, Napoleon, and Hitler perpetrated? moreover, that God created all the microbes, bacilli, and viruses that cause so much suffering to the human race as necessary for a period of schooling, all of which is essential to our eternal progression and exaltation?

"Any person who has read Albert Schweitzer's On the Edge of the Primeval Forest and learned the horrible physical suffering he witnessed in his hospital would surely be obliged to admit that, if this suffering was part of the divine plan, then God must be a sadistic monster, and not a loving God."

Answer: After reading this letter I was impressed by the poem written by Thomas Bracken, entitled "Not Understood." The first stanza is as follows:

Not understood. We move along asunder; Our paths grow wider as the seasons creep Along the years; we marvel and we wonder Why life is life. And then we fall asleep— Not understood.

It is an indisputable fact that human beings do not come into this mortal world merely to partake of that which is pleasant, joyful, and free from pain and suffering. Mortality is part of our eternal schooling. We came here to gain experience that could not be obtained in any other way, experience that is essential to increase our knowledge and understanding and to fit us in the eternal world to come and to prepare us to become sons and daughters of our Eternal Father. Therefore we are subject to all of the vicissitudes that pertain to mortality. No mortal life would be complete if there had been no disappointments, no pain or physical discomfort, nor suffering. All of these experiences form part of our eternal schooling. Should any human individual come into this mortal world and never partake of some trial, some sorrow, disappointment, or physical pain, he would have lost some of the most essential lessons and experiences that should have been received to balance out his mortal education and fit him for the eternal life where he, through the blessings of the gospel and obedience to divine will, is destined to become a son of God and to rule and reign over an eternal kingdom.

MAJORITY DO NOT LEARN REAL PURPOSE OF LIFE

It is true that the majority of human creatures never learn in mortality what the real purpose is for their being in this mortal world. The simple truth is that it is an essential part of the divine plan. Mortality is one grade in our eternal progression that is definitely essential in order that man may, through obedience to the divine will, become exalted as a son of God, possessing all the authority, power, and wisdom.

We read in the Bible the following:

Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcome, and am set down with my Father in his throne.

He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. (Revelation 3:20-22.)

Members of the Church should pay more attention to the words of our Redeemer, especially in relation to his suffering which was voluntarily received that we—all who are willing to follow him and keep his commandments—might not suffer. He paid the price for our eternal redemption, and all that he has asked of us is that we keep his commandments.

ALL ARE ASSURED RESURRECTION FROM THE DEAD

No matter how wicked a man may become, he is assured the resurrection from the dead, for the Redeemer paid the price even for the wicked that they might receive the resurrection and live again. The resurrection is just as universal as was the fall. It is written in the words of our Savior:

For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I,

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men. (D. & C. 19:16-19.)

Every mortal soul should be exceedingly grateful to the Redeemer of this world for the manifestation of his great love for each of us which is made manifest in his extreme suffering, which brings to us the resurrection of the dead—not only the resurrection of mankind, but of the earth itself and every creature that has dwelt or will dwell upon it in this mortal state. It has been revealed by his own words to the Prophet Joseph Smith as follows:

And again, verily, verily, I say unto you that when the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season;

And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand. (Ibid., 29:22-25. )
