Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

26

Authority for Baptism for the Dead

Question: "I have been reading the Book of Mormon and I do not understand where you get authority for baptism for the dead as you Latter-day Saints practice it. If Alma 34:31-35 and 42:10-13 are of correct translation, where is your authority?"

Answer: For a complete answer the verses in question are quoted:

Yea, I would that ye would come forth and harden not your hearts any longer; for behold, now is the time and the day of your salvation; and therefore, if ye will repent and harden not your hearts, immediately shall the great plan of redemption be brought about unto you.

For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world.

For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final state of the wicked. (Alma 34:31-35.)

And from the forty-second chapter of Alma:

Therefore, as they had become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature, this probationary state became a state for them to prepare; it became a preparatory state.

And now remember, my son, if it were not for the plan of redemption, (laying it aside) as soon as they were dead their souls were miserable, being cut off from the presence of the Lord.

And now, there was no means to reclaim men from this fallen state, which man had brought upon himself because of his own disobedience;

Therefore, according to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God. (Ibid., 42:10-13.)

I am sorry that you have misunderstood so seriously the words of Amulek in Alma. These words conform exactly to the words of Jesus Christ in the Gospel of Mark:

And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. (Mark 16:15-16. )

EVERY MAN IS GIVEN A CHANCE

This has nothing to do whatever with those who died without having an opportunity to hear the gospel. The Lord gives every man a chance of repentance and there is his justice. The millions who have died without hearing the name of Christ or having the privilege of receiving his gospel are to have that chance. Therefore, the Lord has revealed to us the work of salvation for the dead and this means that the dead who never had the opportunity to repent and to believe in Jesus Christ while they were living on this earth shall have the opportunity in the spirit world to receive it and the work will be done by proxy for them in the temples.

Now the Lord condemns those who have heard the gospel and reject it, and these are the people spoken of in Alma 34:31-35. This has reference only to those who have had the opportunity of hearing the truth and then reject it. Remember the Nephites at one time were all members of the Church. Amulek is speaking to those who have turned away from it. He is not speaking to the dead who never had an opportunity to hear. These people who had the warning and rebelled are left without excuse.

BAPTISMS FOR THOSE WHO HAVE NOT HEARD THE GOSPEL

We are not performing baptisms for these, but for those who died never having had an opportunity to receive the truth.

I fail to see any force in your argument on Alma, Chapter 42:10-13. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only Church that I know of on the face of the earth that holds out a salvation for the dead who died and never heard of the name of Jesus Christ while they were living.
