Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

28

What Is the Meaning of First Death?

Question: "In a recent Sunday School lesson in Doctrine and Covenants Studies by Bryant S. Hinckley there was an article, copied from the study course on Church History and Modern Revelation by Joseph Fielding Smith, which appeared to be in direct contradiction to Doctrine and Covenants 29:41-44. This statement was originally made by Orson Pratt and states that the first death is the separation of the body and the spirit. Yet Christ himself says that the first death is a spiritual death of being cast out from his presence and that the second death is the same, a spiritual death. Then in verse 43 Christ speaks of the separation of the body and spirit as a natural death.

"Is this statement, by Orson Pratt and used in these lesson books, in agreement with or in contradiction to the words of Christ in Doctrine and Covenants 29:41-42? In either event please explain why."

Answer: This morning I received your letter in which you call attention to what you think is a contradiction in a quotation by Orson Pratt with the Doctrine and Covenants 29:41-44, in relation to the first and second deaths.

I am sorry you did not give me the page, or lesson, in which this quotation occurs. I have not time to search for it. I hope, however, you are not making a man an offender for a word. (Isa. 29:21.) Really I fail to see that there is any real difficulty or conflict in referring to the temporal, or natural, death as the first death. This all depends upon the viewpoint and the nature of the question being discussed.

FIRST DEATH WAS BANISHMENT

It is true that the first death pronounced upon Adam is called the first death, and so it is, because it was banishment pronounced upon him before the natural death came upon him. It also becomes the first death pronounced upon all others who violated the commandments and break the law of God, but it is not the first death to those who do not sin against the light. For instance it never becomes the first death to little children who die before reaching the years of accountability, for we read in this same section (vs. 46-47) that they are redeemed from the foundation of the world; nor does it become the first death to those who are baptized at the age of accountability and who remain faithful to the end.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. (John 8:51.)

Orson Pratt is not alone in referring to the physical, or natural, death as the first death. Jacob, brother of Nephi, so speaks of it.

And it shall come to pass that when all men shall have passed from this first death unto life, insomuch as they have become immortal, they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel, and then cometh the judgment, and then must they be judged according to the holy judgment of God. (2 Nephi 9:15.)

AMULEK'S WORDS ON THE RESURRECTION

Amulek, also in discoursing on the resurrection used it in like manner.

Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption. (Alma 11:45.)

It cannot be any more out of order for Elder Orson Pratt to speak of the physical death as the first death than it is for Jacob or Amulek.

I see no more inconsistency in this expression than I do in speaking of the "first" resurrection being that at the coming of Christ. If I wanted to be offensive I could argue that this is not the first resurrection, for the first resurrection was immediately following the resurrection of our Lord. Yet the Lord speaks of the one yet to come as the first. See D. & C. 45:54; 76:64; Rev. 20:5.
