Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

29

What Is the Meaning of Second Death?

Question: "My question concerns Helaman 14:18 in the Book of Mormon where Samuel, the Lamanite prophet, says, '. . . but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off as to things pertaining to righteousness?' On first reading this one gets the idea that Samuel is referring to the sons of perdition and in following the cross reference to Alma it gives the same impression that the second death is an everlasting death as to things pertaining unto righteousness. Just exactly, what did Samuel mean by second death?"

Answer: This is in answer to your very thoughtful letter in relation to the question of the "second death." I can readily understand how you have become confused in relation to the exact meaning of this expression.

It is very clear in the Doctrine and Covenants Section 76:30-37, that the only persons who will be completely overcome by this dreadful fate are the sons of perdition who go with the devil and his angels into "outer darkness." All the rest of mankind will receive some measure of salvation, after the suffering of the wrath of God. From the reading of other passages we discover, however, that there will be great multitudes, who will never come back again to dwell in the presence of the Father and the Son. These receive banishment from their presence, but not entirely do they get beyond the divine influence.

SPIRITUAL DEATH IS BANISHMENT

In Section 29:41, we have a definition of the spiritual death which is banishment, which shall be pronounced upon the wicked. In the 44th verse of this same section we read: "And they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not." This verse could well refer to the sons of perdition also because it is pronounced against all those "who repent not." We may well believe that all others except sons of perdition will eventually repent, else they could not find a place in any degree of salvation. True, the vast majority will not repent until after their suffering, especially those who go to the telestial kingdom, and their repentance will come in the spirit world. It is strange but there are those who, because of their evil deeds get beyond the power of repentance. This is the condition of Satan and his angels.

I think we, most of us, have made a dreadful, but not unpardonable, mistake in thinking that the sons of perdition will be very few. I have heard some say they can be "counted on the fingers of one hand." Where this thought originated I do not know. In my thinking there will be a large number, exceedingly large, that will become sons of perdition.

MANY NEPHITES BECOME APOSTATES

In relation to the Nephites we should keep this in mind. Most of them, if not all, spoken of by Jacob (Chapter 3:11), by Alma, Samuel, Mormon, and others, were apostates who once had the light of truth and willfully turned away from it, and fought it. They were not like the people of the Gentile nations who never had the light of truth.

We read in the Book of Mormon where the people were all righteous and in the course of a few years there appeared among them many apostates who endeavored to destroy the Church. Think, for instance, of the time when the day, a night, and a day appeared as one day. Following this they all became a united people, repentant and having the Spirit of the Lord. In the course of a few years they had turned away in great numbers and were persecuting the Church, had revived the Gadianton band and threatened to destroy the Church. Then came the great destruction at the crucifixion because of their abominations.

After the appearing of the Lord and the wicked had all been destroyed, the Nephites and Lamanites became one people and for two hundred years lived in the greatest peace and prosperity.

And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. (4 Nephi 15.)

REBELLION AMONG NEPHITES

They had with them during this time the guidance of their twelve, three of whom had remained from the beginning. Then they began to rebel and became more wicked than any other people on the face of the earth. They tried to kill the three disciples who were privileged to tarry, and finally destroyed every soul who believed in Christ.

These were not like those who persecuted the Church in the days of Rome, or the Gentiles to whom Paul went. These rebellious people in the western world, had sinned knowingly and had tried to destroy Christ. Therefore the harsh things said about them by their prophets were said to apostates who once knew the truth and rebelled against it. Therefore Nephi, Jacob, Alma, Samuel and Mormon were fully justified in their condemnation of their own people. Samuel was justified in pronouncing such a penalty upon his Nephite brethren:

Behold, we are surrounded by demons, yea, we are encircled about by the angels of him who hath sought to destroy our souls. Behold, our iniquities are great. O Lord, canst thou not turn away thine anger from us? And this shall be your language in those days.

But behold, your days of probation are past; ye have procrastinated the day of your salvation until it is everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure; yea, for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head. (Helaman 13:37-38.)

THEIR SORROWING WAS NOT UNTO REPENTANCE

And the words of Mormon:

And it came to pass that when I, Mormon, saw their lamentation and their mourning and their sorrow before the Lord, my heart did begin to rejoice within me, knowing the mercies and the long-suffering of the Lord, therefore supposing that he would be merciful unto them that they would again become a righteous people.

But behold this my joy was vain, for their sorrowing was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin. (Mormon 2:12-13.)

You are acquainted with the words of Paul:

For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. (Hebrews 6:4-6.)
