Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

31

Has the Spirit of the Lord Been Taken from Men?

Question: During the course of our lesson the statement was made that 'the Spirit of the Lord has been removed from the earth.' This was later defined as being 'the Spirit of truth which lights all men who come into the world.' Is this so? If it is, why do the missionaries still preach that the Spirit of the Lord is with every man, so they can distinguish good from evil? Has the Spirit of the Lord been taken away from Church members as well as the world at large? When I first joined the Church, I was told the Spirit of the Lord inspired the great men of the earth—doctors, inventors, etc. Who inspires them now?"

Answer: You seem to be troubled over what was said about the Spirit of the Lord being removed from men and yet it is by the Spirit that inventions and discoveries are made.

The word of the Lord to Joel is being fulfilled, and has been since the organization of the Church and the Lord is still pouring out his Spirit upon certain individuals who are discovering, inventing and bringing to pass his purposes in the earth; and he will continue to do so until his purposes are accomplished.

THIS SPIRIT IS NOT THE HOLY GHOST

This Spirit is not the Holy Ghost but the Spirit of Christ, or Light of Truth, and such men the Lord is using in his service. This does not prevent the Lord from withdrawing his inspiration and leaving the wicked in darkness. Therefore, he has said:

I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth.

I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every soul;

And the saints also shall hardly escape; nevertheless, I, the Lord, am with them, and will come down in heaven from the presence of my Father and consume the wicked with unquenchable fire. (D. & C. 63:32-34.)

Again in the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord has said:

For I, the Almighty have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for their wickedness.

And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness. (Ibid., 84:96-97.)

In Section 33, the Lord has said:

And he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts. (Ibid., 1:33. Compare Genesis 6:3.)

From this, we learn that the Lord is not guiding the nations nor the peoples of the earth in their wickedness and rebellion.

CONTENTIOUS LEADERS RECEIVE INSPIRATION FROM SATAN

The present turmoil and contention in the world is due to the fact that the leaders of nations are getting their inspiration from Satan and not from the Lord. The Lord's Spirit is withdrawn from them according to his promise; but remember this does not mean that his Spirit has been withdrawn from those who are honestly endeavoring to bring to pass his purposes, and it will lead them to the truth if they will hearken to the voice of the Spirit, but when they fail to hearken to this Spirit they go into darkness. (See D. & C. 84:45-53. ) When a man rejects the light of this Spirit his mind is darkened and the Lord says he will withdraw the inspiration that otherwise would be his, if he is in rebellion.

So we discover that men whose thoughts are evil have the light of truth darkened or withdrawn from them and Satan takes its place.
