Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

34

The Holy Ghost and the Light of Christ

Question: "In your discourse (in Doctrines of Salvation) you seem to make a definite break between the Holy Ghost and the Light of Christ. In Dr. Talmage's writings (Articles of Faith) he seems to tie the two together under the person of God the Holy Ghost, and in other instances to the power or authority of this great Personage, or to the agencies through which he ministers. Is there a difference of opinion or do I misinterpret the meaning?"

Answer: No one wishes more than I do for the time to come spoken of by Jeremiah, when it will not be necessary to teach any person, "For they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord."

I have tried all my life to proclaim the simple truths of the gospel in a clear manner which all can understand. The result is that one statement of fact is bound to come in conflict with the set opinion or doctrine of some one which requires further explanation and perchance a determined opposition. Now the Lord has made most matters in relation to our salvation, the kingdom of God, the Godhead and our relation thereto, perfectly clear; at least in my judgment he has done so. Among these doctrines President Joseph F. Smith, my father, has made clear the difference between the Holy Ghost and his mission, and the mission of the Holy Spirit, or Light of Christ.

THE HOLY GHOST IS A PERSONAGE OF SPIRIT

The Holy Ghost is a Personage of Spirit, in the likeness of God the Father, in other words a likeness of the Father and the Son. His mission is to instruct and enlighten the minds of those who, through their faithfulness have obeyed the commandments of the Father and the Son. He bears witness of the truth, quickens the minds of those who have made covenant and reveals to them the mysteries of the kingdom of God. He is a special messenger from the Father and the Son and carries out their will; but he is not sent to the world. The Lord said of him when telling his apostles that he was to leave them, that he would send to them "another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever." Then the Lord adds:

Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. (John 14:16-l7.)

ONE EXCEPTION TO THIS LAW

There is one exception to this law as proclaimed by our Lord. That is in a case like that of Cornelius, who was a devout believer. He received a manifestation from the Holy Ghost. Again: Moroni has proclaimed that any honest seeker after truth who diligently asks of the Lord, will receive a manifestation of the truth through the Holy Ghost. But once the Holy Ghost has given that manifestation, then the person has no further claim for further manifestations, until he has complied with the law. Now, IF the world cannot receive this gift, then we must conclude that the enlightenment that comes to men in the world—and such enlightenment has come on many occasions—it must be from some other source. When, therefore the Lord said through Joel, that he would pour out his spirit on all flesh (Joel 2:28.) it was not the Holy Ghost that was to be given to ALL, only to the few, for, remember, the world cannot receive this Spirit.

On the other hand, the Spirit of Christ (sometimes called the Light of Christ, and Spirit of truth, or Spirit of Jesus Christ) is a spirit that is given to EVERY MAN, no matter who he is or what is his belief. Of this spirit the Lord has said:

For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

And the Spirit (i.e. of Christ) giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit.

And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father. (D. & C. 84:45-47.)

FURTHER STATEMENT ON LIGHT OF CHRIST

Again the Lord speaks of this Spirit:

He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth;

Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made;

As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. (Ibid., 88:6-13.)

Moroni also speaks of the Light of Christ and says:

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which persuadeth to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. . . .

And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall be judged. (Moroni 7:16, 18.)

WORDS OF JOHN THE APOSTLE

John the Apostle also speaks of the Light of Christ as follows:

There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe.

He was not the Light, but was sent to bear witness of the Light.

That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. (John 1:6-9.)

I know that frequently the Holy Ghost and the Spirit of Christ have become confused. There are passages that have to be judged solely by the context, but it seems to me that the Lord has made very clear the difference between the mission of each.

One is a Personage of Spirit and the third member in the Godhead. The other is a spirit of light and truth which fills the immensity of space and gives light to the intelligence of men, whether they believe in Christ or not. It is this second light that the Lord has threatened to withdraw from men, not the first, for men do not have the first only as they subscribe to the commandments of the gospel. (See Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 2, pp. 149-156 for further discussion of the Mission of the Holy Ghost and the Spirit of Christ. )
