Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

35

Why Do Some Have More Ability than Others?

Question: "Why are some spirits born into the world with more ability than others? and why are some more rebellious to counsel or less receptive to truth?

Answer: There are two fundamental principles by which we are all governed. The first is free agency. This is the power to make our own choice because the power is in us. The second is that some of us were created with a disposition to accept counsel and some of us with a disposition to follow our own judgment independent of counsel. We were not created equal in the spirit any more than we are in the flesh to be obedient to counsel and with equal powers of intelligence. Even there as well as here some of us by application learned more readily than others. Some were not inclined as much as others to learn and hence their progress was retarded.

CREATED WITH DIFFERENT DISPOSITIONS

The spirits of men were created with different dispositions and likes and talents. Some evidently were mechanically inclined, from them have come our inventors. Some loved music and hence they have become great musicians. We evidently brought to this world some if not all of the inclinations and talents that we had there. The fact that one person finds one bent, like mathematics easy and another finds it difficult, may, in my judgment, be traced to the spirit existence. So with other talents and skills. It was these characteristics that enabled our Eternal Father to choose certain individuals for certain work on the earth, such as Adam, Abraham, Moses and Joseph Smith. The Lord chose Cyrus and named him one hundred years before he was born to perform the work assigned to him on the earth. It is my judgment that thousands of others were chosen for their special fields because they showed talents and dispositions in that spirit world.

Abraham recorded the following:

And the Lord said unto me: These two facts exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all. (Abraham 3:19.)

Abraham further recorded:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was. And among all these were many of the noble and great ones. (Ibid., 3:22.)

ALL COMES THROUGH THE GIFT OF AGENCY

But let us not lose sight of free agency; neither that we had our dispositions there and our tendencies. All of this comes through the great gift of free will, or agency. It was because men had been given the power to do their own thinking that led to the rebellion in heaven. No one was coerced, or forced to take an evil course. We all had equal privileges before the laws there existing, to receive salvation there and here, according to our works. Therefore many rebelled being led by Lucifer who was ambitious and hence, with their eyes open, lost their salvation. We were not forced to do evil or to become wicked, they made their own choice, contrary to all the instructions that they received, for without any doubt the laws there were perfect and every man was instructed to do good. If we will remember that characteristics, dispositions, and the same freedom to act were given us there, I think that all else can be readily explained.
