Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

36

What Use Is Free Agency during the Millennium?

Question: "If this earth is the proving ground to see if we will obey the Lord's commandments, and we are given free agency to see whether we will choose good or evil, and during the millennium there is no evil, then of what use is free agency? How can a man born during the millennium choose good if he has not been presented also with the evil?"

Answer: The Lord has never taken any course that would deprive any person of his free agency. Even during the millennium that privilege will be granted them.

In Isaiah, Chapter 65, we read:

For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.

There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.

And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat of the fruit of them.

They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the works of their hands.

They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them.

And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent's meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord. (Isaiah 65:17-25. )

NOTE PARTICULARLY VERSE 20

Note particularly verse 20 which has been italicized for emphasis. Give some thought to this verse. Now observe carefully the following verses from Section 101 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

And prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together.

And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed.

And also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall become new; that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth.

And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face,

And in that day whatsoever any man shall ask, it shall be given unto him.

And in that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any man.

And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death.

In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree;

And when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious.

Yea, verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things— (D. & C. 101:23-32.)

A GREAT DIFFERENCE WITHOUT POWER OF SATAN

It will make a great difference when Satan will have his power taken away during that period, but the inhabitants of the earth will still have their agency. We are taught that during that thousand years, men will not be compelled to believe and that there will be many, at least in the beginning, who will belong to the Protestant and Catholic churches. The Lord will not take away from them their right to believe as they will. However, if they persist in their unbelief under the conditions which will prevail, they will be condemned. Before that period is over all will have received the truth. We read again from Isaiah:

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. (Isaiah 11: 9.)

PROPHETIC WORDS OF ZECHARIAH

I also call your attention to Zechariah, Chapter 14, and particularly the following verses:

And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of the nations which come against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.

And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain.

And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no rain; there shall be the plague, wherewith the Lord will smite the heathen that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all nations that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles. (Zechariah 14:16-19. )

For further discussion on this question I refer you to Question 25, "Churches on Earth during the Millennium," Answers to Gospel Questions, Vol. 1, pages 108-111.
