Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

38

Is Baptism Necessary for Entrance into the Terrestrial and Telestial Kingdoms?

Question: "Is baptism necessary to gain entry into the terrestrial and telestial kingdoms? Won't all who are resurrected and go into these lower kingdoms have to be baptized before they can leave paradise? What will happen to those in paradise who refuse to accept the gospel and accept baptism, even by proxy?"

Answer: The scriptures are very clear in declaring that baptism is for the celestial kingdom only. For a place in the terrestrial or the telestial kingdom, baptism is not required.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

. . . A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God, without being born of water and the Spirit. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 12.)

The kingdom of God mentioned by the Savior in his conversation with Nicodemus points clearly to the fact that it is the celestial kingdom that is meant. This is also implied in the instructions given by our Savior to his apostles when he left them. They were to go into all the world and preach the gospel, all who accepted and were baptized should enter the celestial kingdom, but all others would be damned, or be assigned to one of the other kingdoms.

DOCTRINE IS PLAINLY EXPLAINED

In the Doctrine and Covenants this is made very plain. In Section 20 we read:

That as many as would believe and be baptized in his holy name, and endure in faith to the end, should be saved—

Not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in all things, should have eternal life.

As well as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and of the Son;

Which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, infinite and eternal, without end. Amen.

And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. (D. & C. 20:25-29.)

See also Section 76.

A PROBATIONARY PERIOD FOR MAN

In addition to these passages read what is written in Section 29, part of which I quote:

And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the day of his probation—that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe.

And they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not. (1bid., 29:43-44.)

From the words of Paul to the Romans we read:

What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?

Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection:

Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

For he that is dead is freed from sin.

Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him:

Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him.

For in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.

Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. (Romans 6:1-11.)

UNBAPTIZED ARE DAMNED

All who are not baptized are damned. The Savior said:

. . . Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. (Mark 16:15-16. )

It is a damnation (stopping) and denied progress in exaltation to all those who refuse to receive the light. We will never be baptized for all the dead. Baptism for the dead is for those who died without the knowledge or the privilege of having the knowledge of the gospel, and then it will apply only to those who are dead who are willing to accept the gospel in the spirit world.

In doing work for the dead, as we do not have a Urim and Thummim, we are under the necessity of doing work in the temples for all the names we find in our genealogical records and leave it to the Lord to do the judging as to which are worthy. We have perfect confidence that the Lord can do the segregating.
