Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

39

Was the Apostle Paul Married?

Question: We seem to be in controversy on our discussions as to whether Apostle Paul was married or not. Some of our quorum feel that as he knew the various principles of the gospel he would certainly have complied, although no mention, to our knowledge, is in the scripture. We would certainly appreciate your help in this matter."

Answer: You state that members of your quorum are in a controversy over the question whether Paul was married or not. The controversy hangs on the statement of Paul in the seventh chapter of I Corinthians, verse 8, which reads:

I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them if they abide even as I.

This does not bear witness that Paul was not married, and his own evidence in other scripture infers strongly that he was.

ALL MINISTERS REQUIRED TO MARRY

It is my understanding that in Paul's day all ministers had to be married, however, I think the evidence is strong enough that Paul was married, based upon his own statement in 1 Corinthians 11:11:

Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord.

The expression, "in the Lord," would certainly infer celestial marriage. That being true Paul would have to be a married man.

PAUL'S COUNCIL TO TIMOTHY

It was Paul's council to Timothy that a bishop was to have a wife:

A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach; (1 Timothy 3:2.)

The same council was given by Paul to Titus:

If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children not accused of riot or unruly. (Titus 1:6.)

It would be inconsistent for Paul to teach others they had to be married and that marriage was essential for exaltation and then not be married himself. Paul was worthy of the exaltation, therefore, Paul was without any question a married man. (For a more detailed study of this question see Pau1's Life and Letters by Dr. Sidney B. Sperry, pp. 9 and 130, 132. )
