Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

42

Can a Jew Accept the Gospel Prior to the Second Coming?

Question: "Can a Jew accept the gospel prior to the second coming of the Savior, when Christ shall stand on the Mount of Olives and it divides and the Jews rush in the valley that is created by the dividing; and the Savior manifests himself to them?"

Answer: The Lord said to the Prophet Joseph Smith, before the organization of the Church, that the gospel was to be declared to the Jews. We read the following in Section 18 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

And now, behold, there are others who are called to declare my gospel, both unto Gentiles and unto Jew;

Yea, even twelve; and the Twelve shall be my disciples, and they shall take upon them my name: and the Twelve are they who shall desire to take upon them my name with full purpose of heart. (D. & C. 18:26-27.)

WE ARE TO PREACH TO BOTH JEW AND GENTILE

Also in Section 107 we read that we are to preach the gospel to both Jew and Gentile before the coming of Christ.

The Twelve are a Traveling Presiding High Council, to officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the Presidency of the Church, agreeable to the institution of heaven; to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the Gentiles and secondly unto the Jews. (Ibid., 107:33.)

Again from Section 133:

Send forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off; unto the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all nations, first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews. (Ibid., 133:8. )

If the words of the Lord are to be fulfilled, the gospel must be carried to the Jews before the Savior comes. In the days of Peter and Paul the gospel was taken first to the Jews and then to the Gentiles.

THE GOSPEL IS BEING TAUGHT TO THE JEWISH PEOPLE

In this dispensation it is to be taken first to the Gentiles and then to the Jews. Now read the words of Nephi on the title page of the Book of Mormon, "that the Book of Mormon came forth to the convincing of Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ." I can say to you that the gospel is being taken to the Jews, and we have faithful members of the Church who are Jews, for the day has come according to the revelations for the preaching of the gospel to the Jews.
