Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

44

Purported Visions

Question: "As a missionary in Germany I am frequently asked what we think of the story of the little girl in France who is supposed to have received a vision from Christ's mother, Mary. Another question is in relation to a girl of the Hindu faith who supposedly is here on earth for the second time. What is the Church's stand in regard to supernatural things which seem to have a relationship with some faith or creed?"

Answer: Living in Germany you ought to be quite wary with all the fairy stories the Catholic Church tells about the mother of Jesus and holy messengers appearing to children and old women.

I read what was in the newspapers about the pope's vision which was very vague and the contents not yet to be revealed. Are you not acquainted with the Catholic doctrine that the heavens are sealed and there is to be no more vision or revelation and that Jesus finished his work?

CATHOLICS DENY CONTINUED REVELATION

The infallibility of the popes does not signify that they are inspired. The Apostles were endowed with the gift of inspiration, and we accept their writings as the revealed Word of God.

No Catholic, on the contrary, claims that the pope is inspired or endowed with Divine revelation properly so-called.

For the Holy Spirit was not promised to the successors of Peter in order that they might spread abroad new doctrine which He reveals, but that, under His assistance, they might guard inviolably and with fidelity explain, the revelation on deposit of faith handed down by the Apostles. (James Cardinal Gibbons, Chapter 11, Infallibility of the Popes, page 9—The Faith of Our Fathers. )

Every once in a while believers in reincarnation spring some story about persons who have returned to earth in another body. The Prophet Joseph Smith says that reincarnation is a doctrine of the devil and have you not read that the devil would deceive even the elect? Put your time on your work and seek for the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord and forget about supernatural visions that never took place.
