Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

51

Chastity and Dress

Question: "I have been asked to give a talk on chastity and dress. Will you please explain exactly what the standards of the Church are in relation to dress? Some women in the Church wear dresses that are so short that they do not cover their knees when sitting. It has been my understanding that Latter-day Saint women should always wear dresses that cover their knees, at least when they are of Mutual age. Please set me straight. What is right?"

Answer: Isaiah, one of the great prophets of early times, saw our day, and he described the conditions that would prevail among the "daughters of Zion" in these latter days. This is in part what he said:

Moreover, the Lord saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:

Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts.

In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the moon,

The chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,

The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings,

The rings, and nose jewels,

The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins.

The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the veils.

And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty. (Isaiah 3:16-24.)

CONDITIONS OF PRESENT DAY

As I sit on the stand in a stake conference and look down over the congregation, I see some of the conditions existing of which Isaiah spoke.

When I was a youth attending the Salt Lake Stake Academy and later the Latter-day Saints University, the girls were dressed neatly from head to foot in shirtwaists and full skirts down to their ankles. I recall an incident that happened when a group of students—young girls and boys—took a short trip up City Creek Canyon. One of the girls slipped and caught her dress on a limb, exposing her leg. She was so embarrassed that she wanted to withdraw, and it took some persuasion by the other girls to have her remain.

Now, in this modern day, Isaiah's prophecy has been and is being fulfilled.

The following is taken from The Salt Lake Tribune of Saturday, January 15, 1966, page 11, entitled "Public 'Knees' Ridiculous, Notes Stylists":

New York (AP)—Four of Europe's fashion barons criticized the new short hemlines today and said any woman who shows her knees in public is ridiculous.

"When a bride gets married, the most important moment of her life, she wears a skirt that trails down the aisle," said Norman Hartnell of London, couturier for Britain's royal family.

"Are women to be idiots the rest of the time?" he asked. "Surely they have a mirror. What's pretty about knees?"

Hartnell's customers include, in his words, "all the elite clientele in England," and he says he doesn't see their knees. "So why see the rest?"

He spoke with fashion writers attending the week-long New York Couture Group previews. Hemlines shown here are midknee to three inches above the knee.

Visiting with Hartnell were designers Jacques Heim of Paris, Pedro Rodriguez of Madrid and Micol Fontana of Rome. All preview their spring clothes in Europe within the next three weeks.

"Generally speaking, any fashion is killed by an abuse of the same fashion," said Heim. Short can be too short.

"I try to emphasize the beauty of a woman, to show her in the best way. The best way," he said, "has nothing to do with the knees. The knee should be at all times covered."

STANDARDS EXPRESSED BY GENERAL AUTHORITIES

The standards expressed by the General Authorities of the Church are that women, as well as men, should dress modestly. They are taught proper deportment and modesty at all times. It is, in my judgment, a sad reflection on the "daughters of Zion" when they dress immodestly. Moreover, this remark pertains to the men as well as to the women. The Lord gave commandments to ancient Israel that both men and women should cover their bodies and observe the law of chastity at all times.
