Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, vol. 5 ( 1966)

53

Acceptance of the Prophet Joseph Smith

Question: "It appears to me that many Latter-day Saints have failed to accept the Prophet Joseph Smith as completely as they should. Could you please review for our benefit some of the evidences of his prophetic calling?"

Answer: The Prophet Joseph Smith once said: "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council in heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 365. ) We read in the Bible that this was the case with Jeremiah (Jeremiah 1:5. ) and John the Baptist who was called to be the messenger to prepare the way before the Lord. (Malachi 3:1; Luke 1:13.) Nor were these pre-mortal callings confined to the prophets, for in a remarkable prophecy made by Isaiah, the Lord revealed the mission which was assigned to Cyrus, king of Persia, over one hundred years before he was born. (Isaiah 44:28;Isaiah 45:1-3.)

Because of the fact that the original records of the prophets have not come down to us in their purity, many of these important things, "plain and precious," have been eliminated by uninspired men. Fortunately, however, some of these plain parts, through the mercy of the Lord, have been restored, fulfilling the prediction of Moses concerning certain writings that were recorded by him. Among these parts, which the world will not receive, some are given in the Prophet's revision of the scriptures to "as many as shall believe." Among these revelations which are restored, we discover that the Lord informed Abraham that he had chosen rulers from among the intelligences that were organized, to be given in various capacities down the ages; and Abraham was one of these who was so chosen. ( 3:22-23.)

ALL THINGS ORGANIZED FROM THE BEGINNING

It is reasonable to believe that in the beginning, before the earth was prepared, the Lord would have all things organized from the beginning to the end of time. It is written in the scriptures: "Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the hosts of them." (Genesis 2:1.) This is equivalent to the Lord's saying that everything was in preparation to be placed on the earth in its due course when mankind should be placed upon it.

From what was written on the brass plates obtained by the sons of Lehi we have learned of some remarkable predictions concerning both Moses and Joseph Smith and the part assigned to each in the beginning. Lehi has given us this record concerning the missions assigned to Moses and to Joseph Smith.

Wherefore, Joseph truly saw our day. And he obtained a promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of his loins the Lord God would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Israel; not the Messiah, but a branch which was to be broken off, nevertheless, to be remembered in the covenants of the Lord that the Messiah should be made manifest unto them in the latter days, in the spirit of power, unto the bringing of them out of darkness unto light—yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom.

For Joseph truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins.

Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers.

And I will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work.

And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel.

And Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the land of Egypt.

But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my work unto the seed of thy loins—and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them.

Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord.

And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord.

And thus prophesied Joseph, saying: Behold, that seer will the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise;

And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation. (2 Nephi 3:5-15.)

PROPHECIES RECORDED ON BRASS PLATES

These prophecies concerning the work of Moses and that of Joseph Smith were recorded on the brass plates obtained by the sons of Lehi. In fulfillment of the Lord's promise, these few sentences have been restored; and we hereby learn something of the greatness of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Among those who were called in that great council, he held a place of distinction and honor, and a wonderful work for the salvation, not only of the house of Israel but also for all mankind on the face of the earth, was foreordained and assigned to him ages before he was born.

President John Taylor spoke truly when he said:

Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. (D. & C. 135:3.)

It seems to me that even we, the Latter-day Saints, who have accepted him as a prophet of God, have to a great extent failed to recognize him and esteem him as fully as we should for the great work which, under the guidance of Jesus Christ, he performed for us and for the whole world. Yet, like so many of the prophets of old, and even the Savior himself, he has received the thanks of an unbelieving world by sacrifice and martyrdom.

Any who think that the Father and the Son are without knowledge of the history of this world from its beginning to its end, have reason to humble themselves and repent. The day will come surely, when the Lord will reveal all that was made known to Enoch, Moses, and the brother of Jared, which is now hidden from our knowledge because of the hardness of our hearts, for this cannot come only in a day of humility and righteousness.
