Carolyn J. Rasmus, In the Strength of the Lord I Can Do All Things ( 1990)

Part I

The Challenge

Chapter One

Signs of the Times

Charles Dickens began his famous book A Tale of Two Cities with the oft-quoted line, "It was the best of times. It was the worst of times." Although he was describing the French Revolution, his statement seems to also apply to the times in which we live.

In many ways we do live in the best of times. As a matter of routine we enjoy such conveniences as dishwashers, clothes dryers, electric blankets, air conditioners and automobiles. We enjoy fast foods, frozen foods, and low-fat foods. This is the age of rapid transportation. Today we can fly in comfort and luxury to countries our grandparents only read about. Computers make the storing, cataloging, and retrieval of information easy and instantaneous. Improved health conditions and medications have eliminated many life-threatening diseases. Open heart surgery, hip and knee replacements, cornea transplants, and other surgeries not only extend life but enhance the quality of life. Through the medium of modern-day electronics we have immediate access to events occurring anywhere in the world by simply turning a dial on a radio or television set. Although many still talk of the "good old days," few want to surrender the time-saving modern-day conveniences that eliminate physical labor, protect our health, and enhance our life-style. Certainly, in some respects, we are living in the "best of times."

But with new inventions and life-style changes come new challenges. How do we learn the importance of taking care of things when many products are disposable and designed to be thrown away, rather than cared for and preserved? How do we learn to "bridle all [our] passions" (Alma 38:12) when shopping center marquees flash messages telling us to indulge our "passion with fashion"? How do we learn to be "submissive, meek, [and] humble" (Mosiah 3:19) when billboards tell us to "super boost our ego"? How do we put off the "natural man" when faced with a steady stream of advertising suggesting that "thin and rich" is both wonderful and essential; that "right" labels are important; and that success is measured by the size of one's financial holdings and material possessions?

Though often perceived as a miracle, television can also be a menace. This modern-day invention brings into our homes programs which openly flaunt immoral behavior and suggest that instant gratification is not only pleasurable, but acceptable. Through all forms of media we are made aware of serious social ills—increasing teenage pregnancy, drug and substance abuse, violent crimes, divorce, suicide, abortion, AIDS, and lack of ethics. Such social symptoms suggest that perhaps these are indeed the "worst of times."

Living in Perilous Times

But we should not be surprised. We are living in the last days, days which the Apostle Paul described as "perilous." These are times in which "men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God." (2 Timothy 3:1-4.)

Nephi also described a time which sounds much like our own. He says there shall "be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this." (2 Nephi 28:8.)

A modern-day prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson, has told us that "our generation will be comparable in wickedness to the days of Noah, when the Lord cleansed the earth by flood." However, he indicates that there will be a major difference this time. "God has saved for the final inning some of his strongest and most valiant children who will help bear off the kingdom triumphantly." That, he tells us, is where we come in. For we are "the generation that must be prepared to meet [our] God." He acknowledges that "never before on the face of this earth have the forces of evil and the forces of good been so well organized" but reminds us that the outcome has already been determined—"the forces of righteousness will finally win." He then continues, "What will remain to be seen is where each of us now and in the future will stand in this battle—and how tall we will stand." Great battles can make great heroes and heroines.

In addition to the "societal battles" between good and evil and right and wrong, President Benson tells us that "each of us has his or her own battlefield." (Ezra Taft Benson, "In His Steps," devotional address given in Anaheim, California, 8 February 1987.)

Regardless of age, marital status, educational background, or economic circumstance, everyone faces personal but very differing challenges on a daily basis. Young married couples often struggle to have enough money to meet basic needs as they begin a new family unit. Older people are sometimes challenged by ill health during their retirement years. Single adults often feel lonely and unwanted. There are others who stoop under the burden of physical or emotional pain or a handicap of some kind. Parents of teenagers are faced with challenges ranging from keeping up with everyone's schedule to responding to an adolescent's serious questioning about such issues as peer pressure, the role of men and women in today's society and in the Church, abortion, premarital sex, and ethics.

Single parents carry heavy burdens without having another adult to share the load. Parents whose children are raised sometimes feel lonely or abandoned, and don't know how to cope with the "empty nest years." Others may find themselves serving as parents to their grandchildren. Young adults face critical issues and decisions revolving around dating, missions, marriage, family, careers. Those in middle age are challenged to balance demands of work with quality family life and service to neighbors, church, and community.

Amid such challenges or "battles," many people talk of feeling stressed, anxious, depressed, frustrated, overly committed, and overwhelmed. When offered alternatives that promise immediate pleasure, freedom from pain, and instant gratification, increasing numbers of youth and adults are turning to drugs or seeking to gratify their natural desires by winning social acceptance or purchasing worldly possessions. When things aren't going very well, we fail to recognize that trials are meant to be blessings—evidences of our Heavenly Father's love for us. "Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." (Hebrews 12:6.) Trials and temptations provide opportunities for growth.

Though in many ways we live in the best of times, there are battles raging—in society, in the world, and often within our families and in our personal lives. Though not fought with swords or cimeters or guns, the battles in which we are engaged are just as real and as potentially deadly. The Book of Mormon, compiled to be read by us in our day, contains many accounts of battles fought by the people of that time. Although the enemies they fought were very different than those we face today, the methodology they used can be instructive for us.

Go Forth in the Strength of the Lord

Repeatedly, the Book of Mormon contains the phrase "in the strength of the Lord." We read of King Benjamin and his armies fighting against the Lamanites. "In the strength of the Lord they did contend against their enemies, until they had slain many thousands of the Lamanites." (Words of Mormon 1:14.) Zeniff records, "I and my people did go forth against the Lamanites to battle. Yea, in the strength of the Lord did we go forth . . . ; for I and my people did cry mightily to the Lord that he would deliver us out of the hands of our enemies." Zeniff then bears testimony saying, "God did hear our cries and did hear our prayers; and we did go forth in his might." (Mosiah 9:16-18.)

On another occasion Zeniff again speaks of battling against the Lamanites. "And it came to pass that we did go up in the strength of the Lord to battle." (Mosiah 10:10.) He continues, "I did stimulate them to go to battle with their might, putting their trust in the Lord." (Mosiah 10:19.) Likewise, in an epistle to Moroni, Pahoran talks of taking possession of the city of Zarahemla: "We will go forth against them in the strength of the Lord, and we will put an end to this great iniquity." (Alma 6:18.) In the same letter he tells Moroni to "strengthen Lehi and Teancum in the Lord; tell them to fear not, for God will deliver them." (Alma 6:21.)

Others in the Book of Mormon refer to being able to go forth and to conquer "in the strength of the Lord." As Moroni went among the people waving the Title of Liberty, he cried with a loud voice, saying, "Behold, whosoever will maintain this title upon the land, let them come forth in the strength of the Lord." (Alma 46:20.) Likewise, the newly converted King Lamoni acknowledged to Ammon, "I know, in the strength of the Lord thou canst do all things." (Alma 20:4.) Ammon, wanting not to boast of his own strength or wisdom, acknowledged that "as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in his strength I can do all things." (Alma 26:12.)

Although the battles of our day are of a very different nature, these lessons from the Book of Mormon suggest that victory over our enemies (whoever or whatever they may be) is assured if we go forth "in the strength of the Lord."

How do we do this? How do we call upon "the strength of the Lord" as we cope with the increasing challenges and complexities of life? How do we find the peace promised in the scriptures amid hectic and busy times? How do we develop the kind of faith that enabled people of other times to work miracles and to trust so completely in the Lord? How do we gain access to the kind of power that caused people to move forward with optimism in the face of difficulty and often seemingly impossible challenges?

How do we come to experience and believe that "the words of Christ . . . will tell [us] all things what [we] should do?" (2 Nephi 32:3.) Alma taught that "the preaching of the word had a great tendency to lead the people to do that which was just," and that it had a "more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword or anything else." Because of this, Alma believed that the Zoramites should "try the virtue of the word of God" (Alma 31:5), or in other words, try living the word of God in their daily lives that they might experience its power. If the "word" can have such a powerful effect in our lives, how do we become familiar with his words so that we might "try" them and learn of their "virtue" or worth? Indeed, how do we liken the scriptures to our lives and apply their messages to help us with our battles?

In an age when many are distrustful, skeptical, and afraid, we can read of Christ's invitation to all to "look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not." (D&C 6:36.) How do we come to believe in and accept this invitation to eliminate doubt and fear from our lives?

In the book of Alma we are told to "cry unto God for all [our] support" and to "counsel with the Lord in all [our] doings, and he will direct [us] for good." (Alma 37:36-37.) Do we have the faith to believe that this promise is for us? Are we willing to humble ourselves and cry unto God for all our support? Do we truly believe he will direct us for good? Perhaps like the apostles of old we say, "Lord, increase our faith." (Luke 17:5.) But how does this happen? How do we strengthen our faith, especially in a time when so many demand evidence or seek for a sign?

The purpose of this book is to explore ways in which we might better understand "the strength of the Lord" and the power that is available to us as we face our own challenges and the "battles" of our day. President Benson tells us we will "never have a better opportunity to be valiant in a more crucial cause than in the battles [we] face today and in the immediate future." (Ezra Taft Benson, "In His Steps.")

This book is intended as a personal testimony and witness that there is a very real power available to each of us through Jesus Christ. With faith in him, we will be victorious as we "go forth in the strength of the Lord."
