Carolyn J. Rasmus, In the Strength of the Lord I Can Do All Things ( 1990)

Part II

The Way

Chapter Two

By His Grace We Have Power

Perhaps one of the most important lessons each of us needs to learn is that we are not alone on this earth, and that the "plan" is not for us to fail but for us to succeed and ultimately to return to our heavenly parents. The purpose for our earthly existence is to give us experience. (See D&C 122:7.) That experience is sometimes joyful and happy. At other times we experience frustration and discouragement. But in every situation, at every age, and whatever our experience, we have the promise of Jesus Christ, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matthew 28:20.)

We need not face each day, each challenge, each opportunity for growth alone. We can go forth "in the strength of the Lord." But how do we do this?

There is a higher power accessible to each of us every day, every hour. It is the same power by which worlds were made. It is the power of faith. The Bible Dictionary defines faith as "a principle of action and of power, and by it one can command the elements and/or heal the sick, or influence any number of circumstances when the occasion warrants." (LDS Edition of the King James Version, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1983, "Bible Dictionary," page 669.) The Book of Mormon prophet Jacob, writing of the people of his day, said, "Our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea." (Jacob 4:6.)

Then he taught a great lesson, explaining why they "have power to do these things." He said, "The Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know it is by his grace, and his great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things." (Jacob 4:7.)

Like many of us, Jacob and his people might have doubted their abilities or wondered how they could accomplish the challenges placed before them. When we feel overwhelmed, unsure of ourselves, or unable to cope, we are in essence acknowledging our "weaknesses"—the difficulties we have in doing those things that need to be done. Yet, as Jacob explains, we are given "weakness" by our Heavenly Father so that "we may know that it is by his grace . . . that we have power." (Jacob 4:7.)

A Divine Means of Help or Strength

What exactly is this "grace" that is given us? The Bible Dictionary tells us "the main idea of the word grace is a divine means of help or strength, given through the bounteous mercy and love of Jesus Christ." (LDS Edition of the King James Version, "Bible Dictionary," page 697.) Grace is an "enabling power." Through Christ's love and mercy, we can have access to "a divine means of help or strength"—literally, an "enabling power."

Many scriptures contain the word grace. If we substitute the words enabling power for the word grace, scriptures take on a new meaning. Consider the following:

"Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find [an enabling power] to help in time of need." (Hebrews 4:16.)

In the second epistle of Paul to the Apostle Timothy, he counsels him to "be strong in the [enabling power] that is in Christ Jesus." (2 Timothy 2:1.)

Ether records the words of the Lord which tell us "my [enabling power] is sufficient for the meek," and that "if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my [enabling power] is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:26-27.)

These scriptures suggest that part of the reason we feel "weak" is so we will acknowledge that we do indeed need a strength beyond our own. Our weaknesses turn us to Jesus Christ. It is through our faith in him and his mercy and love for us that we come to know that there is a "divine means of help or strength available to each of us." The Apostle Paul must have understood this well, for he wrote in his letter to the Philippians, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me." (Philippians 4:13.)

Likewise, many composers of hymns written in this dispensation acknowledge our dependence upon Christ for strength beyond our own:

I need thee, oh, I need thee; Every hour I need thee! Oh, bless me now, my Savior; I come to thee! ("I Need Thee Every Hour," Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985, no. 98.) I will not doubt, I will not fear; God's love and strength are always near. His promised gift helps me to find An inner strength and peace of mind. I give the Father willingly My trust, my prayers, humility. His Spirit guides; his love assures That fear departs when faith endures. ("When Faith Endures," Hymns, no. 128.)

Faith—A Principle of Action and of Power

There is a power available to us. This power is faith—a principle of action and of power. It is through the bounteous mercy and love of Jesus Christ that we receive his grace—a divine means of help or strength.

The principles of faith and grace can literally empower us to "go forth in the strength of the Lord." The power available to us through Jesus Christ is very real. But while we have access to it, we are required to do our part.

If you have flown on an airplane, you know that prior to takeoff the flight attendant makes an announcement similar to the following: "Your oxygen mask is located in the compartment above your seat. If needed, it will drop down automatically. If you are smoking and see the masks, please extinguish your cigarette. Pull the mask towards you firmly to start the oxygen flowing. Place the mask over your nose and mouth and slip the elastic band over your head. For those traveling with someone who will need assistance, put on your mask first and then assist them with an additional mask."

Consider the implications of this announcement. Everyone has an oxygen mask located above their seat. If necessary, it will drop down automatically. However, nothing will happen unless the passenger pulls the mask toward him to firmly start the oxygen flowing.

Oxygen is needed to sustain mortal life. Without it, we will die. Likewise, we need the enabling power of the Savior to help us sustain our spiritual lives. Jesus Christ has said to us, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.) On another occasion after Christ had fed the five thousand, he told those gathered that he was "the bread of life." (John 6:48.) Numerous times Christ referred to himself as the "light and the life of the world." (See Mosiah 16:9; Alma 38:9; 3 Nephi 9:18; Ether 4:12; D&C 11:28; D&C 12:9; D&C 45:7.)

The oxygen mask hanging above our heads does us no good unless we pull it firmly toward us and place the mask over our nose and mouth. Likewise, Christ's power is inoperable in our lives until we humble ourselves, acknowledge our dependence upon him, and invite him into our life. "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come into him, and sup with him, and he with me." (Revelation 3:20.)

Two other aspects of this pre-takeoff announcement provide parallels related to gospel principles. Passengers are told that if they are smoking and see the masks, they are to extinguish their cigarettes. Perhaps we should "extinguish from our lives" anything that would interfere with our fully receiving the gift of life. Should we not eliminate from our lives those practices and sins and wrongdoings which would prevent us from receiving Christ into our lives?

The announcement also tells us that we are first to put on our own mask before we assist small children traveling with us. In other words, we must first receive the oxygen and be strong in order that we might help others. So it is in the matter of faith. Before we can strengthen the faith of others, we must first be strong in faith. Christ tells Simon Peter, "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not." He then adds, "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." (Luke 22:32.)

The announcement given on the airplane tells us that we have access to life-giving oxygen. To have access to this life-giving substance, we must activate it. The scriptures tell us that we have access to a life-giving power through Jesus Christ. To activate this power we must believe in Jesus Christ and have faith in him and in his power. Such belief will not only change our lives, but enable us to live life to its fullest.
