Carolyn J. Rasmus, In the Strength of the Lord I Can Do All Things ( 1990)

Chapter Three

Faith Comes by Hearing

How do we strengthen or develop our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ? Paul told the Romans that "faith cometh by hearing." (Romans 10:17.) The Bible Dictionary tells us that "faith is kindled by hearing the testimony of those who have faith. Miracles do not produce faith, but strong faith is developed by obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ; in other words, faith comes by righteousness, although miracles often confirm one's faith." (LDS Edition of the King James Version, "Bible Dictionary," page 669.)

As we seek to increase our faith, it is helpful to listen to the testimony of those who have witnessed God's power in their lives and who testify of the reality of miracles.

A friend of mine, who was raised on a ranch in Arizona, told me of an experience she had as a child. Her father had promised that a foal about to be born would be hers. The day the foal was born she was in the barn and got to witness the event. She watched in wonder and amazement. Suddenly the mare rolled over on the foal, crushing its tiny body. As soon as the mother horse moved a bit, my friend jumped into the stall and cradled the lifeless foal in her arms. With all the faith of a child, she cried out to Heavenly Father to save her horse. Shortly, the little animal began to breathe and the long thin legs began to tremble.

Unbeknownst to my friend, her father had observed the last part of this drama. At that point he entered the stall and, embracing his daughter, said words to this effect, "When you live the best you know how to live, and when you pray to Heavenly Father, he can work miracles."

Several years ago, against the advice of some friends, I purchased a used motorbike. It was old and small and at top speed went only forty miles per hour. Believing I was in no danger traveling at such a slow speed, I chose not to wear a helmet. I loved to feel the wind in my hair. One Saturday afternoon I filled the tank with gas and started up a slightly inclined street. The next thing I remember was hearing a man say, "Don't move. We've called the paramedics." I was aware of a strange feeling on the left side of my face. When I lifted my hand there I discovered that the left side of my face was bloodied and broken.

Among the crowd of people which gathered was a friend who had recognized my bike and stopped. She took my hand in hers. I said simply, "Bonnie, I need a priesthood blessing."

Almost immediately I was strapped to a stretcher and taken by ambulance to the hospital. Almost as quickly, two men who held the Melchizedek Priesthood were at my side. I remember only one phrase of the blessing: "Thou shalt be fully restored and more."

During the following days, weeks and months, each time I moved my head I heard a strange gurgling noise. In a near panic I pictured my brains moving from one side of my head to the other. Then always the phrase from that priesthood blessing came to my mind, "Thou shalt be fully restored and more," and I was calmed. After months of slow and painful healing, I was fully restored and more.

Would I have recovered without the priesthood blessing, or was there a connection between the blessing promised and my eventual healing? I feel certain that that blessing, coupled with my prayers and the prayers of many friends, made all the difference.

An Age of Great Skepticism

Bruce C. Hafen, former president of Ricks College and currently the provost of Brigham Young University, wrote about a university student who had a childhood experience similar to that of my Arizona friend. After relating the incident to his priesthood quorum, this student said, "I tell you that story because I don't think I would do now what I did then. Now that I am older, less naive, and more experienced, I 'know better' than to expect help in that kind of situation. I am not sure I would believe now, even if I relived that experience, that [it] was anything more than a coincidence. I don't understand what has happened to me since that time, but I sense that something has gone wrong."

Brother Hafen added, "Whatever the change in attitude was, I too sensed that it was not healthy. Did it matter? He still came to church, but he had become less childlike, less believing. His sense of the miraculous had waned. Yes, it should have been a matter of great concern." ("Is Yours a Believing Heart," Ensign, September 1974, pages 52-57.)

We live in a day and an age of great skepticism. People demand "proof." There is a feeling among many that unless something can be measured and analyzed, it does not exist or at the very least is of little value.

Like Korihor the anti-Christ in the Book of Mormon, many suggest and even insist that "ye cannot know of things which ye do not see." (Alma 30:15.) Korihor believed that the holy prophets desired to keep the people in "bondage." He accused the priests of yoking the people "by their traditions and their dreams and their whims and their visions and their pretended mysteries." (Alma 30:28.) Korihor wanted evidence. He challenged Alma by demanding, "Show me a sign." (Alma 30:43.)

There are many Korihors in the world today, many who demand evidence and seek for a sign. Often genuine spiritual experiences are referred to as coincidence. It is suggested that "some things just happen."

Alma's response to Korihor is instructive. He says, "Thou hast had signs enough; will ye tempt your God? Will ye say, Show unto me a sign, when ye have the testimony of all these thy brethren, and also all the holy prophets? The scriptures are laid before thee, yea, and all things denote there is a God; yea even the earth, and all things that are on the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator." (Alma 30:44.)

Perhaps a coincidence could be defined as "a small miracle in which God chooses to remain anonymous." (As quoted by Patricia T. Holland, "One Thing Needful: Becoming Women of Greater Faith in Christ," Ensign, October 1987, pages 26-33.)

Hope for Things Which Are Not Seen, Which Are True

Often, as is the case with most spiritual things, we struggle to put into words what we feel and believe and know. A number of years ago, Ardeth G. Kapp, Young Women General President, was asked to speak to a group of young women one early morning in the High Uinta Mountains. At the conclusion of her remarks she asked each young woman to find a quiet spot in nature and, before returning home, to "talk with your Father in Heaven and share with him the things that are in your heart." She told them that "he is always there and he will hear you."

Two weeks later during a testimony meeting in Sister Kapp's own ward, Becky, the assistant youth camp director, stood to add her testimony to those of the other girls who had participated in this same camping experience: "Something about the feelings I had that special morning made me want to be alone for a while, so I found a private spot where there was a little opening in the trees. When I knelt down on the ground, thick with pine needles, I didn't know for sure what to say, so I closed my eyes and said, 'Heavenly Father, do you know I am here?' I waited and waited and I could hear the wind in the trees. Then I opened my eyes and saw the sun coming through the leaves, and I felt all warm inside." She paused a moment and then, in a reverent whisper, added, "You may not think it was anything, but I know he knew I was there." (Ardeth G. Kapp, Miracles in Pinafores and Bluejeans [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], pages 39-40.)

Do we know that Heavenly Father knows that we are here? Do we "hope for things which are not seen, which are true"? (Hebrews 11:1; Alma 32:21.) Do we have faith to "influence any number of circumstances when occasion warrants"? (LDS Edition of the King James Version, "Bible Dictionary," page 670.) Do we really believe that through the mercy and love of Jesus Christ we have access to a divine means of help or strength if we will but humble ourselves, acknowledge our weaknesses, and call upon him? That is our challenge, our responsibility—to figuratively pull the oxygen mask down, as was described in an earlier chapter, and begin to breathe deeply of the spiritual life-giving substance that comes from the Savior of the world.

Faith Comes by Hearing the Word of God

The scriptures teach us about faith and give evidences of the power of faith. This is one of the reasons that Alma believed the scriptures have a "powerful effect" upon people. (Alma 30:5.) He knew what Paul wrote and the Prophet Joseph Smith later taught, that "faith comes by hearing the word of God." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976], page 148.)

Nephi tells us that the reason he labored diligently to write was to "persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God." He continued: "It is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. . . . We are made alive in Christ because of our faith. . . . [We] may look forward unto that life which is in Christ."

He concludes, "The words which I have spoken shall stand as a testimony . . . for they are sufficient to teach any man the right way; for the right way is to believe in Christ." (2 Nephi 25:23, 25, 27-28.)

The prophet Ether cried from morning "even until the going down of the sun." He wanted the people to know the power of faith—"that by faith all things are fulfilled." Like many in our day, the people "did not believe, because they saw [great and marvelous things] not." (Ether 12:3, 5.)

Moroni adds to Ether's record by saying, "Dispute not because you see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.)

Moroni then recounts the wonders and marvels accomplished through the power of faith. (See Ether 12.) He cites the following evidences of faith (see also Paul's testimony of the power of faith in Hebrews 11): It was by faith that Christ appeared to the faithful (Ether 12:7); by faith the Law of Moses was given and by faith the "more excellent way" prepared by Christ has been fulfilled (Ether 12:11); the faith of Alma and Amulek caused the prison to tumble to the earth (Ether 12:13); the faith of Nephi and Lehi wrought a change upon the Lamanites who were then baptized with fire and the Holy Ghost (Ether 12:14); the faith of three disciples resulted in their obtaining a promise that they would not taste death (Ether 12:17); and the faith of the brother of Jared was so great that when God put forth his finger he could not hide it from him (Ether 12:20).

After listing these examples of great faith, Moroni taught an important principle: "If there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them." (Ether 12:12.) Mormon taught the same thing when he testified, "The reason why [God] ceaseth to do miracles among the children of men is because that they dwindle in unbelief." (Mormon 9:20.) This same principle is described in the writings of Matthew: "And [Jesus] did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief." (Matthew 13:58.) Likewise, we have the words of Mormon recorded by his son Moroni, "For it is by faith that miracles are wrought . . . wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief." (Moroni 7:37.)

From our study, several things are evident: first, faith is "a principle of action and of power"; second, true faith must be centered in Jesus Christ; third, the scriptures give evidence of the power of faith in the lives of people; fourth, where there is no faith, miracles cannot occur.

How do we increase our faith? What are the things we can do in our lives to work miracles for the Lord? How do we increase our faith in Jesus Christ so that we can lay aside fear, worry, and other things that prevent us from being all that we can be and doing all that we can do?
