Carolyn J. Rasmus, In the Strength of the Lord I Can Do All Things ( 1990)

Chapter Four

Increase Our Faith

Christ taught his disciples "hard doctrine" when he said: "No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon." (Luke 16:13.) He told the story of a certain rich man and of a beggar named Lazarus. While in this life the beggar sought to be fed by the rich man. After death it was the rich man who cried out that Lazarus, the beggar, might "dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue." (Luke 16:24.) Next, Christ taught the disciples that if their brother were to trespass against them seven times in a day that they should still forgive him. (Luke 17:4.)

No doubt some of the Savior's followers, wanting to believe, struggled with how they might follow his teachings. There were times when, after hearing Christ's teachings, some of them would reply, "This is an hard saying," and at times some even turned and "walked no more with him." (John 6:60, 66.)

However, Luke records that following Christ's teachings "the apostles said unto the Lord, increase our faith." (Luke 17:5.)

Like the apostles, we often desire to believe but struggle because our faith is weak. We too cry, "Lord, increase our faith."

Many of us can relate to the father who brought his son to Christ to be healed. It appears that the son might have experienced what we know today as epilepsy, for the father told Christ that he "fell on the ground" and that he "foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth." The father says that often his disease had "cast him into the fire, and into the waters, to destroy him." (Mark 9:18, 20, 22.)

The father then says to Christ, "If thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us." (Mark 9:22.)

Christ's instructions to the father are equally applicable to us. He replied, "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth." (Mark 9:23.)

The father's response is so much like ours when we go to Christ knowing that he can help and that we need his help so badly. The scriptures say that the father "said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." (Mark 9:24.) Subsequently, the child was healed.

There are many who do believe but who, like the apostles and followers of Christ anciently, desire to increase their faith. How do we strengthen our belief and increase our faith?

As I read and study, observe others who I believe are of a strong faith, and seek to increase my own faith, several things emerge as being helpful in strengthening faith.

Before suggesting three principles which can strengthen our faith, let me give a caution. There is no such thing as a "magic formula" which, when followed, eliminates problems, stresses, and hard times. Even Christ, in his agony in the Garden of Gethsemane, prayed unto the father that, if it was possible, "let this cup pass from me." He then added an important qualifying phrase: "Nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42; see also Matthew 26:39; Mark 14:36.) In this case the cup was not, and could not be, removed. Nevertheless, the Father came to the aid of his Only Begotten Son: "And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him." (Luke 22:43.)

Having been strengthened, Jesus Christ went forth to accomplish his foreordained mission—the ultimate sacrifice, the great Atonement.

While miracles do happen, and we may well, through the appropriate exercise of faith, have some obstacles removed from our paths, there are many things which will not be "removed from us"; however, with faith in Jesus Christ and through his bounteous mercy and love, we can experience his grace—a divine means of help and strength and power sufficient to deal with the challenges life presents us.

It is helpful to review the Prophet Joseph Smith's experience while a prisoner at the Liberty Jail in Missouri in 1839. He cried to the Lord, imploring him to stretch forth his hand and stop the "wrongs and unlawful oppressions" directed at the suffering saints. He pleaded with the Lord to "remember thy suffering saints." (See D&C 121:3, 4, 6.)

The wrongs and oppressions did not cease (as often ours will not), but the Lord poured out an even greater blessing, the blessing of peace, and then he explained to the Prophet: "Thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes." (D&C 121:7-8.)

During his life, President Spencer W. Kimball, twelfth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, suffered typhoid fever, smallpox, Bell's palsy, years of boils and carbuncles, a major heart attack, cancer of the throat which resulted in the removal of most of his vocal cords, reoccurrence of cancer which required radiation treatment, and heart disease that led to open heart surgery to replace a valve and transplant an artery. Yet he continued to give unselfish service in building the kingdom of God. He exemplified one who learned how to "walk by faith." (2 Corinthians 5:7.) He wrote:

Just as undaunted faith has stopped the mouth of lions, made ineffective fiery flames, opened dry corridors through rivers and seas, protected against deluge and drought, and brought heavenly manifestations at the instance of prophets, so in each of our lives faith can heal the sick, bring comfort to those who mourn, strengthen resolve against temptation, relieve from the bondage of harmful habits, lend the strength to repent and change our lives, and lead to a sure knowledge of the divinity of Jesus Christ. Indomitable faith can help us live the commandments with a willing heart and thereby bring blessings unnumbered, with peace, perfection, and exaltation in the kingdom of God. (Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972], page 12.)

And so it can be as we "increase our faith." Challenges, temptations, hardships, and difficulties will not always be removed from us; but by the power of faith in the Savior we can feel peace, experience comfort, and realize a strength and power which comes only through belief in him.

Three principles which I believe can literally increase our faith are: first, searching the scriptures; second, being in tune with the Spirit of the Lord; and third, praying always.

I am not suggesting that these are the only things which increase our faith, but I have a personal testimony that these are true principles that enhance and contribute to our ability to go forth "in the strength of the Lord."

The chapters that follow contain personal insights I have gained as I have sought to understand faith and to strengthen my own faith. I share them as seeds of thought which I hope you will plant and nourish, eventually participating in a personal harvest of faith.

In writing about faith, I am not suggesting that I have perfect faith. There are many times when my faith wanes or when I wish I could be more firm in my faith. I take consolation from President Kimball's comment that "we would not have much motivation to righteousness if all speakers and writers postponed discussing and warning until they themselves were perfected." (Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], page xii.)
