Carolyn J. Rasmus, In the Strength of the Lord I Can Do All Things ( 1990)

Chapter Five

Search the Scriptures

Alma taught the multitudes of people who gathered upon the hill Onidah about faith and the word of God. He explained that faith is not a perfect knowledge (see Alma 32:21, 26) and suggested that the same was true of the word of God which he preached unto them: "Ye cannot know of their surety at first . . . any more than faith is a perfect knowledge." (Alma 32:26.)

Then Alma taught a powerful lesson, a lesson that applies both to the development of faith and to the understanding of the word of God. He said: "If ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words." (Alma 32:27.)

Awake, arouse, experiment, exercise, desire—these are action words. They require action on our part. Repeatedly throughout the scriptures we are directed to take action—to ask, believe, receive, desire, inquire, knock, ponder, nourish, and so forth.

In describing the devil, Nephi tells us that the Adversary will pacify and lull the people into carnal security (see 2 Nephi 28:21). No wonder we are told to be awake and alert.

In comparing "the word" to a seed, Alma tells us that if it is a good seed, "or that the word is good," it will begin to enlarge our soul. It will begin to enlighten our understanding and be delicious to us. (Alma 32:28.) Then he adds, "Would not this increase your faith?" (Alma 32:29.) Alma implies that it is through the word that our faith can increase.

In modern times Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught something similar: "Faith is . . . born of scriptural study. Those who study, ponder, and pray about the scriptures, seeking to understand their deep and hidden meanings, receive from time to time great outpourings of light and knowledge from the Holy Spirit." Elder McConkie suggested that "faith comes and revelations are received as a direct result of scriptural study." Notice Elder McConkie's use of action words—study, ponder, pray, seek. (See "Holy Writ: Published Anew," Regional Representative's Seminar, 2 April 1982.)

A Desire to Believe

If our study of the scriptures can increase our faith, how do we begin? Again, the scriptures are instructive. Alma has told us that it is sufficient if we can "no more than desire" to believe. (Alma 32:27.)

Lehi, the first prophet in the Book of Mormon, received a vision of the tree of life. His son, Nephi, "having heard all the words of [his] father, concerning the things which he saw in a vision" (1 Nephi 10:17), wanted to know of the vision for himself. "I, Nephi, was desirous also that I might see, and hear, and know of these things, by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him." (1 Nephi 10:17.)

The account of Nephi preparing for and receiving the vision of the tree of life is filled with action words: "For it came to pass that after I had desired to know the things that my father had seen, and believing that the Lord was able to make them known unto me, as I sat pondering in my heart I was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord." (1 Nephi 11:1.) Nephi's experience is the same as Alma's counsel. First he desired, then he believed.

This is reinforced in Nephi's experience. After he had been "caught away . . . into an exceedingly high mountain," the Spirit said to him, "Behold, what desirest thou?" (1 Nephi 11:2.) Nephi knew what he desired. He said, "I desire to behold the things which my father saw." (1 Nephi 11:3.) Then the Spirit said to him, "Believest thou that thy father saw the tree of which he hath spoken?" Nephi responded, "Yea, thou knowest that I believe all the words of my father." (1 Nephi 11:4-5.) Then the Spirit said to Nephi, "Blessed art thou, Nephi, because thou believest in the Son of the most high God; wherefore, thou shalt behold the things which thou desirest." (1 Nephi 11:6.)

The beginning of our scripture study must start with our desire to believe. (Alma 32:27.) When Alma tells us that we must "give place for a portion of my words," could he mean that we must find a place (or a time) in our fast-paced, often hectic lives to study and ponder the scriptures?

Active Participation

In the analogy of the oxygen mask on the airplane (see chapter two), oxygen becomes available only when action is taken by the passengers—when they pull the line and mask toward them. So it is with the study of the scriptures. To understand the scriptures requires that we be active participants.

Nephi's experience in receiving the vision gives us another clue that can be helpful to us in our own study of the scriptures. We know that he had a desire to know about the vision and that he believed the Lord could make it known unto him. But we also read that prior to the vision Nephi "sat pondering." To ponder means "to consider something deeply and thoroughly; to weigh carefully in the mind; to consider thoughtfully." A synonym for ponder is meditate. (The Random House Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged, 1966.) We have many scriptures which illustrate the things that happened as people pondered or meditated.

The revelation recorded in D&C 76 provides one such example. The Prophet Joseph Smith had been commanded by the Lord to translate the Bible, and he indicated that "it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled." (Joseph Smith, History of The Church, 1:245.) In the process of doing this work, Joseph and Sidney Rigdon came to John 5:29, which differed in translation from the King James Version. The Prophet recorded, "Now this caused us to marvel, for it was given unto us of the Spirit. And while we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone round about." (D&C 76:18-19.) Joseph and Sidney were actively involved—they meditated. It was then that a great vision was shown them: They saw the Father and the Son and recorded one of the most powerful testimonies in all the holy scriptures: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:22-24.)

We have record of a similar experience preceding a vision given to Joseph F. Smith, the sixth president of the Church, recorded in D&C 138. He reported: "On the third of October in the year nineteen hundred and eighteen, I sat in my room pondering over the scriptures; And reflecting upon the great atoning sacrifice that was made by the Son of God, for the redemption of the world; . . . While I was thus engaged, my mind reverted to the writings of the apostle Peter. . . . I opened the Bible and read the third and fourth chapters of the first epistle of Peter. . . . As I pondered over these things which are written, the eyes of my understanding were opened and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me." (D&C 138:1, 2, 5-6, 11.)

What follows is President Smith's description concerning the Savior's visit to the spirit world. Note the action words recorded in this section: pondering, reflecting, opened, and pondered.

Nephi, the son of Helaman, had a similar experience. He was pondering over the things which the Lord had shown unto him. "And it came to pass as he was thus pondering . . . in his heart" that the voice of the Lord came unto him. He was commended for his "unwearyingness," was given the sealing power, and was commanded to declare the word of the Lord unto the people. (Helaman 10:2-4, 12.)

When Jesus Christ showed himself unto the people of Nephi and preached unto the multitudes, he, too, instructed the people to ponder. He perceived that they did not understand all of the words he had spoken to them and he said, "Go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things which I have said, and ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand, and prepare your minds for the morrow." (3 Nephi 17:3.) Ponder, ask, prepare—all are action words.

Interestingly, we have no direction in the scriptures themselves to merely read the scriptures. We are always told to search or study or ponder. Probably each of us has had the experience of reading passages of scripture, only to finish and realize that we're not even sure we know what we've read. Learning requires an investment of time and energy. We must be mentally awake and actively involved in the learning process.

King Benjamin learned this lesson from an angel, who appeared unto him and said, "Awake, and hear the words which I shall tell thee; for behold, I am come to declare unto you the glad tidings of great joy." (Mosiah 3:2-3.) The scriptures contain glad tidings of great joy, but we must be awake to understand their messages.

In the analogy of comparing the word to a seed, Alma repeatedly admonishes the people to "nourish it." (See Alma 32:37-42.) He tells the people that they cannot have "fruit" unless they nourish the word. How is it to be nourished? He repeats three words three times—by diligence, faith, and patience. (See Alma 32:41-43.) To nourish is to cherish, foster, and keep alive. Diligence is constant, persistent, and earnest effort. Patience is quiet perseverance. Faith is to hope for things which are true. (See Alma 32:21.)

In summary, searching the scriptures requires action on our part. We begin simply by having a desire to learn. That desire must be nourished with faith and diligence and patience.

Becoming Acquainted with the Scriptures

During his tenure as President of the Church, President Spencer W. Kimball delivered several landmark addresses to the women of the Church. In 1978 he counseled the sisters to "study the scriptures that you may gain strength through understanding of eternal things. You . . . need this close relationship with the mind and will of our Eternal Father. We want our sisters to be scholars of the scriptures as well as our men. You need an acquaintanceship with his eternal truths." ("Privileges and Responsibilities of Sisters," Ensign, November 1978, page 102.)

The following year, in 1979, he again emphasized the importance of scriptural study: "I stress again the deep need each woman has to study the scriptures. We want our homes to be blessed with sister scriptorians—whether you are single or married, young or old, widowed or living in a family. Become scholars of the scriptures—not to put others down, but to lift them up!" ("The Role of Righteous Women," Ensign, November 1979, page 102.)

President Ezra Taft Benson has repeatedly admonished members of the Church to study the scriptures. He has told us to "immerse [our]selves in the scriptures regularly and consistently." ("Cleansing the Inner Vessel," Ensign, May 1986, pages 4-7.) Further, he has said that we will be denied the sweet whisperings of the Spirit unless we "pay the price of studying, pondering, and praying about the scriptures" ("The Power of the Word," Ensign, May 1986, pages 79, 82), and that we must come to see that "studying and searching the scriptures is not a burden laid upon [us] by the Lord, but a marvelous blessing and opportunity" ("A Sacred Responsibility," Ensign, May 1986, pages 77-78). President Benson has promised that "if we will daily sup from [the Book of Mormon] and abide by its precepts, God will pour out upon each child of Zion and the Church a blessing hitherto unknown." ("The Savior's Visit to America," Ensign, May 1987, pages 4-7.)

My initial serious desire to read the scriptures came as a result of President Kimball's admonition to become scholars of the scriptures. As I listened to our prophet, I knew it was the right thing to do. In the past I had read verses and chapters and sometimes pages, understanding little of what I read and remembering very little. I was aware of frequently repeated scriptures and I knew where to find things such as the Beatitudes or Christ's discourse on the first and second great commandments. But I was reading strictly out of obedience, because I thought I should.

At that stage of life my reading of the scriptures could be likened to having to practice musical scales or arpeggios. My piano teacher said that these drills would make me a better pianist. I couldn't see how. I didn't like doing it, but I responded in obedience. Later, as my skill in piano increased, I found that many patterns in music came easier because I was familiar with the fingering from previous drills. My constant drilling of scales and arpeggios nourished my understanding of and skill in playing the piano. I practiced with faith (I believed what my piano teacher told me), with diligence (my mother made sure my effort was constant and persistent), and patience (perseverance).

Just as practice made me more comfortable with piano music, I found that constant repetition of studying the scriptures helped me become more comfortable with the language of the scriptures. I would mark the scriptures when I heard others make reference to them in a sacrament meeting or conference talk. In addition to marking them, I would usually write the date in the margin and sometimes who had made reference to it. I would do the same thing if I read an article which gave me new insight into a scripture. Often I would jot a note in the margin to help me better understand the meaning of the scripture.

As I became more acquainted with the scriptures, I began to see patterns emerge. I remember my excitement one morning as I read Mosiah 3:19. In talking about yielding to the enticings of the Holy Spirit and becoming a Saint through the atonement of Christ, King Mosiah uses these words: "submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love." I remembered reading some of these same words in the New Testament. Using the Topical Guide I was soon able to turn to the fifth chapter of Galatians: "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Galatians 5:22-23.) The footnote led me to Colossians 3:12 in which similar words were used to describe the elect of God. I turned again to the Topical Guide to look up each of the words I originally read in Mosiah and was led to such scriptures as Helaman 3:35, Alma 7:23-24, D&C 4:5-6, and D&C 121:41-42. I was having my own scripture chase and loving it!

Like seeing portions of scales and arpeggios repeated in music, I became increasingly aware of repeated words (faith, diligence, and patience) and ideas. Although the references identified in the new LDS editions of the scriptures lead us to the Topical Guide or Bible Dictionary or other scriptures, I found myself adding to the information that was available when I found another scripture that seemed to me equally related.

Likening the Scriptures unto Ourselves

But the real key to searching the scriptures and enjoying them came when I followed Nephi's advice to liken the scriptures unto ourselves. (See 1 Nephi 19:23-24.) One day as a friend and I were sharing favorite scriptures, she told me one of the ways in which she "likened the scriptures" to herself. Each time she was reading and felt that a scripture "applied" directly to her, she wrote in the margin "to me" and put the date under it. I began doing this. I remember one period of time when I was feeling particularly discouraged. I was trying to do things that seemed right, but I felt as though I was taking one step forward and two steps backward, and making little overall progress. In the midst of this period of discouragement, I read from Alma 7:19: "For I perceive that ye are in the paths of righteousness; I perceive that ye are in the path which leads to the kingdom of God; yea, I perceive that ye are making his paths straight." I felt as though the Lord was speaking directly to me, that he acknowledged that I was trying to live my life in an appropriate way. As I read the scripture, I wept and felt that the message was just for me. I wrote in the margin "to me," and underneath put the date.

Over a period of about three years I have identified thirty-six such scriptures. In addition to writing in the margin of the scriptures, I also have kept a list on the very last page. Recently, I began at the top of the list and reviewed each scripture one after the other. I was surprised to realize that more than half of the scriptures dealt with the need for having patience. I was struck with the significance of that message to me and felt that the scriptures were, as Nephi tells us, "for our profit and learning." (1 Nephi 19:23.)

On a trip to Ohio to visit my parents who are in their mid-eighties and dealing with the challenges of aging, my mother said to me, "I feel just like Job." I sensed her discouragement and despair, and thought about what I might say to her that would be comforting and helpful. Almost immediately the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded in D&C 121 came into my mind. He had pleaded with the Lord and asked some hard questions concerning the suffering of the saints in Missouri. He wanted the Lord to kindle his anger against their enemies and to "avenge us of our wrongs." (D&C 121:5.) Then came the voice of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph (and I believe to my mother): "Peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high. . . . Thy friends do stand by thee. . . . Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job." (D&C 121:7-10.)

I could hardly wait to share this scripture with my mother. Early the next morning I told her about the Prophet Joseph Smith and the many adversities the Saints had suffered in Missouri. I then read her this portion of scripture. Together we talked about Job and all that he had endured. We also talked about the many blessings and good things for which she had to rejoice. When we finished talking she said simply, "I am not at all like Job. I have so many things for which to be thankful."

As my mother and I talked that morning I gained new insights from her and we were led to read the scriptures about Job. I have found that sharing and discussing scriptures with others is a wonderful way to expand my own knowledge and to learn from others. Sometimes I'll call a friend on the phone and say, "Listen to this" or, "I got a new insight this morning while I was reading the scriptures. Do you have a minute for me to share?" Other friends of mine have found that reading and discussing the scriptures together is an exciting process. A group of women I know walk early every morning; they walk and talk and learn together. Known affectionately in the neighborhood as the "traveling synagogue," they use as their "course of study" the standard works. What a wonderful way to become physically and spiritually fit!

Ye Do Err, Not Knowing the Scriptures

The scriptures help us understand the importance of searching and knowing the scriptures. Because Nephi desired to know the things that his father had seen, he was shown the vision of the tree of life. (See 1 Nephi 11.) However, Nephi's brothers did not understand the teachings of their father and "were disputing one with another concerning the things which [their] father had spoken unto them." They said to Nephi, "We cannot understand the words which our father hath spoken." (1 Nephi 15:2, 7.) Nephi himself admits that the things spoken by Lehi were "hard to be understood, save a man should inquire of the Lord." He asked his brothers, "Have ye inquired of the Lord?" (1 Nephi 15:3, 8.) The Lord then counseled, "If ye will not harden your hearts, and ask me in faith, believing that ye shall receive, with diligence in keeping my commandments, surely these things shall be made known unto you." (1 Nephi 15:11.)

In at least three instances scripturally, people are rebuked for not having searched and known the scriptures. In the New Testament the Sadducees asked Christ a question concerning the writings of Moses. They wanted to know if a man married his brother's widow, whose wife would she be in the Resurrection. Jesus answered, "Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God." (Matthew 22:29; Mark 12:24.)

In the Book of Mormon we have record of the Zoramites believing that they could not worship God because they were not permitted to enter into the synagogues. (See Alma 32:3.) Alma said to them, "Behold, ye have said that ye could not worship your God because ye are cast out of your synagogues. But behold, I say unto you, if ye suppose that ye cannot worship God, ye do greatly err, and ye ought to search the scriptures; if ye suppose that they have taught you this, ye do not understand them." (Alma 33:2.) Moroni spoke to the unbelievers who did not believe in revelations, prophecies, gifts, healings, or the speaking with and interpretation of tongues. He said, "He that denieth these things knoweth not the gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them." (Mormon 9:7-8.)

Not knowing the power of God or understanding his ways is only one consequence of not searching the scriptures. In scriptures referring to the last days we read that the time will come when "they that murmured shall learn doctrine." (See Isaiah 29:24; 2 Nephi 27:35.) Elder Neal A. Maxwell suggests that this could be interpreted to mean that "doctrinal illiteracy is a significant cause of murmuring among church members." ("A Choice Seer," Ensign, August 1986, page 9.)

It is instructive to look at scriptures containing the words murmur and murmured. A few illustrations demonstrate that when the people were not acquainted with the ways of the Lord, they murmured:

"And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderness!" (Numbers 14:2.) If the children of Israel had understood what Moses knew about their exodus to the promised land, they would not have murmured.

"And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them." (Luke 15:2.) The pharisees and scribes did not understand that Christ came to save sinners, therefore they murmured.

"The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven." (John 6:41.) Although the Jews could understand that manna had been sent from heaven to save ancient Israel from starvation and temporal death, they did not understand that the bread which Christ would give was his flesh. (See John 6:51.) Not only did the Jews murmur because they did not understand this doctrine, but we are told many of the Savior's disciples believed that this was "an hard saying" and many "walked no more with him." (John 6:60, 66.)

"Because of the stiffneckedness of Laman and Lemuel . . . they did murmur in many things against their father, because he was a visionary man, and had led them out of the land of Jerusalem." (1 Nephi 2:11.)

If Laman and Lemuel had truly understood that being a "visionary man" meant that their father walked and talked with God, they would not have murmured. Also, they would have known that to remain in Jerusalem would have meant that they might have been destroyed.

"And thus Laman and Lemuel . . . did murmur against their father." In this instance the scriptures tell us why they murmured—"because they knew not the dealings of that God who had created them." (1 Nephi 2:12.)

Is it possible that we sometimes murmur because we are not familiar with or do not understand or have not taken the time to study and learn the doctrine?

The Scriptures Enlarge Our Memory

When Alma entrusted the records to his son Helaman, he also commanded him to keep a record of the people, "for it is for a wise purpose that they are kept." (Alma 37:2.) He indicates that all the records which have been preserved were done so in the wisdom of God. Alma tells his son that one of the reasons these records have been preserved is that they might enlarge the memory of the people. (See Alma 37:8.) Our memory is those impressions or recollections or remembrances of the past. In this scripture Alma tells us that one of the purposes of the scriptures is to help us remember. The word remember (and its variants—remembered, rememberest, remembereth, and remembering) appear 461 times in the Standard Works, 193 of which are in the Book of Mormon alone. Although the people were told to remember a variety of things, five themes recur in these "remember" scriptures: One, remember to keep his commandments and to observe the statutes of the Lord (see 1 Nephi 15:25; 2 Nephi 1:16; Mosiah 1:7; Alma 9:13; Alma 37:13, 35); two, remember God's mercy toward us (see Alma 29:10; Alma 32:22; Moroni 10:3); three, remember the great things God has done for us and for his people (see Alma 9:9; Alma 29:11, 12; Mosiah 27:16); four, remember Christ's atoning sacrifice and means of salvation (see 1 Nephi 19:18; Helaman 5:9, 12); and five, remember the teachings of those who taught of God (see Helaman 4:21; Helaman 5:10; Alma 33:3; Alma 46:24; Alma 57:21; Ether 15:1).

As we study the scriptures we can learn about God, his dealings with men throughout the ages, the gift of Jesus Christ to each of us, and the testimony of others who believed in God. As we study these things, our memories will be enlarged and we will increase our understanding of things pertaining unto God.

The Scriptures Testify of Jesus Christ

Amulek taught the people, repeating what his "beloved brother" Alma had said unto them; that they needed to "prepare [their] minds" and have faith to "plant the word in [their] hearts" so that they could "try the experiment of [the word's] goodness." (Alma 34:1-4.)

The most important reason for us to search the scriptures is to increase our faith in Jesus Christ, for the scriptures teach and write and testify of Christ. Jacob records that "none of the prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this Christ." (Jacob 7:11.) He also indicated that "for this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming." (Jacob 4:4.)

Nephi recorded that the things he wrote were to persuade his people that they would remember the Lord their Redeemer (see 1 Nephi 19:18). He also wrote, "We labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God." (2 Nephi 25:23.) Writing to us in our day, Mormon says, "For this cause I write unto you . . . that ye may believe the gospel of Jesus Christ." (Mormon 3:20-21.) Alma instructed his son, Helaman, that the records "should be kept and handed down from one generation to another, and be kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord to bring them to the knowledge of the Lord their God, and to rejoice in Jesus Christ their Redeemer." (Alma 37:4, 9.)

It is for this reason that the scriptures are laid before us—that we might know of Jesus Christ, have faith in him, partake of his goodness and power, and be blessed with his grace which will enable us to "go forth in the strength of the Lord."
