Carolyn J. Rasmus, In the Strength of the Lord I Can Do All Things ( 1990)

Chapter Six

Having His Spirit to Be with Us

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ cannot be known or developed "but [by] the Spirit of God." (1 Corinthians 2:11.) It is through "the spirit which is of God that we might know the things that are freely given us of God." (1 Corinthians 2:12.) Paul also tells us that there are things which we cannot learn through "the words which man's wisdom teacheth" but which must be learned through the Holy Ghost. (1 Corinthians 2:13.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith understood this same principle when he said, "It requires the Spirit of God to know the things of God." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 205.) The prophet Jacob bore testimony that the works of the Lord are "great and marvelous . . . [and] unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him." He wrote, "It is impossible that man should find out all his ways. And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him." (Jacob 4:8.)

Following a vision given to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon in 1832, they bore witness in much the same way that Jacob did. "Great and marvelous are the works of the Lord, and the mysteries of his kingdom . . . which surpass all understanding in glory, and in might, and in dominion." (D&C 76:114.) They too tell us that such things are "only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit." (D&C 76:116.) Job also taught this principle for he said to his three friends, "The inspiration of the Almighty giveth . . . understanding." (Job 32:8.)

Since each of us is a literal child of God, our spirits having been born to Heavenly Parents before we came to earth to receive bodies from our mortal parents, it is not surprising that God would continue to give understanding to our spirits. (See Hebrews 12:9.) There is great truth to the statement by Teilhard de Chardin: "We are not human beings having a spiritual experience. We are spiritual beings having a human experience." It is through God's spirit that he communicates to us, his children. Therefore, being in tune with his spirit is critical to our learning and remembering and knowing the things of God.

Repeatedly, the prophets of this dispensation have admonished us to be in tune with the Spirit of the Lord. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "I know that His spirit will bear testimony to all who seek diligently after knowledge from Him." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 29.) Following the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith he appeared in February of 1847 to President Brigham Young. President Young asked the Prophet Joseph if he had a message for the people. The Prophet said, "Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the Spirit of the Lord and it will lead them aright. Be careful and not turn away from the still small voice; it will teach you what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom." (Manuscript History of Brigham Young, February 23, 1847.)

Similarly, President Wilford Woodruff was visited by President Brigham Young about two years after President Young's death. President Woodruff asked Brigham Young if he had a message for the Saints in Arizona. President Young said, "Tell the people to get the Spirit of the Lord and keep it with them." (As quoted by Neal A. Maxwell, Notwithstanding My Weaknesses [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981], page 113.)

In our day President Ezra Taft Benson has said, "Spirituality—being in tune with the Spirit of the Lord—is the greatest need we all have. We should strive for the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost all of our days. Seek the Spirit in all you do. Keep it with you continually." ("Seek the Spirit of the Lord," Ensign, April 1988, page 5.)

The Spirit Will Enlighten Our Minds

How does the Spirit work on and with us? How do we recognize it? The scriptures give us insight. The Lord, through a revelation given to Joseph Smith, said, "I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind." (D&C 11:13.) In teaching how to recognize the promptings of the Spirit, the Prophet Joseph Smith explained that sometimes we "feel pure intelligence" flowing into us, or we receive "sudden strokes of ideas." These things, presented to our minds, come by the Spirit of God. "Thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, [we] may grow into the principle of revelation" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 151.)

In a revelation given through Joseph Smith to Oliver Cowdery, the Lord said, "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation." (D&C 8:2-3.)

Enos prayed mightily and gained a remission of his sins. He continued to cry unto the Lord "in mighty prayer and supplication" all day long and through the night. Then he received a revelation: "There came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed." (Enos 1:4-5.)

I, like you, have had experiences when, at critical times, important thoughts have come into my heart and mind.

I remember one such morning when I finished my prayers and stood almost before I'd uttered, "Amen." I was ready to grab my coat and leave for work when the thought came into my mind, "Go back and kneel beside your bed." Even though I felt pressed for time, the impression came so strongly that I responded immediately.

As I returned to my knees a scripture came into my mind: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left . . . and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.) That was all. I stayed there for a few minutes, all the time wondering why that scripture would come into my mind. Then I left for work.

It is about a forty-five minute drive from my home in Orem, Utah, to my work in Salt Lake City. I knew that a storm had been forecasted, but the sun shone brightly as I left home and I went merrily on my way. About twenty minutes later, as I neared what is referred to locally as the point of the mountain, I drove into a blinding snowstorm. The snow was heavy enough that I struggled even to see the white line marking the edge of the freeway; to keep my bearings I had to focus on the tail lights of the eighteen-wheeler ahead of me. Suddenly, and without warning, the truck swerved into the median strip of the highway.

The storm was bad enough that the radio station I was listening to kept advising people to stay off the highways. One caller indicated that this was the worst weather conditions he'd seen in the Salt Lake Valley in twenty-five years. I concurred, as I was driving at a snail's pace. The snow was turning to ice as it hit the highway, and the visibility continued to decrease.

What cars were still on the road were sliding across the various lanes; and many cars were off to the side of the road. Though I gripped the steering wheel tighter and tighter, I felt that I had little or no control of the car. It almost seemed inevitable that I'd be the next car off the highway or involved in an accident.

Suddenly the experience I'd had less than an hour earlier came into my mind. As the words of the scripture passed through my mind again, I felt an immediate sense of peace and calm. I knew that I would be safe, that I would be protected on my right and on my left.

It took three times longer than usual to get to work that morning, but I did get there. I was safe, and once again I knew that the influence of the Spirit in our lives is real, and that it can serve as both a guide and a comfort.

The Spirit Speaks Peace to the Mind

One of the most common ways that we feel the influence of the Spirit is described in D&C 6:23. The Lord says to the Prophet Joseph, "Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?"

Late one night when I felt particularly harried and rushed, I knelt to pray. I was so tired I don't remember saying much more than, "Heavenly Father, please help me." Shortly thereafter, I felt impressed to reach for a pad of paper and pencil. While still on my knees, I wrote these words which came to my mind:

When all around seems strange and wrong, I seek to know what's right. I pull away to be alone, I seek to find the light. The Spirit whispers, I feel at peace. I know God cares and hears. Eternal truth rings in my ears, My soul no longer fears. Oh, Heavenly Father, hear my prayer And calm my troubled mind. Help keep my thoughts in thee alone, Eternal truths to find.

My responsibilities and pressures and hectic schedule didn't change, but I did feel peace. And I sensed I was not alone. I knew that with the help of the Savior, I could do all that was expected and required—and that I could do it cheerfully and with his spirit.

Actively Seeking for the Spirit

If, through the Spirit of the Lord, we can have our minds enlightened, experience pure intelligence, hear the voice and receive the thoughts of the Lord in our mind, and feel peace, what must we do to have his Spirit with us? When manifestations of the Spirit of the Lord are recorded in the scriptures, the person receiving the manifestation is almost always actively engaged in the process of seeking direction, answers to specific questions, or insight into a situation. Nephi, wanting to know the things concerning the vision his father had received, was "desirous . . . [to] see, and hear, and know of these things, by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him." (1 Nephi 10:17.)

Enos, before having the voice of the Lord come into his mind, tells us that his "soul hungered," he cried unto God "in mighty prayer and supplication," and he "poured out [his] whole soul unto God." (Enos 1:4, 9.)

The words which President Joseph F. Smith uses to describe his activity prior to having the Spirit of the Lord rest upon him are also words of action—pondering, reflecting, and reading. (See D&C 138:1, 2, 6.) The Prophet Joseph Smith received additional words of revelation concerning baptisms for the dead after this subject "occupied his mind" and "pressed itself upon [his] feelings." (D&C 128:1.)

Be Still and Listen

As in the study of the scriptures, we must be actively involved in the process of seeking—to know, to understand, or to receive an answer to our inquiry. Active listening is as critical as asking.

An incident from the life of Bishop John Wells, a former counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, teaches the importance of being guided by the Spirit.

Bishop Wells was a great detail man and was responsible for many Church reports. One of his sons was killed in a railroad accident on October 15, 1915. He was run over by a freight car. Sister Wells could not be consoled. She received no comfort during the funeral and continued her mourning after her son was laid to rest. Bishop Wells feared for her health, as she was in a state of deep anguish. One day, soon after the funeral, Sister Wells was lying on her bed in a state of mourning. The son appeared to her and said, "Mother, do not mourn, do not cry. I am all right." He then related to her how the accident had taken place. Apparently there had been some question—even suspicion—about the accident because the young man was an experienced railroad man. But he told his mother that it was clearly an accident. He also told her that as soon as he realized he was in another sphere, he had tried to reach his father but could not. His father was so busy with the details of his office and work that he could not respond to the promptings. Therefore, the son had come to his mother. He then said, "Tell Father that all is well with me, and I want you not to mourn any more." (Ezra Taft Benson, "Seek the Spirit of the Lord," Ensign, April 1988, page 2, as quoted in David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], pages 525-26.)

President Ezra Taft Benson has emphasized that "we must always be responsive to the whisperings of the Spirit. These promptings most often come when we are not under the pressure of appointments and when we are not caught up in the worries of day-to-day life." ("Seek the Spirit of the Lord," page 2.)

We live at a time when people seem always to be in a hurry, to be rushing from one appointment or place to another. There are appointments to keep, schedules to meet, and places to be; but in all of the rushing, where are we going?

We seem, somehow, to believe that to accomplish something we must be physically involved; that to have approval, either of ourselves or others, we must give an accounting of our activities during every waking hour. Somehow we believe that the more we do, the better we are.

At various times in my life when I've been caught up in the push-push, rush-rush way of living, my body has rebelled and I have finally had to justify to myself a reason to stop. The doctor would always confirm—"it was strep throat." I came to realize that although the manifestation was strep throat, it really was "stress throat."

During one of these illnesses, I lay in bed reflecting on a priesthood blessing I had received which included these words from Mosiah: "It is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength." (Mosiah 4:27.) Was I running faster than I had strength? I thought about and pondered this through the night. The next morning I reread Mosiah 4:27 and then D&C 10:4: "Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength and means." I began to think of many self-imposed deadlines. I thought of pushing beyond what I knew to be wise. In many cases it was because of false pride—I wanted to be seen as capable. I believed others' acceptance of me was dependent on the things I did.

Alone and not feeling physically like doing anything, I reflected not only on having run faster and labored harder than I had strength to do, but became aware that my prayers had been rushed. I could not remember having felt any prompting of the Spirit for some time, and my study of the scriptures was nonexistent. I made a quiet resolve to better "pace myself" and to be about the things that can, in fact, bring not only insight but also strength.

I recalled an experience I had had only weeks earlier. The kitchen floor seemed always to be dirty. I know two dogs and two people can track in a lot of dirt, but I was sweeping the floor every day, only to find that it looked just as bad the next day. I swept the kitchen floor every day for more than two weeks. Then one evening while repeating the exercise, I discovered that what really needed sweeping was the garage, through which entrance was gained to the kitchen. The next Saturday I cleaned the garage thoroughly. It was filthy, absolutely filled with dirt and dead grass and other debris. Immediately I found that the kitchen floor was much less dirty. While all that time I had been doing something right—I had done a fine job of sweeping the kitchen floor—I simply had not been doing the right or smart thing, which was keeping the garage clean. When the garage was clean, the kitchen floor remained cleaner.

Are our lives sometimes like that? Do we do things right, but not always do the right things? Do we sometimes rush around in a busy fashion, doing worthwhile things, but then never find time for the very things that bring peace and insight and strength from above? Do we sometimes not read the scriptures, or seek to listen to the Spirit, or pray and seek for answers because there's never quite enough "quiet" time for pondering, reading, and seeking?

The more I thought about this during that occasion of forced rest due to illness, the more it became evident that I needed to make some changes in my life. I went to my desk with several books and my scriptures and put together a memo that began: "To Carolyn Rasmus, from Carolyn Rasmus."

At the top I wrote two scriptures. "Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength and means" (D&C 10:4), and, "It is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength." (Mosiah 4:27.)

I added five quotes from the book Notwithstanding My Weakness (Deseret Book, 1981), by Neal A. Maxwell:

Paced progress is essential; God used six measured and orderly creative periods followed by respite. (Page 5.)

There is a difference between being steadily and effectively and "anxiously engaged" and being frantically engaged one moment and being passive the next. (Page 15.)

Let us remember that the Lord does not want us to be weary by the way. (Page 15.)

Steady devotion is better than periodic exhaustion. (Page 7.)

Pace is so essential to personal progress lest we magnify our weaknesses instead of our callings. (Page 7.)

It seemed as though Elder Maxwell had written these statements just for me. I reviewed notes from a meeting I had attended during which Elder J. Thomas Fyans, a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, had instructed the auxiliary leaders of the Church: "Do not create self-imposed deadlines that keep you out of breath."

Finally I turned to the scriptures to find what I knew was already there. In the New Testament there are numerous references to Christ going up into a mountain—sometimes to pray, sometimes to simply be alone. (See Matthew 5:1; 14:23; Mark 3:13; Luke 6:12; John 6:15.) One particular scripture was especially meaningful to me. The Apostles were with Jesus Christ, and they "shared with him what they had done and what they had taught." Following this "reporting session," Christ said to them, "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. And they departed into a desert place by ship privately." (Mark 6:31-32.)

I noticed some parallels from these verses with my own life. Certainly there were "many coming and going" and "no leisure so much as to eat." I felt as if this scripture was just for me—"Come ye . . . and rest a while."

We see this same principle spoken of in the Book of Mormon. Alma had journeyed to the land of Gideon, taught the people, and "established the order of the Church." Then "he returned to his own house at Zarahemla to rest himself from the labors which he had performed." (Alma 8:1.)

In another instance, after Alma and Amulek had been imprisoned, contended with unbelievers, and taught the gospel, Alma took Amulek "to his own house, and did administer unto him in his tribulations, and strengthened him in the Lord." (Alma 15:18.)

If we are to be in tune with the Spirit, we must stop long enough to listen to its promptings. But listening can also be a challenge, especially when we are surrounded by family members, friends, telephones, radios, television sets, and compact disc players. This is especially challenging for those who live or work with teenagers. While serving as a ward advisor in the Young Women's program, I frequently drove young women who believed in a principle I called "ICRO"—"In Car . . . Radio On." And when the radio was on, it was loud. When the radio, or anything else for that matter, blares, all communication stops. Amid their protests that I was "the worst advisor they had ever had," I finally won out and we actually drove places without the radio on. At first they didn't know how to talk to each other, but gradually that changed. We not only learned about each other, but we learned to share, to communicate, and to listen to one another.

If we are to be in tune with the Spirit of the Lord we must "turn off" the noise of the world in order to listen, truly listen, to his voice. We need to remember that when the Lord spoke to Elijah it was not "a great strong wind [which] rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks," it was not "in the earthquake" or "in the fire"; instead, the voice of the Lord came to Elijah as a "still, small voice." Likewise, when the voice of the Lord came to the people in the land of Nephi, "it was not a voice of thunder, neither was it a voice of a great tumultuous noise, but behold, it was a still voice of perfect mildness, as if it had been a whisper, and it did pierce even to the very soul." (Helaman 5:30.)

Numerous times in the scriptures we read words to this effect: "Be still and know that I am God." (See D&C 101:16; Exodus 14:13; Psalm 46:10.) However, it is in the Doctrine and Covenants that we learn why the Lord wants us, on occasion, to be still. He says to us, "Stop, and stand still until I command thee, and I will provide means whereby thou mayest accomplish the thing which I have commanded thee." (D&C 5:34.)

We dare not allow ourselves to become so caught up in the pressures of living that we remove ourselves from the true source of life. It is when we are still and quiet that we can hear the still, small voice helping us understand the deeper wisdom that comes from the Lord.

Unfortunately, we are sometimes our own worst enemy, imposing guilt on ourselves when we think we have not done as much as we could, or when we see others doing more. Elder Dallin H. Oaks suggested some general principles which, although specific to family history work, have a broader application. The first principle is that our efforts (in this case to promote temple and family history work) should be such as to accomplish the work of the Lord, not to impose guilt on his children. He then tells us that there is a variety of individual circumstances which must be taken into account if we are to eliminate imposing guilt. He specifically mentions "age, health, education, place of residence, family responsibilities and financial circumstances."

His second principle focuses on our need to understand that "in the work of redeeming the dead, there are many tasks to be performed." He suggests that we prayerfully select those ways that would fit our personal circumstances at a particular time. He says, "This should be done under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord." ("Family History: In Wisdom and Order," Ensign, June 1989, page 6.)

Prepare to Receive the Spirit

Perhaps nowhere is the promise of having the Lord's Spirit to be with us brought to our minds more forcefully and frequently than during the weekly sacramental service. In the blessing on the bread we are told that in order for us to always have his Spirit to be with us, we are to do certain things. In other words, like in so many things associated with the gospel, action is required on our part. When partaking of the bread we bear witness that we are willing to take upon us the name of Christ, always remember him, and keep his commandments. (See D&C 20:77.)

As we partake of the water, we bear witness that we "do always remember him." (D&C 20:79.) The importance of remembering Christ in order to have his Spirit was also emphasized when Christ instituted the sacrament prior to his crucifixion. (See JST Matthew 26:22.) These scriptures suggest that partaking of the sacrament is one of the most important things we can do to bring us closer to the Spirit.

To the Nephites, Christ said, "And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you." (3 Nephi 18:11.) Remembering Christ is critical to being in tune with his Spirit. How do we remember him? We can begin remembering him when we pray. We might remember how he endured pain and sorrow and afflictions; how he responded with meekness when unjustly accused; how he always sought to do the will of his Father; how he showed love to others; and how he taught important principles to the people. We might seek to remember him by using the knowledge we have about him as a guide for our own lives. In whatever situation or circumstance we encounter, we might ask: "How would Christ handle this?" "What would he say if he were here?" "What can I do to pattern my life after his?"

In all that we do, it is important to remember his promise to us—that as we remember him we will have his Spirit to be with us.

Being in tune with the Spirit also requires that we live in such a way that the Spirit can be with us. It requires that we believe that such a power is available to us and that we are trying to live the best we know how.

We know that the Spirit of the Lord withdraws when there is "wickedness and hardness" of hearts. However, when we begin to "grow exceedingly in the knowledge of [our] God; . . . keep his statutes and commandments, and . . . walk in truth and uprightness before him," the Lord will pour out his Spirit upon us. (Helaman 6:34-36.) Elder Neal A. Maxwell writes, "[We] cannot have the influence of the Spirit if our lives do not reflect reasonable righteousness. We should, therefore, using the criteria given by the Lord, want to avoid trying to cover up our sins, gratifying our pride and advancing our vain ambitions, or exercising compulsion over others. We should want to live in such a way that our way of living reflects relationships with others that are filled with 'persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, love unfeigned, kindness and pure knowledge' (D&C 121:36-41)." (All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book], page 95.)

Shortly after joining the Church, I began to question my decision. Some professional friends suggested I'd been brainwashed; another wrote that the "Mormons wouldn't accept you in your alien religion" and suggested I had been pressured into joining the Church. Finally, I went to the man who had baptized me. I said, "This is the worst decision I've ever made in my life. I've been happy my whole life, and now I'm absolutely miserable."

He looked at me and simply asked, "What are you not doing that prevents you from having the Spirit of the Lord with you?" What was I not doing? "Nothing," I said. "I'm not doing anything." He said, "That's what I thought. You're not praying?" "No." "You're not reading the scriptures?" "No."

He admonished me. I went home and, for the first time in more than a month, prayed. I began again to read the Book of Mormon. And those things began to make all the difference.

The Fruits of the Spirit

In addition to learning about how the Spirit of the Lord can be recognized and what we might do to be more in tune with that Spirit, it is important for us to know how the Spirit of the Lord can influence us. Paul wrote to the Galatians and contrasted the "works of the flesh" with the "fruit of the Spirit." The contrast is striking. He identified as works of the flesh the following: adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, and revellings.

In contrast, the fruits of the Spirit include "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness [and] temperance." No wonder Paul advised us to "walk in the Spirit." (See Galatians 5:16-23.) Repeatedly, scriptures in the Book of Mormon tell us that the influence of the Spirit of the Lord in our lives encourages us to do good:

"Because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts . . . we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." (Mosiah 5:2.)

"That which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God. . . . The Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil." (Moroni 7:13, 16.)

"And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. And whatsoever thing is good and just and true; wherefore, nothing that is good denieth the Christ, but acknowledgeth that he is." (Moroni 10:6.)

"Put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit." (D&C 11:12.)

One morning when I was feeling like I was just "not on track," I prayed to better know what I might do to be and do better. At lunch time, instead of eating, I chose to spend some time alone. I felt impressed to write the following ideas that came to my mind:

Â My nothingness—dependence on Him (Mosiah 2:20-21).

Â God is omnipotent (1 Nephi 9:6) and omniscient (Helaman 9:41).

Â He knows, cares about, loves me personally (1 Nephi 11:17);

Â He has sent angels to guard me (D&C 84:88).

Â Learn from scriptures, pray, seek the guidance of the Holy Ghost (2 Nephi 32:3, 5, 8, 9).

Â Learn to know His will and carry it out (John 5:30).

Â Understand that His will is more important than my will (Mark 3:35).

Â Learn the importance of His work, and that it is more important than my work. (John 8:28-29).

Â Understand that His work is saving souls (D&C 18:15).

Â Work to bring immortality and eternal life to others (Moses 1:39).

Â Put off the natural man; become a saint (Mosiah 3:19).

Â Humble myself (Alma 13:28).

Â Call on His name.

Â Watch and pray to not be tempted.

Â Be led by the Holy Spirit.

Later, I realized that each thought reflected an idea I had read in the scriptures. I searched the scriptures and added the references to my lunch time "food for thought."

When the Spirit Withdraws

Any discussion about being in tune with the Spirit of the Lord would be incomplete without acknowledging that there are times in our lives when the Spirit withdraws and we are left to our own judgment. I have come to believe that this is not necessarily due to unrighteous living or because we aren't doing certain things in our lives, but rather because there are times when, for the purpose of our own growth or experience, this is the will of our Heavenly Father.

The Prophet Joseph Smith cried out when he was imprisoned in Liberty Jail, "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?" (D&C 121:1-2.) Christ himself, hanging on the cross, pleaded, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46.)

Perhaps in such times of trial and tribulation we are expected to prove ourselves "true" even without the benefit of the influence of the Spirit. Our challenge is to be righteous at all times, under all conditions and circumstances.

Reflecting on this idea, and having experienced times when I felt very much alone and would question the strength of my faith or my humility or righteousness, I recorded the following in my journal:

President Brigham Young once made a statement which impressed me very much. In a quiet moment with his secretary and two others, someone said, "President Young, why is it that the Lord is not always at our side promoting universal happiness and seeing to it that the needs of people are met, caring especially for His Saints? Why is it so difficult at times?"

President Young answered, "Because man is destined to be a God, and he must be able to demonstrate that he is for God and to develop his own resources so that he can act independently and yet humbly." Then he added, "It is the way it is because we must learn to be righteous in the dark." (See Brigham Young's Office Journal, 28 January 1857.)

For me, learning to be "righteous in the dark" is part of my challenge in life. I have found times of spiritual abundance alternating with feelings of perceived abandonment. In pondering this idea one day, I wrote the following in my journal:

Because of my experiences prior to joining the Church, I expected that following my baptism I would experience one big spiritual high. The passing years have taught me otherwise. Instead, I find that mountain-top experiences are separated by valleys, even deserts. I struggle with ambiguities and contradictions. I am disturbed by discrepancies between gospel principles and practices. Often I have more questions than answers, and, like Nephi, I often feel "encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me." (2 Nephi 4:18.)

However, after passing through spiritual deserts where I have struggled with problems, I gain new insights and understandings and realize how finite my own vision is. I no longer equate ease and comfort with happiness and contentment, but am in the process of coming to better understand the peace and joy spoken of in the gospel. No wonder our Heavenly Father, whose knowledge is perfect, provides us with spiritual valleys as well as spiritual peaks.

Whether we are in a spiritual valley or on a spiritual peak, the Lord is mindful of us. He has promised, "By this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive." (D&C 11:14.)

May we actively seek for and desire his Spirit. And in our tightly scheduled lives, may we pause to feel and sense his spirit of goodness and assurance. As we are in tune with the still, small voice, we will be gently guided and enabled to "go forth in the strength of the Lord."
