Carolyn J. Rasmus, In the Strength of the Lord I Can Do All Things ( 1990)

Chapter Seven

Pray Always and Be Believing

From the time I was a young child I have believed in prayer. My parents taught me about it, I heard others pray, and it has always seemed like the right thing to do. I have heard many bear testimony that their prayers have been answered—that they have found their way when they have been lost, received guidance on an important decision, or found a way to relate to one of their children who seemed lost and alienated from the family. I also know people who feel frustrated and even guilty because they have prayed with all of their soul and yet have sensed no guidance on important matters. They begin to question their own faith, the "rightness" of their prayer, or even if God exists.

The scriptures are clear on our responsibilities concerning prayer. Repeatedly we are admonished to "pray always." (See 2 Nephi 32:9; Alma 13:28; 3 Nephi 18:18; D&C 10; D&C 88:126; Matthew 26:41; Mark 13:33; Luke 21:36.) The scriptures also contain numerous and repeated references to Christ, our Exemplar, praying to the Father. Likewise, the scriptures are filled with examples of others who prayed to God for a variety of reasons—to praise God, to express thanks, to seek for guidance, to be healed, to receive comfort, to resist temptation, to plead for forgiveness, to experience patience, to seek a blessing such as relief from drought, and so forth. Many people have written about prayer—how to pray, when to pray, the appropriate language of prayer, and how to prepare ourselves to pray.

For all I have come to know and experience about prayer, there have been times when I've still had many questions about this form of communication with our Father. Why is it that sometimes answers seem to come so clearly, almost before we've said the prayer, and yet at other times, after intensive and persistent pleadings with the Lord, we feel we are left on our own? Does receiving an answer one time and not another mean we pray with more faith sometimes? Does it mean that at times we are seeking the wrong, or an unrighteous, blessing?

Our Relationship to Heavenly Father

One day when earnestly seeking to better understand prayer and to make it more meaningful in my own life, I read the following statement in the Bible Dictionary: "As soon as we learn the true relationship in which we stand toward God (namely, God is our Father, and we are his children), then at once prayer becomes natural and instinctive on our part. Many of the so-called difficulties about prayer arise from forgetting this relationship." (LDS Edition of the King James Version, "Bible Dictionary," page 752.)

Suddenly my mind was flooded with thoughts. Although we cannot remember the time prior to our earthly birth, we do know that we are the spirit children of Heavenly Parents. We lived with them, were taught by them, and had opportunities to commune with them. If we were to become perfect, it was necessary for us to leave our Heavenly Father and our premortal home, and come to earth. When we were born of mortal parents, a veil covered our spiritual eyes and we could no longer remember our pre-earth experiences.

God endowed man with "agency." (Moses 7:32.) With this agency, man became free to choose "liberty and eternal life . . . or captivity and death." (2 Nephi 2:27.) We are to be "tried in all things" (D&C 136:31) to "see if [we] will do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God shall command [us]." (Abraham 3:25.)

The plan was not that we would be sent to earth and left on our own. The first instruction the Lord gave Adam and Eve after they were driven from the Garden of Eden was to pray. (See Moses 5:5.) In other words, through prayer man, though physically separated from God, could continue to commune with him.

The desire of our Heavenly Father is for us to ultimately return to him. Anticipating the fall of Adam and Eve, God provided a Redeemer to rescue us from the Fall and to show us a perfect example of how to live so that we might become more godly. As I thought about this great plan of salvation, several things became very clear to me: I am literally a spirit child of my heavenly parents; I lived with them, I knew them, and they knew me well; to grow in wisdom and knowledge and judgment, it was necessary for me to leave my Heavenly Parents and come to earth and receive an earthly body; I was given agency—I can make choices and will learn from them; the plan is for me to ultimately return to my Heavenly Father; this is made possible through the Atonement of Christ. Through his life I can learn how to live my life. I have not been left here on the earth alone with no knowledge of who I am or why I am here. The scriptures teach me about these things. They also teach me about God and what he is like and of his concern for me.

Communicating with Our Father

As these thoughts came to my mind I began to more clearly understand the purpose of prayer. It is the means by which I have continued opportunities to call upon and talk with my Heavenly Father, now that I am no longer in his presence. Because I believe that he is all-knowing and that he knows me better than I know myself—as earthly parents often know their children better than the children know themselves—I know that he will respond to me in ways that are best for me.

When we come to understand that prayer is our means of access to God our Father, we become increasingly more comfortable in calling upon him. When we know that our Father knows us and hears us and responds to us, we will be anxious to "commune" with him. (See Exodus 25:22.) It is then that we will put aside "vain repetitions" (3 Nephi 13:7) and "pour out our whole souls to God." (Mosiah 28:14.) Ultimately, we will be more anxious to listen than to rehearse our own litany of lists.

How often, in the hope of fulfilling the responsibility we feel to pray, do we simply go through the motions of prayer? The following fictional dialogue causes us to think about Moroni's admonition to pray "with real intent of heart." (Moroni 6:9.)

My Dear Father in Heaven . . .

Yes?

Don't interrupt me. I'm praying.

But you called me.

Called you? I didn't call you. I'm praying . . . My Dear Father in Heaven . . .

You did it again.

Did what?

Called me. You said, "My dear Father in Heaven. Here I am. What do you have on your mind?

But I didn't mean anything by it. I was just saying my prayers for the night. I always say my prayers. It makes me feel good—like getting my duty done.

All right. Go on.

I'm thankful for my many blessings.

How thankful?

What?

How thankful are you for your "many blessings"?

I'm . . . well . . . I don't know. How should I know? It's just part of the prayer. Everyone always says we should express thanks.

All right. You're welcome. Go on.

Go on?

With your prayer.

Let's see. Bless the poor and the sick and the needy and the afflicted . . .

Do you really mean that?

Well, sure, I mean it.

What are you doing about it?

Doing? Who me? Nothing, I guess. I just think that it would be kind of nice if you got control of things down here like you have up there so people didn't have to suffer so much.

Have I got control of you?

Well, I go to Church. I pay my tithing. I don't smoke or drink.

That isn't what I asked you. What about your temper? You have a problem with your temper, and your friends and family suffer. There's also the way you spend your money—all on yourself. And what about the kind of books you read?

Stop picking on me! I'm just as good as some of the rest of those I see Sunday at Church.

But I thought you were praying for me to bless the needy. If that is to happen, I'll have to have help from the ones who are praying for it—like you.

Oh, all right. I guess I have a few hang-ups. Now that you mention it, I could probably mention some others too. But, look, I need to finish up here. This is taking a lot longer than usual. Bless the missionaries to be led to the doors of the honest in heart.

You mean people like Margaret?

Margaret?

Yes. The woman around the corner.

That Margaret? But she smokes and never goes to church.

Have you had a look at her heart lately?

Of course not. How can . . .

I've looked, and hers is one of those honest hearts that you were just praying about.

Well then, get the missionaries over there. Do you think I like having a nonmember for a neighbor?

You're supposed to be a missionary. Everyone is a missionary.

Hey, wait a minute? What is this, "Criticize Me Day"? Here I am, doing my duty, keeping your commandment to pray; and all of a sudden, you break in and start reminding me of all of my problems.

You called me. And here I am. Keep on praying. I'm interested. Go on.

I don't want to.

Why not?

I know what you'll say.

Go ahead.

Please forgive me of all my sins, and help me to forgive others.

What about Bill?

See! I knew it! I knew you'd bring him up! Listen, Father, he told lies about me, and I lost a job. Everyone in that office thinks I'm a first-class creep, and I didn't do anything. I'm going to get even with him.

But your prayers. What about your prayers?

I didn't mean it.

Do you enjoy carrying that load of bitterness around?

No, I don't. But I'll feel better as soon as I get even.

Do you want to know something?

What?

You won't feel better. You'll feel worse. Listen to me, you forgive Bill, and I'll forgive you.

But Father, I can't forgive Bill.

Then I can't forgive you.

No matter what?

No matter what. But you're not through with your prayer yet. Go on.

Please help me not to fall into temptation.

Good. I'll do that. But you stop putting yourself in all those places where you can be tempted.

What do you mean by that?

Stop hanging around the magazine racks and spending so much time in front of the TV. Some of that material will get to you sooner or later. You'll find yourself involved in some unfortunate things before long.

I don't understand.

Yes, you do. You find yourself in a crisis situation, and then you come running to me. "Father, help me out of this mess, and I promise I'll never do it again." It's amazing how the quality and intensity of your prayers improve when you are in trouble. Do you remember some of those bargains you've made with me?

Well, I don't think . . . Oh, yeah. Like the time Mom's visiting teacher saw me coming out of that movie about . . . Oh, brother!

Do you remember your prayer? I do. "Oh, Father. Don't let her tell my mother where I've been. I promise I'll go to nothing but G-rated movies from now on." She didn't tell your mother, but you didn't keep your promise. Did you?

No, Father, I didn't. I'm sorry.

So am I. Go ahead and finish your prayer.

Wait a minute. I want to ask you a question. Do you always listen to my prayers?

Every word. Every time.

Then how come you never talked back to me before?

How many chances have you given me? There's not enough time between your "amen" and your head hitting the pillow for me to draw a breath. How am I supposed to give an answer?

You could, if you really wanted to.

No. I could if you really wanted me to. I always want to.

Father, I'm sorry. Will you forgive me?

I already have. And thank you for letting me interrupt. I get lonely to talk to you sometimes. Good night. I love you.

Good night. I love you too.

(Used at Brigham Young University Education Week, August 1986. A similar presentation was used in a sacrament meeting in Bountiful, Utah, in July 1986. The author was unknown and I have since modified the script.)

A scripture concerning prayer which had always troubled me suddenly became understandable to me. ("The eyes of my understanding were opened"—D&C 138:11.) Christ said to his disciples: "Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." (Luke 11:9.) That instruction seems clear enough, but what follows gives us great insight concerning our Father in Heaven: "If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent? Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (Luke 11:11-13.)

These scriptures relate a father responding to a son to our Heavenly Father responding to us. Often a child asks for something, but either because of experience or knowledge or understanding (of the child and/or the situation), the parent does not give the child what he asks for. This may occur because the request is not in the child's best interest, or because of the parent's love for the child. Sometimes in being given "bread" the child perceives he is really receiving "a stone."

I remember one occasion when I was babysitting my younger brother, who was about sixteen months old. He'd wandered out of my sight, and after several minutes of not hearing him I went to investigate. He had managed to climb up a chair and onto the cupboard. There he sat, as proud as he could be of his accomplishment, happily playing with a shiny and very sharp butcher knife. Even though I was only twelve years old, I knew enough to take the knife away from him before he hurt himself. He immediately began to cry. He had been attracted to the knife because it was bright and shiny; to him, it was a plaything. But no matter how hard he cried, I would not give it to him. Now, some forty years later, I would not take a knife away from my brother. His own experience and judgment have matured to the point that he can handle a butcher knife without inflicting harm to himself.

Even though there were times I "thought I would die" if my parents did not grant me what I thought I had to have, I'm grateful for their wisdom in denying my request. Likewise, I can now see that many of the things for which I prayed at an earlier age would have been to my detriment or deprived me of growth if they had been granted the way I wanted and expected.

All of our prayers are answered, though sometimes not in the way we anticipate (and in retrospect, how grateful we can be that they are not).

Even the Savior's prayer in Gethsemane was answered in the negative. In addition to learning that prayers are not always answered as we wish them to be, we learn two other important lessons from the Savior's experience. First, following his prayer we are told that an angel appeared unto him, strengthening him. Sometimes when we wish for a certain situation to be resolved or made right or prevent it from happening, it is in our own best interest to be blessed instead with peace or understanding or additional knowledge or comfort or courage or increased faith or strength to bear up. Our Heavenly Father who is all-knowing, all-wise, and who loves us very much, will always answer our prayers!

Not My Will but Thine

The second thing we learn from Christ's prayer in Gethsemane is that he prayed, "Nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.) What a lesson for those of us who desire to be Christlike. Christ desired to do the Father's will. Even in the premortal life we have record of Christ, the Beloved Son, saying, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Moses 4:2.)

On numerous occasions Christ told us, "I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me." (John 5:30; see also 3 Nephi 27:13; D&C 19:24.) He who exemplified by his life his desire to do the Father's will taught us, "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 7:21; see also 3 Nephi 14:21.) Like Christ, other prophets have prayed, "Thy will, O Lord, be done, and not mine." (Jacob 7:14; Alma 14:13.)

Often it is shortsightedness that causes us to question if God hears our prayers, or to believe that our prayers are unanswered. We lack the perspective of our Heavenly Father. Knowing only our mortal existence, we often fail to see things in an eternal perspective.

Following his address at the Sermon on the Mount (and the similar discourse given to the Nephites), the Savior taught the disciples how to pray and concluded by giving them an example that has come to be known as the Lord's prayer. (See Matthew 6 and 3 Nephi 13.) In both instances, the disciples were instructed to pray to their Father "who art in heaven" and to pray that "thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven." (Matthew 6:9-10; 3 Nephi 9:10.)

In Christ's instructions concerning how we are to pray, he indicates that our "Father knoweth what things [we] have need of, before [we] ask him." (Matthew 6:8; 3 Nephi 13:8.) Why then do we pray at all? I believe it is because as we go through the process of using words to express ideas, we are forced to clarify our thinking and, in most instances, come to a new and clearer understanding.

In the early stages of work to achieve my doctoral degree, I had what I thought was a brilliant idea for a dissertation and was anxious to talk it over with my advisor. I made an appointment, arrived at her office at the appointed hour, and told her my purpose in coming. She asked to see my written proposal and an outline of what research I wanted to do.

"I don't have anything in writing yet," I responded. She dismissed me from her office and told me she would be glad to talk with me when I had something in writing.

I perceived her actions to be inappropriate and cruel. Yet, in the days that followed I discovered, as I struggled to put my thoughts into words, that I had not carefully thought through what I wanted to do. In fact, as a result of this exercise, I determined on my own that my idea would not be appropriate for a dissertation.

Often it is as we commune with our Heavenly Father through prayer that things become clear in our own minds. As we commune with him and seek to have his will done in our lives, we take time to reflect on the counsel and instruction he has already given us through the scriptures. In fact, Christ tells us that when "my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you." (John 15:7.)

The Lord told Nephi, son of Helaman, that because "thou . . . hast not sought thine own life, but has sought my will," whatever he asked would be done. Nephi knew the Lord's will and the Lord knew Nephi. He knew that Nephi would "not ask that which is contrary to my will." (Helaman 10:4-5.)

It is incumbent upon us to learn the will of the Father. Perhaps that is why Nephi told us to "feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do." He also taught us that the Spirit can teach us to pray. (See 2 Nephi 32:3, 8.) This idea is reinforced in a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God." (D&C 46:30.) Likewise, the Spirit helps us to pray. Paul taught, "We know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." (Romans 8:26.)

Study It Out in Your Mind

In our desire to respond to the invitation to "ask," we need also to be mindful of the Lord's admonition to Oliver Cowdery. "You have not understood," the Lord said. "You have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me." The Lord then explains that Oliver needed first to "study it out in his mind." (D&C 9:7-8.) In my own experience, whether in writing or preparing a talk or trying to solve a problem, I have found President Spencer W. Kimball's statement to be true: "Perspiration must precede inspiration; there must be effort before there is excellence. We must do more than pray for . . . outcomes, though we must surely pray. We must take thought. We must make effort. We must be patient. We must be spiritual." (Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], page 402.)

In many instances it is the process of searching and studying and struggling that becomes more beneficial than the answer itself. I had such an experience in responding as a member of the Young Women General Board to an assignment given by the Young Women General Presidency. Each board member was asked to give written expression to the Young Women logo. It was suggested that our thoughts be limited to one or two short paragraphs.

I was excited about the assignment and immediately thought of the torch representing the Light of Christ, of the need for young women to be "a light" in a dark world, and of the torch as a symbol for young women to become literal "standard bearers." I jotted down a list of ideas and words to serve as a springboard for my writing.

I awoke early the next Saturday morning, excited about putting my thoughts on paper. When I sat down to write, I felt impressed to go to the library. I looked up books under the words torch and torch bearer and was surprised by the variety of books related to these two words. I selected nearly thirty books from which I drew ideas and spent about four hours reading and making notes of phrases and words. Later, I reviewed scriptural references on light.

By early evening I finally felt prepared to write. I cleared everything off my desk and sat before a blank piece of paper. That's when the struggle began. Several hours later I had written only two paragraphs, which I didn't feel particularly good about. But the next morning when I awoke, many of the words I had written came to my mind in rhyme. I finally got up and read again a talk President Ezra Taft Benson had given to the young women of the Church and an article by Young Women General President Ardeth G. Kapp in which she had called on young women to "stand up and lead out."

I then wrote the following:

Young women of these latter days, reserved till now for birth, Your sacred mission was ordained before you came to earth. In times when people everywhere are searching for the truth, They'll turn to you; will you step forth, O valiant, noble youth? A special call has come to you: "Be strong; stand up; lead out. Renew commitment; stand for truth; with faith you need not doubt." A mighty wave is forming; it will move across the earth. Come, join the wave of truth and light, O youth of royal birth. Young women of these latter days, we'll hold our torches high, That Christ's true light through us will shine, his name to glorify. I hear the call. I want to serve. The mighty wave I see. I will stand up for all that's right. I will, O Lord; send me. Our values help us as we seek to know and live the truth. With willing hearts and minds we'll serve while we are in our youth. With torches high and burning bright, we'll seek to light the way, That all might find the narrow path and eagerly obey. We will awake, arise, shine forth, and standard bearers be. With all our strength, with all our love, Christ's witnesses we'll be. Young women of these latter days, we'll hold our torches high, That Christ's true light through us will shine, his name to glorify.

I had never written anything like this before and possibly will not again. What I wrote came after study and struggle. I had completed the assignment. I had done the best I knew how. Ultimately, the Lord used my preparation and work to fulfill a purpose I could not have foreseen. The words I wrote were later put to music and used to introduce the Young Women's logo in a satellite broadcast.

We must learn that the immediacy of an answer to our prayers, or the perceived "no answer," is always given in our best interests. A loving Heavenly Father responds to his children in ways that are best for them and for their growth. The scriptures tell us that he will give us that thing "which is right" (3 Nephi 18:19) and "that is expedient for [us]" (D&C 88:64).

I have always been touched by the story of Amanda Smith. This incident took place following the massacre at Haun's Mill in October 1838. Many had been brutally killed, but Amanda survived and returned to the scene in search of her husband and three sons. From a distance she saw one of her older sons carrying a younger brother and she cried out, "Oh! My Alma is dead!" Her son replied, "No, mother, I think Alma is not dead. But father and brother Sardius are killed." Later Amanda was to record in her journal:

What an answer was this to appal [sic] me! My husband and son murdered; another little son seemingly mortally wounded; and perhaps before the dreadful night should pass the murderers would return and complete their work!

But I could not weep then. The fountain of tears was dry; the heart overburdened with its calamity, and all the mother's sense absorbed in its anxiety for the precious boy which God alone could save by his miraculous aid.

The entire hip joint of my wounded boy had been shot away. Flesh, hip bone, joint and all had been ploughed out from the muzzle of the gun which the ruffian placed to the child's hip through the logs of the shop and deliberately fired.

We laid little Alma on a bed in our tent and I examined the wound. It was a ghastly sight. I knew not what to do. It was night now. . . .

The women were sobbing, in the greatest anguish of spirit; the children were crying loudly with fear and grief at the loss of fathers and brothers; the dogs howled over their dead masters and the cattle were terrified with the scent of the blood of the murdered.

Yet was I there, all that long, dreadful night, with my dead and my wounded, and none but God as our physician and help. (Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom [New York: Tullidge and Crandall, 1877], pages 122-128.)

Amanda, in her anguish, cried to her Heavenly Father as might a child in trouble cry to her earthly father. Her cry for help was simple, short, and to the point. From her faithful, believing heart she cried, "Oh my Heavenly Father, what shall I do? Thou seest my poor wounded boy and knowest my inexperience. Oh Heavenly Father, direct me what to do!" Immediately she received an answer and was directed as if by a voice.

Nearby was a slippery-elm tree. From this I was told to make a slippery-elm poultice and fill the wound with it. . . . I removed the wounded boy to a house, some distance off the next day, and dressed his hip; the Lord directing me as before. I was reminded that in my husband's trunk there was a bottle of balsam. This I poured into the wound, greatly soothing Alma's pain. . . .

So Alma laid on his face for five weeks, until he was entirely recovered—a flexible gristle having grown in place of the missing joint and socket, which remains to this day a marvel to physicians. (The Women of Mormondom, pages 122-128.)

There are many scriptures about prayer. All are instructive. They help us better understand prayer and how to pray and give us examples of those who prayed in a variety of situations and circumstances.

I sincerely believe that one of the "keys" to our prayers is to remember that we are praying to our Heavenly Father who loves us and wants the best for us. The more we become familiar with his power, his knowledge, and his ways, the more we will desire to seek to do his will.

Then whatever our challenge or adversity may be, we will receive from him all that is needed in order for us to "go forth in the strength of the Lord."
