Carolyn J. Rasmus, In the Strength of the Lord I Can Do All Things ( 1990)

Part III

The Promise

Chapter Eight

Come Unto Christ and Be Perfected in Him

To fully understand Christ's invitation to come unto him, we must start at the beginning—with Adam and Eve.

After Adam and Eve ate of the forbidden fruit, they were driven out of the Garden of Eden. Although they were shut out from the presence of God, they called upon him and he spoke to them. Then God gave Adam and Eve two commandments: to worship the Lord their God, and to offer up by way of sacrifice the firstlings of their flocks. Many days later an angel appeared to Adam asking him why he offered sacrifices to the Lord. He replied simply, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." Adam was then told by the angel that such sacrifices were in the "similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth." Then Adam and Eve were told to do everything in "the name of the Son" and to repent and to call upon God in the name of the Son forever. (See Moses 5:5-8.)

On that day, the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam and Eve and bore record of the Father and the Son, telling him that through Christ he and all mankind could be redeemed from the Fall. When Adam heard these things, he blessed God and began to prophesy to "all the families of the earth, saying, Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God." (Moses 5:10.)

What Adam proclaimed to "all families" and to each of us is the "good news" of the gospel—that because of Jesus Christ we can be saved. He is the reason for our joy and the basis for our faith.

Our salvation and joy, like Adam and Eve's, is made possible by the atoning sacrifice of God's son, Jesus Christ. Christ is for us, as he was for Adam and Eve, a literal Savior: He and he alone can save us from our sins.

But what does this "good news" have to do with the instruction from God that Adam and Eve should offer the "firstlings of their flocks" as an offering? Such an offering was to remind them of the sacrifice which the Son of God would make for the sins of the world. The firstling of the flock was to be the best, the one without spot or blemish, perfect in every way. This sacrifice was to typify that, as the lamb "before her shearers is dumb" (Isaiah 53:7), so Christ, when falsely accused by the chief priests, "answered nothing." (Mark 15:3-5.)

And so from the day of Adam and Eve through many generations, the offering of sacrifices was practiced by the people. Under the law of Moses sacrifices became varied and complex, but the purpose of the sacrifice was always the same—to cause the people to "look forward with steadfastness unto Christ" (2 Nephi 25:24), and to "keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him." (Mosiah 13:30.)

In our day we, too, need to be kept in remembrance of God and reminded of our duty to him. We are repeatedly commanded to pray unto the Father through Christ and to keep his commandments. It is through study of the scriptures that we can be brought to a remembrance of the great and marvelous works of God to people of all ages. It is for this same purpose that we are commanded to "meet together often to partake of bread and wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus." (D&C 20:75.) Christ taught the Nephites that the sacrament "shall be a testimony unto the Father that ye do always remember me." (3 Nephi 18:7.)

But no longer do we offer the firstling of the flock as required of Adam and Eve. Amulek taught the people the doctrine of the Atonement, explaining that it was necessary "that there should be a great and last sacrifice . . . to stop the shedding of blood" and to fulfill the law of Moses. This "great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God. . . . And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name." (Alma 34:13-15.)

Jesus Christ, the Firstborn of the Father, the Perfect One, has fulfilled the law which required the offering of the firstling of the flock. Following his resurrection, Christ himself told the Nephites, "In me is the law of Moses fulfilled. . . .Your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away." (3 Nephi 9:17, 19.)

A Broken Heart and a Contrite Spirit

Because the law of Moses has been fulfilled, we no longer offer animal sacrifices. Instead, we are to offer for a sacrifice to Christ a "broken heart and a contrite spirit" (3 Nephi 9:20; 12:18-19)—a heart that aches as we think about how inconsiderate we were to someone, or how impatiently we responded to the clerk at the store, or the unkind things we said about our neighbor. Our hearts begin to break as we realize that we are often filled with envy and jealousy and pride. We are pained when we think of simple things we might have done to lift another's burden, or of times when we could have so easily spoken an encouraging word but did not. Perhaps we've cheated or lied or been dishonest in a dozen other ways that seemed so innocent at the time. Maybe we've committed a moral transgression or been involved with the misuse of drugs.

For each of us there will come a day when we wish we'd done things better, or when we realize that there is no way we can make everything right. If justice were demanded—if we had to pay a penalty for everything we've done wrong or for good things we failed to do—we simply could not do it. We could not pay the debt. But the debt has already been paid. Christ's death on the cross, "the great and last sacrifice," was to "bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice; . . . mercy can satisfy the demands of justice." (Alma 34:15-16.)

For our sacrifice we are to offer "a broken heart and a contrite spirit"; to admit that we're sorry for our wrongdoings and that we want to do better. We acknowledge that we need Christ.

That is the key—to recognize that we need him. Until we come to that point in our lives, he will simply "stand at the door, and knock." But when we come to know that we need him and subsequently invite him into our lives, "He will come in and sup with us." (Revelation 3:20.)

Experience a Mighty Change

Once we invite Christ into our lives, we will experience "a mighty change." (See Mosiah 5:2; Alma 5:26.) Through the ages many people have heard the message of Christ and invited him into their lives; and because of his mercy and love, their lives have been changed.

Saul of Tarsus was actively involved in persecuting the Christians until he saw a vision on the road to Damascus. Because of Christ, Saul had both his heart and his name changed, and he spent the rest of his life in the service of his new master.

A young girl might have lived her life as a humble, obscure woman in the village of Nazareth, but following a visit from an angel she committed to serve as "handmaiden of the Lord" and became the earthly mother of Jesus. (See Luke 1:38.)

A nameless woman from Samaria responded to Christ's request for a drink of water, and after learning of a "well of water springing up into everlasting life" she left her waterpot and became a missionary for Christ. (See John 4:5-30.)

Mary called Magdalene felt Christ's healing influence as he rebuked from her seven devils. Her complete devotion to Christ was evidenced as she was one among the women last at the cross and first at the tomb. (See Luke 8:2; Matthew 27:56, 61.)

Because the Lamanites and Nephites believed and lived Christ's teachings "the love of God did dwell in the hearts of the people," and they were able to live without contentions or disputations—"they had all things in common and there could not be a happier people." (See 4 Nephi 1:2, 3, 15, 16.)

The multitudes who heard King Benjamin bear testimony that through the atonement of Christ people could put off the natural man and become saints had a "mighty change" wrought in their hearts and were called the "children of Christ." (See Mosiah 4:17, 19; 5:2, 7.)

The Nephite babes and children who were blessed and taught and ministered unto by Christ had their tongues loosed and "did speak unto their fathers great and marvelous things, even greater than he had revealed unto the people." (3 Nephi 7:21; 26:14-16.)

In the final chapters of the Book of Mormon, every Nephite who would not deny Christ was put to death. But Moroni could not deny his Savior. He had seen his father and all of his kinsfolk slain in battle; he had no friends. And though the whole face of the land was "one continual round of murder and bloodshed," he spent the remainder of his days preparing a record for our day. In that record he posed to each of us the question, "Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ?" (Mormon 8:5, 8, 35, 38; Moroni 1:1-3.)

The men and women and children who invited Christ into their lives and who accepted him were changed by him. They did not live lives free from hardship or illness or sorrow or loneliness. Among them were those who were rejected by their friends and others, stoned, persecuted, and imprisoned; many lost their earthly possessions and suffered death because of their belief in Christ.

Without exception, even in the midst of great trials and tribulation, these people of Christ spoke about experiencing peace, comfort, success, joy (exceeding and exquisite), courage, strength beyond their own, happiness, patience, fellowship, confidence, wisdom, and power. Like Moses, they chose "rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season." (Hebrews 11:25.)

And there were many who were willing to give away their worldly wealth (large or small) to receive the gifts and blessings promised by Christ. Zacchaeus, a rich man who was chief among the Publicans, came down from a sycamore tree, received Christ "joyfully," and restored fourfold anything he had taken from a man by false accusation. (See Luke 19:1-9.)

Simon and his brother Andrew "forsook their nets, and followed him." (Mark 1:18.) Mary, sister of Martha, left some things undone and chose the "good part"—the one needful thing that could not be taken away from her. (Luke 10:38-42.) Upon hearing about the atonement of Christ and hope of the Resurrection, the father of King Lamoni said, "I will give up all that I possess, yea, I will forsake my kingdom. . . . I will give away all my sins to know [God]." (Alma 22:15, 18.)

Will you accept the invitation of the Savior? He stands at the door and knocks, waiting for our response. "Come," he says, "and fear not, and lay aside every sin, which easily doth beset you, which doth bind you down . . . come and go forth, and show unto your God that ye are willing to repent of your sins and enter into a covenant with him to keep his commandments." (Alma 7:15.)

Invite Christ into Your Life

All the Savior asks of us is that we repent—to lay aside our sins and to turn our heart and will to God; to do the things which Christ has done and to desire the things which he desired. Inviting Christ into our lives means bearing one another's burdens, mourning with those that mourn, comforting those who stand in need of comfort. (Mosiah 18:8-9.) It means making time to "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees." (D&C 81:5.)

President Ezra Taft Benson has said, "When you choose to follow Christ, you choose to be changed." ("Born of God," Ensign, November 1985, page 5.) C. S. Lewis borrows a parable from George MacDonald:

"Imagine yourself as a living house. God comes in to rebuild that house. At first, perhaps, you can understand what he is doing. He is getting the drains right and stopping the leaks in the roof and so on: you knew that those jobs needed doing and so you are not surprised. But presently he starts knocking the house about in a way that hurts abominably and does not seem to make sense. What on earth is He up to? The explanation is that He is building quite a different house from the one you thought of—throwing out a new wing here, putting on an extra floor there, running up towers, making courtyards. You thought you were going to be made into a decent little cottage; but He is building a palace. He intends to come and live in it Himself." (C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity, Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., page 174.)

The plan is for us to become perfect—perfect as are Christ and our Father in Heaven. But becoming perfect is as much a process as an end result. Just as Christ "received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness," so it is with us. (D&C 93:13.) The Prophet Joseph Smith compared the process of perfection to a ladder. We begin by climbing from the bottom, and we ascend to the top by taking one step at a time. (See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 348.)

And so it is with our faith. Few of us have the faith of Melchizedek to "break mountains, to divide the seas, [or] to dry up the waters, [and] to turn them out of their course." (JST Genesis 14:30.) Few of us can make "the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea," as did Jacob. (Jacob 4:6.) Few there are among us who have the faith of Alma and Amulek to cause the prison to tumble to the earth. (See Ether 12:13; Alma 14:27.)

But we can "desire to believe" (Alma 32:27) and begin to "exercise faith in Christ; and . . . lay hold on every good thing." (Moroni 7:25.) We can "search the scriptures" (John 5:39), and "pray always and be believing." (D&C 90:24.) As we accept the invitation to "come unto Christ," he will enter into our hearts and into our minds through the promptings of the Spirit. As we seek to remember him, his words will come into our minds; we will begin to think of the things he would do; and we will have an increased desire to become like him and to respond as he would respond.

Go Forth in the Strength of the Lord

Like people of all ages, however, we must realize that having faith in Christ does not mean that challenges and hard times will go away. Pain will continue to exist, accidents will occur, and pollution of air and body and mind will not cease. Having faith in Christ does not mean that we will escape those who lie and cheat to get gain, devalue and make a mockery of life, take advantage of others, or scoff at prophets and visions and traditions. Having faith in Christ does not mean that there will not be times when there seems to be no virtue in righteousness, when it seems that obedience is for fools, or when it appears that lying and cheating bring reward. Having faith in Christ does not mean that we will see a decrease in our personal and family problems, become wealthy in terms of the standards of the world, or that our lives will become less complex.

Having faith in Jesus Christ does mean that we need never face any problem or challenge or trial or temptation alone. Having faith in Christ means that through his bounteous mercy and love we do have access to a divine means of help and strength—a power that will enable us to face every situation. Most importantly, faith in our Savior, Jesus Christ, will enable us to obtain a remittance of our sins and eventually return to the presence of God.

The first step on the ladder of increasing our faith is to believe and act upon the promises we find in Holy Writ:

"Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest." (Joshua 1:9.)

"Treasure up [my] words in thy heart. Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love." (D&C 6:20.)

"For with God nothing shall be impossible." (Luke 1:37.)

"I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will guide thee with mine eye." (Psalm 32:8.)

"Ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. Doubt not, but be believing . . . and come unto the Lord with all your heart." (Mormon 9:27.)

"He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength." (Isaiah 40:29.)

"My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

"Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not. Behold the wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails in my hands and feet; be faithful, keep my commandments, and ye shall inherit the kingdom of heaven." (D&C 6:36-37.)

"Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him . . . and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ." (Moroni 10:32.)

Believing and acting upon these promises will enable us not only to "go forth in the strength of the Lord," but to declare with the Apostle Paul, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me." (Philippians 4:13.)
