David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

Introduction

THE MEANING OF HAPPINESS

HAPPINESS is the purpose and design of existence. "Men are that they might have joy." Virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping the commandments of God lead to a happy life; those who follow that path are not longfaced and sanctimonious, depriving themselves of the joys of existence. I believe that is worth thinking about while we are young. We all like to be happy. Youth is entitled to happiness, and we are untrue to youth if we deprive them of it. But let us ever keep in mind the fact that there is a distinction between happiness and mere pleasing sensation or pleasure.

The road to happiness lies through widening and extending horizons. "Horizon" means something bounded by observation or experience. Geographically our horizon is bounded by the limits of our physical view, but those other horizons which we shall here contemplate are within us, limited only by the boundary of our imaginations. After all, it is these personal experiences and observations which contribute either to our joy or to our unhappiness.

We have all been in the country and rejoiced as we started out on a picnic to climb the hills. As we got to the foot of the hill and climbed, we could see what we thought was the top. That was our bounded horizon, and so we climbed over rocks and sagebrush, admiring a dainty flower here, an unusual shrub there, and ever and anon turning to view the scene below. We were surprised when we got to the first level which we thought was the top to find that it wasn't the top at all. There were hills still ahead of us; but as we turned, our view was much more impressive than it had been at the foot of the hill. And so with light hearts and aspiring eagerness we started to climb the next. One more climb, we thought, and we shall be at the top. Again we were surprised to see "hills peeping o'er hills," but again our horizon was more extended. How uniform the streets down in the old town! How the canyon assumes a new aspect, and the winding rivers wending toward it look like silver threads stretching across the valley. We can't stop now; another climb, and we continue until at length we reach the crest. It is just a daily experience of what Pope so beautifully has expressed: "Hills peep o'er hills and Alps on Alps arise."

The Pulitzer prize for the best symphony written in 1938 was won by a man who as a boy lived in the squalor of the slums. His music is a protest against such conditions. His name is Dante Fiorillo, and he was declared to be "the most talented and deserving composer of the year." As a boy he could see nothing but the dirty streets and the sunless tenements. The surroundings were repulsive to him, and to get away from them he would go for a walk until he reached another part of the town where streets were clean and where sunshine could be enjoyed.

There are too many of us content to dwell in the slums of the intellect and of the spirit. Too many of us seek for happiness in the sunless surroundings of Indulgence. Unlike the young Dante Fiorillo, we hesitate to put forth the energy to walk out into the sunshine and find the clean streets and rejoice in the broader horizons of intellectual joys and spiritual ecstasies. "There are depths in man which go to the lowest hell, and heights which reach the highest heaven, for are not heaven and hell made out of him, everlasting miracle and mystery that he is?" (Carlyle)

And so I ask you to begin the climb now to the intellectual and spiritual hills that I believe will lead to happiness.

The first hill that we ascend I shall name Soul Freedom. There cannot be happiness without free agency. If the soul feels circumscribed, harassed, or enslaved by something or somebody, there cannot be true progress. That is why some of the nations today are wrong, and some day in the future will have to change their policy. God intends men to be free. With that decision we turn around on the hill Soul Freedom and see an extended view. Within us is a sense of strength and confidence. There is hope; there is exhilaration. We are independent and we can make the best of our lives.

But there is another hill ahead of us, and I think that hill is more rugged. There are more rocks. There are more stones rolling as we step along. We may slip occasionally. We may bruise our knees and scratch our hands because that is not an easy ascension. We approach the hill Victory. As we climb it we get the consciousness of self-mastery, which is equal in importance to the consciousness of soul freedom. Look way down there, where the rays of intellect do not penetrate, where the sunshine of morality is seldom seen, and see how people grovel. Many—too many—either will not or cannot come out of the slums to reach this hill from which we broaden our horizon. As a result, their search for happiness is in vain. They grasp at the substance and it turns to ashes.

But we must climb to the next ascent—the Mount Industry. Here one chooses his vocation. The hill is a hard one, but he has mastered some of those things in youth and he is ready now to overcome almost any difficulty. Of course, it will be hard to get an education. Of course, it will take application. Of course, he will have to deny himself some pleasures, but he has already mastered himself physically and he can master himself intellectually. He chooses a vocation and starts out with a view of building a home for that sweet girl who has inspired him. He seeks the supreme happiness that comes from contributing to the blessing of others, and to the strength of the nation. Together the couple are building on the hill of Industry. Building a home together, they share happiness. The husband is happiest when his sweet wife, his sweetheart, is happy; and she is happiest when he succeeds. They are both happiest when the children succeed. After all, in rearing and loving a family lies the supreme happiness. Anything else must take second place in value to those boys and girls who make happy our homes.

"Alps" still rise as we approach the hill Appreciation. Perhaps we live in a cottage—only in a log cabin. We read about the millions that men pay for paintings from abroad, and on our wall hangs just a cutting from a calendar, but by this time we have learned to appreciate God's gifts and the most beautiful pictures in the world are ours for the looking. It doesn't belong to any millionaire any more than it does to us. If our ears are attuned, we can hear the music of the birds and of the humming insects. This life is good to us. Out of our little cabin, even between the chinks of the logs we can see the golden grain. We can hear the rippling stream. The Lord's gifts are free. Appreciation cannot be obtained without climbing. It is not to be found in the slums of indulgence and lethargy and idleness and intemperance, drinking and smoking, and trying to get some physical stimulant for happiness.

Together hand in hand we climb the last hill and reach the top, the hill of Success. As we begin this final ascent and behold our extended horizons, we are conscious of a conviction that true happiness is found in the parodoxical saying of the Savior, "He that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." Our lives are wrapped up with the lives of others, and we are happiest as we contribute to their happiness. There are those who declare such an ideal merely theoretical; they call it impractical. Why not try it? A test by application will prove its practicability. As sure as God has given us the revelation of life, so shall we find happiness supreme as we climb the hill of Success in our willingness and ability to serve.

*There is not a principle which is taught by the Savior of men but is applicable to the growth, development, and happiness of mankind. Every one of His teachings seems to touch the true philosophy of living. I accept them wholeheartedly. I like to study them. I like to teach them. It is a joy to try to live them.
