David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* America

NO OBSERVER can travel from the sun-kissed beaches of the Pacific to the wooded hills and power-producing rivers of New England without being thrilled by the greatness of these United States.

The painted deserts of the West, flower-carpeted in springtime and holding hidden beauty and entrancing interest in every season; the inspiring monuments of the Rockies, harboring snows as reservoirs for crops in valleys below; the colorful canyons, painted only by the Creator Himself; the fertile food-producing valley of the Mississippi; the mighty forests of the Northwest; the navigable rivers; the climate, varying to suit all needs and conditions—all these and a thousand other equally glorious and productive features bear witness of the age-old declaration that this is a "land choice above all other lands," and inspire every patriot to say, "This is my own, my native land."

Millions of Americans today declare with Winthrop: "Our country, to be cherished in all our hearts, to be defended by all our hands."

America was a great land when the stately Indian chiefs ruled their tribes, which thrived from the Bering Sea in the North to the Panama and the towering Andes in the South.

Today, yielding to the demands of the greatest economic era since the dawn of her creation, America is demonstrating the vastness of her resources and the extent of her natural possibilities as never before.

This country is not only the choicest of all lands, but now the preserver of true liberty, and the hope of civilized man!

However, a country may be ever so great and fruitful, and a nation subsisting upon it may be impotent and decadent. "The greatness of a nation," said Lyman Abbott, "is measured, not by its fruitful acres, but by the men who cultivate those acres; not by great forests, but by the men who use those forests; not by its mines, but by the men who work them."

The foundation of a noble character is integrity. By this virtue the strength of a nation, as of an individual, may be judged. No nation can ever become truly great and win the confidence of other peoples, which to further its own selfish ends will put aside or disregard an honorable treaty. No nation will become great whose trusted officers will pass legislation for personal gain, who will take advantage of a public office for personal preferment or to gratify vain ambition, or who will, through forgery, chicanery, and fraud, rob the government, or be false in office to a public trust.

Honesty, sincerity of purpose must be the dominant traits of character in leaders of a nation that would be truly great.

The second essential, fundamental element in the building and in the perpetuity of a great people is the home. "The strength of a nation, especially of a republican nation, is in the intelligent and well-ordered homes of the people." If and when the time comes that parents shift to others or to the state the responsibility of rearing their children, the stability of the nation will be undermined and its impairment and disintegration will have begun.

The increase throughout the United States in the percentage of divorces is alarming, and this insidious evil is increasing in the Church itself. There are too many couples in the Church who when difficulties arise seek the remedy in divorce courts.

In the well-ordered home we may experience on earth a taste of heaven. It is there that the babe in a mother's caress first experiences a sense of security, finds in the mother's kiss the first realization of affection, discovers in mother's sympathy and tenderness the first assurance that there is love in the world.

The most vicious enemy to home life is immorality. Social workers are greatly concerned over the number of young girls between 15 and 19 who seem to have lost all sense of decency and shamelessly sacrifice themselves on the altar of lust. This corroding evil is just as demoralizing to the young man as to the young woman.

Yes, America is a "land choice above all other lands." It is the responsibility of Americans to build a mighty and superior nation. The history of the nations of the past proves that nations in the most fruitful and most productive of all lands may become senile and decadent.

Let us, as citizens of our beloved country, use our influence to see that men and women of upright character, of unimpeachable honor are elected to office, that our homes are kept unpolluted and unbroken by infidelity, that children therein will be trained to keep the commandments of the Lord, to be "honest, true, chaste, benevolent, and virtuous, and to do good to all men."
