David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Aspirations

"ASPIRATIONS" means a "desiring ardently, a strong wish," a longing for the realization of high ideals.

Just by way of emphasis, let us consider youth as grouped into three classes—

(1) The Infusoria Class in which falls the listless, drifting youth.

Down among the lowest types of living creatures, there is a little animal that moves about aimlessly, and ninety-nine out of one hundred of these animalculae perish in consequence. One writer refers to this group as that

great under class of men, content to creep, and without thought of wings for rising. Mere drifters are they, creatures of circumstance, indifferently remaining where birth or events have started them. Having food and raiment, therewith they are content. No inspirations fire them, no ideals rebuke them, no visions of possible excellence or advancement smite their vulgar contentment. Like dead leaves swept forward upon the current, these men drift through life. Not really bad, they are but indifferently good, and therefore are the material out of which vicious men are made. In malarial regions, physicians say men of overflowing health are safe because the abounding vitality within crowds back the poison in the outer air, while men who live on the border line between good health and ill, furnish the conditions for fever that consume away the life. Similarly, men who live an indifferent, supine life, with no impulses upward, are exposed to evil and become a constant menace to society.

(2) The "Firefly" youth.

Higher in the scale of intelligence and moral uplift, there are those who may be classed as the "firefly" men. Often on a summer's evening, you students as children have observed what we used to call the "lightning bug." These flying creatures seemed most active just before a shower. The light from each would shine but for an instant, then the thing would be absorbed in the darkness. Another momentary flash, then blackness again.

Such is the "firefly" youth with respect to noble aspirations. He has luminous hours in which his soul ardently desires to rise above all things mean and sordid, and to bask in the realm of enlightenment and beauty. He would be valiant and courageous in defending virtue and the right under all circumstances. If he could only obtain strength and power, he would use them to help his fellow men and to make the world better! But when a few hours later he associates with companions unfired by such noble ideals, the light of his aspirations fades, the fires of enthusiasm die, and his soul is absorbed in the darkness of indifference and indulgence. Good intentions must be carefully cherished or they will soon perish.

However, it is better to have hoped and yearned for better things, and had the hopes fade than never to have yearned at all. The flicker at least shows the presence of a light that might be fanned into a constant flame. That is better than damp driftwood from which will come not even a spark.

(3) The "Conifer" Youth.

Then there is the third group, which I call the "Conifer" youth. In using this term, I have in mind not just the ordinary cone-bearing tree of the Conifer group, but particularly the Giant Sequoia or "Big Tree" of the Sierra Nevadas. It grows from 200 to 340 feet in height. The diameter is ordinarily 10 to 15 feet, and sometimes reaches 25 to 35 feet! There is a grove of these ancient trees in the Sequoia Forest of the Yosemite Valley. One, "The General Sherman," is estimated to be three thousand five hundred years old. One cannot stand in the presence of this oldest living thing in existence without sensing a feeling of awe akin to reverence. It was probably alive as a mere twig when the Pyramids of Egypt were being built. It was young and vigorous when Greece was in its glory; it was just a young tree when Rome ruled the world. Empires have risen and fallen. Millions of men have lived and died during the tree's lifetime. It has withstood lightning, floods, fire, and still lives on!

It has survived because it has within it the powers of resistance.

The "Conifer" youth senses the fact that man is not just a mere animal, the creature of the flesh which profiteth nothing, but a spiritual being, a soul. He realizes that he is more than a physical object that is tossed for a short time from bank to bank, only to be submerged finally in the everflowing stream of life. There is something within him which urges him to rise above himself, to control his environment, to master the body and all things physical, and to live in a higher and more beautiful world.

The thoughts that a youth harbors during the formative period of his life will determine into which class he falls—whether he is a listless Infusorium, a Firefly youth with regards to good intentions, or an invincible Sequoia in the realm of character.

In your teaching you have been given ideals and principles, the acceptance and application of which will lead to the highest and best in life. Among these, which every youth should cherish, are

First, Faith in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which includes all virtues contributive to man's happiness.

Second, a determination to maintain honor under all circumstances.

Third, to be of value to others—to make the world better for having lived in it.

Fourth, to keep in tune with the Infinite. Inspiration is a reality. Every youth should aspire so to live as to merit divine guidance.

Whatever our joys and sorrows, let us ever remember that what we ardently desire in our hearts will determine what we really are. How constantly and consistently we cherish noble aspirations in our minds and follow them will determine whether we drift as failures along life's highway or fulfill the divine purpose of our being.
