David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Bee Hive Program

THE true spirit of the Church of Jesus Christ gives to woman the highest place of honor in human life. To maintain and to merit this high dignity she must possess those virtues which have always, and which will ever, demand the respect and love of mankind. To know what these virtues are, let everyone think of his own mother. With her picture in mind, each will agree that "a beautiful and chaste woman is the perfect workmanship of God."

Woman possesses power to ennoble or to degrade. It is she who gives life to the babe, who wields gradually and constantly the impress of character to childhood and youth, who inspires manhood to noble ambition or entices and ensnares it to defeat and degradation, who makes home a haven of bliss or a den of discontent, who at her best gives to life its sweetest hopes and choicest blessings.

Anything, therefore, is to be most highly commended and encouraged which has as its motive the ennoblement of womankind—beauty, modesty, sincerity, sympathy, cheerfulness, reverence, and many other sublime virtues, must be hers whose subtle and benign influence is such a potent factor in the progress and destiny of the human race. The fact that the Prophet Joseph Smith organized the Relief Society and marked out its high service and destiny so early in the history of the Church is not without deep significance. The Sunday School, the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association and the Primary, each in its particular field, contribute to the proper guidance of girlhood and the development of true womanhood.

We desire particularly to commend, however, the work of the Bee Hive Girls' organization, which has become such an important phase of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association. It is a source of pride to the General Authorities—as it must be to the entire membership of the Church—that this most efficient system of activities was organized, planned and developed by our own women. Incorporated in this organization are opportunities for activities that promote reverence, health of body, vigor of mind, home efficiency, love of the beautiful and all other distinctive ideals and teachings of the Gospel which are paramount in any Latter-day Saint program.

The ever-increasing progress of the Bee Hive program must be a source of great encouragement to those who sponsor and direct it. It is found in every State of the Union, and in all foreign countries where there are organized branches of the Church.

We congratulate the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association on the accomplishments attained in Bee Hive work, and extend our prayerful wishes and blessings for the success of this great organization. May it contribute ever to the dignity, grace, beauty, and divine significance of true womanhood.
