David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Belief

APPLICATION OF BELIEF

WITH only one exception (the Twelfth) each of the thirteen Articles of Faith begins with the words "We believe."

For one to be a partaker of the benefits of this impressive summary as set forth in the Articles of Faith, one must give more than a mere mental assent to the declarations made.

Strictly speaking, belief means a state of mind in which trust, confidence, or reliance is placed in some person or thing. Belief may be simply an act of understanding. To become an active moving principle of the mind, belief should ripen into faith. There may be belief without faith; there can be no faith without belief.

If then we would apply the Articles of Faith in daily life, let us consider them in the light of a faith based upon a right belief—a faith that impels right action.

In the light of power that moves to action, consider the First Article: (1) "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost." If this belief has "ripened" into an absolute trust and faith, then intelligence, even what we term "common sense," prompts that we have but one aim or purpose in life and that is to make Him the center of our thoughts and being—to establish spiritual communion with Him. Material possessions, physical pleasures become secondary. Our chief goal is to surrender to the Author of our Being our inner life, and to subordinate and to hold in subjection the selfish, sordid pull of nature. Thus, though "having not seen" we can say with equal assurance as Thomas said, "My Lord and my God." It then becomes easy to "seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness."

A willingness to give God the glory is a sure means of subduing selfishness. Faith, therefore, is a foundation element in true character building; for an upright character is the result of continued effort and right thinking, the effect of long-cherished association with Godlike thoughts. He approaches nearest the Christ spirit who makes God the center of his thoughts and acts, and who can say in his heart, ". . . not my will, but thine, be done."

(2) Again, with application in mind, consider the statement, "We believe . . . in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law."

Universal application of this Article would make jails and penitentiaries unnecessary. Of course, before the coming of the millennium, we cannot hope to experience such an ideal state of society; but if members of the Church who mentally subscribe to this declaration were to do their utmost to let belief develop into trust and faith, it is conceivable that there may be in this distracted world a group of a million or two million people who to a degree approach the ideal society.

The words obeying, honoring, and sustaining, as used in this Article, express the proper attitude of the individual toward law. Obedience implies a higher attitude than mere submission to law, for obedience has its root in good intent; submission may spring from selfishness or meanness of spirit. Though obedience and submission both imply restraint on one's own will, a person is obedient only from a sense of right; submissive, from a sense of necessity.

Honor, when applied to things, is taken in the sense of holding in honor. Thus in honoring the law, we look upon it as something which is above selfish desires or indulgences.

To sustain signifies to hold up, to keep from falling. To sustain the law, therefore, is to refrain from saying or doing anything that will weaken or make it ineffective.

We obey law from a sense of right.

We honor law because of its necessity and strength to society.

We sustain law by keeping it in good repute.

Strictly interpreted this Article applies only to the law of the land, but it may have a broader interpretation. To those who would enjoy life in its fullest and most complete sense, the Gospel of Jesus Christ gives this message: Always live in obedience to law—physical law, intellectual law, spiritual law. Transgression of law brings unhappiness; when carried to the ultimate end, it finally brings death.

(3) "We believe . . . in doing good to all men; . . ."

If belief developed into an active, moving force, and a group of men and women applied it, for instance, to just one phase in the Thirteenth Article—"doing good to all men,"—what an inspiring example to all mankind!

The secret therein is a principle, the application of which promises to supplant discouragement and gloom with hope and gladness, to fill life with contentment and peace everlasting. This being true, its acceptance would indeed be a boon today to this distracted world.

Specifically stated, the law is, we live our lives most completely when we strive to make the world better and happier. Faithful Church members are convinced that only in its application can true happiness be found or a truly great character be developed.

The Articles of Faith, even though not all comprehensive of the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ, give a summary of principles and doctrines so sublime, so in accordance with God's will that their application in daily concourse will contribute to happiness in this life and salvation and exaltation throughout eternity.
