David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Better World

ESSENTIALS OF A BETTER WORLD

FOR nearly twenty centuries millions of Christians have prayed for the coming of the Kingdom of God, and for more than twenty centuries millions of people have persistently rejected the conditions indispensable to the realization of this era of peace and brotherly kindness.

Even though the essentials for a better world have not been generally accepted, yet mankind has ever striven for a better way of living. In every progressive age of the world's history, thinking people have been dissatisfied with their current social and economic conditions, and have sought for remedial changes. Many of their hoped-for Utopias, however, though they have inspired men to action, have ended only as dreams and phantasies.

In response to this urge for change, the twentieth century is no exception. Indeed, during the last fifty years, people have witnessed greater political unrest, more stupendous upheavals than have probably occurred in the same length of time in the history of the world.

If, in the spirit of charity, we say that misguided men have brought all this about because of their desire for a better government, the fact still remains that civilization is encompassed by social upheavals that threaten to divert if not entirely to thwart the progress and happiness of the present generation.

Humanity is passing through one of its most crucial experiences. We are in the midst of a revolution both of thought and mode of life. Beliefs of parents are questioned; old ideals are in the discard. Totalitarianism is giving birth to new conceptions that strike relentlessly at beliefs and teachings that were accepted a decade ago as fundamental and unassailable.

Moral and religious skepticism is too generally apparent, and political chicanery, fraud, and civic unrighteousness all too common.

Truly, the time has come as perhaps never before when men should counsel together, and in wisdom determine how the world may be made a better place in which to live.

To achieve this desired end, the first and most important step is to choose as a leader one whose leadership is infallible, whose teachings when practiced have never failed. In the present tempestuous sea of uncertainty, the Pilot must be one who through the storm can see the beacon in the harbor of peace. There is but one such Guiding Hand in the Universe, but one unfailing Light, and that the Light of Christ, who said: "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." An active, sincere faith in the basic teachings of Jesus of Nazareth is the greatest need of the world. The fact that many reject this truth is all the more reason why sincere believers should proclaim it.

The ultimate purpose of Christianity is to develop honorable, upright individuals in an ideal society known as the Kingdom of God. No one, not even the unbeliever, can gainsay this as a most worthy goal. True, nearly two thousand years of trial have failed to bring about even an approach to the realization of either the perfecting of the individual or the establishing of an ideal society. As a result, Christianity and its handmaiden, Democracy, are now on trial before the world tribunal. The fact is, however, that conditions in this war-torn world instead of proving that Christianity has failed, emphatically bear witness that men are forever learning, but never coming to a knowledge of the truth; or, as one man cynically remarked: "Men's lives consist mostly in making the same mistakes over again."

Christianity, as summarized in the divine admonition, "Love the Lord thy God, and thy neighbor as thyself," has never yet been accepted and practiced by the nations of the world. Were that principle even partly applied, our advanced scientific knowledge, our almost unlimited mechanized power, our unexcelled opportunities for education would be directed, not as now, for the destruction of human beings, but for the betterment of individuals, and for the advancement and redemption of mankind.

An essential to a better world is the plain, everyday principle of honesty. Though as genuine as the blue-tinted diamond, how little it is valued in a world where "business is honeycombed with dishonesty, and the political world abounds in duplicity and chicanery." Even to repeat such a charge makes one feel heavy-hearted. In contrast, recall the calm assurance, the confidence that pervades your soul when you know you are in the presence of one whom you can trust.

Man needs a re-dedication to the principles of unselfishness. No peace or freedom can come to this world so long as men live only for themselves. It is true that self-preservation is the first law of nature, but it is not a law of spiritual growth. He who lets selfishness and his passions rule him binds his soul in slavery, but he who, in the majesty of spiritual strength, uses his physical tendencies and yearnings, and his possessions to serve purposes higher than personal indulgence and comfort, takes the first step toward the happy and useful life.

Finally, if we would make the world better, let us foster a keener appreciation of the freedom and liberty guaranteed by the government of the United States as framed by the founders of this nation. There are some fundamental principles of this Republic which, like eternal truths, never get out of date, and which are applicable at all times to liberty-loving peoples. Such are the underlying principles of the Constitution, a document framed by patriotic freedom-loving men.

When the people who call themselves Christian militantly enlist under the leadership of the One to whom they refer as King of the World; when they accept as facts and not as theories His moral and spiritual teachings; when for selfishness they substitute kindness and thoughtfulness for others; when they aggressively defend the principles of true liberty, then may we begin to realize the hope that wrong may be abolished, righteousness be enthroned in human hearts, and honest relations and justice become the daily practice of society. Then, and not until then, will the kingdoms of this world become the Kingdom of our God.
