David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Books

THE VALUE OF GOOD READING

THERE are good books and bad books as there are good companions and bad companions. Our characters are formed largely by the company we choose. We "catch" virtues and vices as well as diseases from our associates. Noble companions inspire nobility; but evil associates lead to moral failure.

As with companions so with books. We may choose those which will make us better, more intelligent, more appreciative of the good and the beautiful in the world, or we may choose the trashy, the vulgar, the obscene, which will make us feel as though we've been "wallowing in the mire."

The value of good reading consists first in selecting good books, and, second, in seeing clearly what is therein written. Reading affords the opportunity to everyone—the poor, the rich, the humble, the great—to spend as many hours as he wishes in the company of the noblest men and women that the world has ever known. No matter how bashful, how reserved, or how poorly dressed the reader may be, he will feel right "at home" in the presence of these greatest leaders and thinkers of all time!

Good reading implies thinking. Sentences may be seen and even pronounced without calling up a single idea; indeed, the person's mind may be on something else entirely. For example, students sometimes pretend to study their lessons by looking with their eyes at the assigned page, while their thoughts are possibly on a picture show, or wondering whether their sweethearts will go with them to the party next Friday night. When the reader's mind thus wanders, though every word in the paragraph be seen, the paragraph has not been read. Good reading is thinking. It is getting the meaning of the printed page. Good reading is to the intellect what good food is to the body. Thoughts as food should be properly digested.

It is interesting to note how, undoubtedly, Abraham Lincoln's early reading affected his future life and character. Of course, we know from his own words that the memory of his angel mother influenced him profoundly. She died when he was but nine years old, yet in after years he said: "All that I am or hope to be I owe to my angel mother."

It is true that our mothers "make us most;" but good companions and good reading are wonderful supplemental helps. So I think it was with President Lincoln. Early in life he chose good reading. Chief among his favorite books were the Bible, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, Aesop's Fables, and Shakespeare's plays.

From another of his first books—The Life of Washington by Weems—the lanky lad, lying outstretched in the flickering light of a crude fireplace, would read and treasure such sayings as these:

"Our private deeds if noble are the noblest of our lives."

"My son," his father is reputed to have said, "I would ride fifty miles to see the boy whose heart is honest and his life so pure that we may depend upon every word he says."

Much of the greatness of George Washington was instilled in the character of Abraham Lincoln in hours thus spent.

Thus good reading shines as the light in the pathway of life leading us—

To build the ladder by which we rise From the lowly earth to the vaulted skies.— And we mount to the summit round by round.
