David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Building for a Purpose

BUILDING is a simple word, frequently used, easily understood. It applies to any edifice erected for any use. It also applies to "the act or process of erecting or establishing." In this latter sense building is associated with one of the noblest aims in human life—the attainment of happiness.

The act or process of placing in the world something beneficial which has never been in it before is one of the paths to happiness. On the other hand, destruction, demolition, unless for the purpose of building something better which is perceived at the time of demolition, tends to bring discontentment, dissatisfaction and misery.

The process of building is in a sense the process of creation, and to create something new is to experience supreme satisfaction. Finite mind can glimpse only dimly the perfect joy with which the Creator looked upon His finished work, and pronounced it "good." From that day to the present the progress of mankind has been due to builders, to creators. Iconoclasts are not contributors either to progress or happiness. They may do a little good by shattering false ideals, but it is the creators of new and better things who move the world forward.

If you would see a practical example of this, just drive through Utah and the adjoining states. On every hand you behold thrifty, fruit-bearing orchards, golden wheat fields, acres and acres of beets, potatoes and other vegetables; comfortable homes, thriving business enterprises, unexcelled schools, creditable churches in the midst of peaceful communities. Yet less than a century ago, this same western land was a wild, forbidding country, condemned on one occasion, on the floor of the United States Senate, as of "no use for agricultural purposes." Said the Senator, "I would not for that purpose give a pinch of snuff for the whole territory. I wish to God we did not own it." But into this country came true builders who laid the foundation of six great commonwealths! As they beheld the transformation of the barren desert into smiling gardens, productive fields, and budding orchards, I fancy these pioneers must have experienced, at least to a limited degree, the joy of the Creator when He looked upon the works of His hands and pronounced them good.

But every true builder builds for a purpose. Every man who, with a worthy purpose in mind, plants a tree, or makes a fence, or erects a house, or with others unites to build a church, steps into the pathway that leads to happiness. Every person who wilfully chops down a tree, breaks a fence, defaces the landscape, destroys a building without making the world better by such displacement or destruction, enters upon the road that leads to misery and discontent.

No one can build without putting forth effort, and none can labor conscientiously for the benefit of others without enriching his soul thereby.

In the building of character as in the transforming of a landscape, the laws of peace and of happiness are ever operative. Effort, self-denial, and purposeful action are the stepping stones of progress.
