David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Womanhood

IDEALS OF TRUE WOMANHOOD

LOOKING among my treasures recently, I picked up a piece of old homespun cloth. It was woven by my grandmother. My grandfather clipped the wool from the sheep out of which the cloth was made. There were no factories in Utah then. The nearest factory was over a thousand miles from this city. The cloth was carded and spun into thread by my grandmother, who had walked across the plains. It was old and threadbare, but genuine, not a shoddy thread in it.

Recently I saw my daughter and her husband examining a sample of a modern piece of cloth which they wished to use for a special purpose. As Lou Jean picked the threads apart and examined them closely, she suddenly exclaimed, "Why, this is nothing but paper." Outwardly it outshone in newness and attractiveness the old piece of homespun, but in reality it was shoddy.

What that piece of homespun is to a modern substitute for genuineness, fundamental, unchanging virtues that have stood the test of ages are to promises of pleasure, indulgence, and false ideals of modern society. Those old fundamental ideals are genuine. Some ideals which appeal to you today are attractive but false. Outwardly they seem glamorous and glorious, but when tested and tried in the scrutiny of experience, there is nothing which remains but the dust of disappointment.

This week I presented the following question to each of ten daughters: "Will you please name for me the outstanding virtues that you admire in your mother?" I did that because I can think of no higher ideal that a daughter should have than her mother, no one whom she should love more. The ideals mentioned by these girls are genuine, everlasting, in an ever-changing world. Summarized they are as follow:

"Some of the qualities I appreciate in my mother," writes one, "are, first, her willingness to inconvenience herself for others."

The second: "Her faith and trust in me."

The third: "Her faith in the Gospel of Jesus Christ."

The fourth: "Her cheerful attitude in face of difficulties."

The fifth: "Sympathy with what I do, and understanding of my problems."

The sixth: "Ability to make a lovely home."

In summary: Unselfishness, honesty, patience, congeniality, neatness and cleanliness, faith, love of the beautiful, trust and faith in her children—a perfect lady.

The ideals of true womanhood may sometimes seem as old-fashioned as that old piece of homespun cloth, but they are as unchanging and everlasting as the soul itself.

Modern indulgences and pleasures that lead girlhood away from these fundamental principles of happiness are shallow and shoddy, deceiving in their promises and ultimately disappointing.

The highest ideal for our young girls today, as for our mothers who crossed the plains, is love as it may be expressed in marriage and home building, and this virtue in which love finds true expression is based upon the spiritual and not the physical side of our being. If marriage and home building be based upon physical attraction alone, girls, your love will sooner or later become famished and home life a heavy, disheartening existence.
