David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Work

SIGNIFICANCE OF WORK

I REMEMBER visiting a sugar factory when every wheel was quiet; the engine was cold; the chimneys stood like specters; the wheels were dry and covered with dust; the sparrows were building their nests in wheels that a few months before hummed with industry. Men had to be hired to keep the dust off the machinery, to make repairs, to keep the factory from disintegrating.

I thought, that is always the result of inactivity. No sugar was manufactured in that inactivity. There were no laborers employed, except those hired to keep the factory from going into absolute decay. But when the power was turned on, then raw products were changed to useful articles which are carried into the homes throughout the world. Sometimes part of the machinery is shut up, closed down, and only one part—that of refining—used.

I sometimes think that we are using just part of the machinery that God has placed in our hands. Dust is accumulating. Let us realize that the privilege to work is a gift, that power to work is a blessing, that love of work is success.

THE GOSPEL OF WORK

ONE day, a group of small boys were swimming. Perhaps it would be more accurate to say they were learning to swim, for none could take more than a few strokes. Just below them a short distance down the stream was a treacherous hole much beyond their depth. Into this, either through bravado or accident, one daring youngster either plunged or fell. He became helpless to save himself; and for a moment his companions were powerless to aid him. Fortunately, one with presence of mind and quick action jerked a long stick from a willow fence and threw one end of it to the drowning lad. The latter grasped it, held on tightly and was saved.

All the boys declared that the venturesome lad owed his life to the boy who furnished the means of rescue.

This is undoubtedly the fact; and yet in spite of the means furnished him if the lad had not taken advantage of it, if he had not put forth all the personal effort at his command, he would have drowned, notwithstanding the heroic act of his comrade.

In this world of ours, children of men are playing, swimming, struggling in the sea of life. There are those who claim that no one will sink and be lost if he will look to Jesus on the shore and say, "I believe." There are others who declare that every one must by his own efforts swim to the shore or be lost forever. The real truth is that both of these extreme views are incorrect. Christ will not save men who will put forth no effort themselves, any more than the young rescuer on the river bank could have saved the drowning lad if the latter had not seized the means provided him. Neither can man save himself without accepting the means provided by Christ for man's salvation.

To man, thus struggling, Christ gave the Gospel, the means of salvation. It was a free gift. It was given by the grace of God, "not of works lest any man should boast." Without this, man was powerless to save himself. He was as helpless as the boy in the deep whirlpool. Truly, "By grace are ye saved."

But having been given the Gospel, what is man expected to do? With the means of salvation within his reach, what must he do? He must grasp it and hold to it with his whole might and strength. It is his duty not only to look at the Savior on the bank and say, "I believe He will save me," but also to make that belief a knowledge by obeying every principle of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. In other words, he must work out his own salvation. It is the height of folly for men to try to persuade themselves that Christ has done everything for them, that He has thrown a rope around them, as it were, and will pull them to safety in spite of themselves.

Love of God and His righteousness is shown not in words but in works.

Eternal life is God's greatest gift to man, and the Lord in turn is glorified in man's immortality. Eternal life is the result of knowledge, and knowledge is obtained by doing the will of God.

The world is in sore need at the present time of the Gospel of individual effort—the Gospel of faith and works. He who will not grasp this means provided him will sink beneath the waves of sin and falsehood.
