David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Youth

ATTITUDE OF YOUTH

WE hear a good deal of talk about our young people these days. Some say that they are indifferent, that they are losing their interest in the Church. I do not agree with this accusation. My experience with the young leads me to believe that there was never a time when youth more sincerely sought the truth, when they were more responsive to assignments made in the Church, when they were more observant of the ideals for which this Church stands.

Oh, I am not blind to the fact that there are those who are wavering. I also know that there were young people during our youth who wavered. I realize that there are those who stand on the side lines, and arrogating to themselves superior wisdom which they do not possess, would fain guide and dictate, but there have always been such. The great majority of our young people are desirous of living the truth.

I realize that temptations were never stronger than they are today; but the young people who resist these temptations deserve all the greater credit. We hear about young boys and young girls who indulge in things contrary to the teachings of their parents and the officers of the Church, and contrary to the ideals of the Gospel, but we too seldom hear about the much larger group who are exerting an influence for good upon their fellow workers and upon their associates. Generally speaking youth are anchored.

ON GUIDING YOUTH

I BELIEVE that the profoundest problem which this country faces, indeed the greatest obligation upon the government today, national, state and local, is to determine how best to guide, protect, and educate properly, childhood and youth.

I believe all agencies interested in child welfare could co-operate in this work to the great good of our state and nation. There are phases of this problem which affect the happiness and peace of mind of every father and mother in the land. The question of child health and guidance goes to the very root of our national life. In the realm of indifference and delinquency are the causes of mothers' heartbreaks, of fathers' chagrin, humiliation and sorrow. Comparatively speaking, there are not many in that realm, but I am wondering if all agencies are co-operating sufficiently to reduce to a minimum the number of boys and girls who have crossed the border line.

There are three fundamental steps to take if we would win back these boys and girls. The first is to become acquainted with them, to know them. They are not bad boys and girls. They are erring young people who need our help.

The second step is the power of personality. You are not going to bring back erring youth unless you first let them know that you are interested in them. Let them feel your heart-touch. Only the warm heart can kindle warmth in another. Wayward boys and girls are sometimes suspicious of people around them. Others get the idea that they are not wanted. The kind hand or the loving arm removes suspicion and awakens confidence. Your own experience bears ample evidence of the value of personal companionship.

The third essential is activity. We shall never accomplish the great object that is before us, in relation to childhood, until we realize that every boy and girl must have something to do.

It is estimated that about one-twelfth of a child's time is spent in school, approximately one-third, or four-twelfths, spent in sleep. Varying amounts above the four-twelfths are spent daily in the home. Let us say roughly that about sixty per cent of the child's time, during the eighteen years that we are considering now, is spent in the home, in sleep, and in school. That leaves forty per cent of a child's life to be spent outside of these influences.

I ask you guardians of youth, what are you doing to direct the efforts of childhood during that forty per cent of his life in which he is left alone to be really himself?

THE BADLANDS

SOME time ago a little three or four-year-old lad was lost in the badlands of North Dakota. He was bareheaded, barefoot, and wore only a pair of overalls. The badlands are noted for their pitfalls, canyons, rattlesnake holes, and as a rendezvous for wild animals.

When the parents found that the little child was lost, they immediately began a search. Later in the evening, as the shadows of night began to fall, neighbors joined in that search, and all night long the mother was praying and the others were crying, hunting for the boy that was gone. The following morning a neighbor mounted his horse and rode to the neighboring villages and gave the alarm, and that morning at about eleven o'clock, farmers, housewives, ranchers, sheepherders, cowboys, business and professional men, shopkeepers, boy scouts, law officers gathered on the town square to hear the sheriff's instructions:

"We are all going to the badlands to find and bring back the little Cornell boy. The best way I know to do this is to form into single line and march out there; each man, woman, and child of us will be spaced a few feet from each other. Every hole and canyon in the way must be searched; every bush must be examined as we go along. This line, friends and neighbors, must not be broken. Every waterhole, ravine and ditch must be searched thoroughly; every square inch must be scanned by us as we go; it is the only way. I do not know how long our search will take, but little Alfred is out in the badlands somewhere, and when we turn back the little fellow will be with us. We can only hope that we shall not be too late. Now let us get going. I have appointed some of you deputies to ride on horseback, so that there will be no slip-up, and there will be none, if I know anything about the people of this State."

The line was formed, and at 6:30 the following evening, after an all-night and more than an all-day search the little fellow was found kneeling in a waterhole. His legs and feet were badly bruised and inflamed. His father and mother rushed to him, clasped him in their arms, and said: "How did you like it, lad?" The little fellow said, "Fine," and burst into tears. When that ten-mile line of human beings saw that the boy was found and really was alive, a great cheer rose from 250 voices.

A father in my office a year ago sat with his head bowed on his arms and said, "There are things worse than death." His boy was also lost, not in the badlands, but in immorality and disgrace.

From all parts of the Union come reports that youth is the criminal age. Eighty-five percent of our criminals are between 17 and 25 years of age.

It seems that the Lord anticipated just such conditions as these, and he placed in the Church organizations for the purpose of saving the youth from the badlands of immorality and indifference towards religious things, saving them from disbelief in God, saving them from irreverence.

Do not condemn the boys; just find out what they would like to do and what they can do, and as soon as they begin to work they are going to be interested.

"There are no bad herbs, and there are no bad men; there are only bad cultivators." Let us be good cultivators so that the responsibility of any of the boys or the men who are in the badlands may not rest upon our shoulders.

YOUTH AND A BETTER FUTURE

FORTY-EIGHT years ago I sat as a graduate in the U. of U. Class of 1897!

I remember with what compassionate feelings—feelings almost akin to pity—I regarded the poor, old, gray-haired men of seventy and seventy-five! As I looked forward to attaining their maturity, what a long distance it seemed between our joyous twenties, and the decrepit seventies!

Now, having reached that milestone, I wonder at the immaturity of youth to think that a man only three score and ten is old! Surely, age must have been older then than now!

Of one thing, however, we may be sure: That

Years rush by us like the wind, We see not whence the eddy comes, Nor whitherward it is tending And we seem, ourselves, to witness their flight Without a sense that we are changed. Yet time is beguiling man of his strength As the winds rob the trees of their foliage.

It is your life ahead of you, and it is the responsibilities it entails that I have in mind as I speak of Youth and a Better Future.

There are three human qualities or virtues characteristic of true leadership. These are (1) a consciousness of a righteous cause, (2) an invincible resolution to uphold it, and, (3) the assurance of the One Safe Guide.

Notwithstanding the frequent declarations of many who see only calamities ahead of us, it is our intent this afternoon to consider the making of a better world. It is surprising how many thoughtful people are speaking and writing ominously of the future.

The future is yours to make or to mar as you choose. The world is sick of strife; it yearns for peace. Only the perverseness of human nature can darken the oncoming years.

Youth—conviction—courage—is a combination potentially capable of determining the kind of world we shall live in. Though not the wisest, youth is the best, the most radiant time of life.

Occasionally, even during the tender years, the reality of the present is slightly disturbed by fanciful flights of thought into the uncertain tomorrow—and by the time graduation comes, the fact that you must take a part in the future becomes as sure as the course of the sun toward the western sky. Facing that future, as you do today, you might well exclaim with King Henry IV: "O heavens! that one might read the book of fate, and see the revolution of the times!"

Even while the glories of youthful prime gladden your hearts and brighten your hopes with anticipated success, there rests unfelt upon your shoulders the weight of a coming responsibility. Yours is the challenge to shape the future. Into your hands and in the hands of a million other youths will be placed the banner of civilization.

To carry it successfully forward will demand courage, or what Luke calls "the boldness of Peter and John,"—that quality of mind which enables one to encounter danger and to overcome difficulties. It is a virtue admired by everybody. Our souls have been stirred, and our eyes filled with tears as we have heard of the military courage of our boys in uniform. We thrill even at spontaneous courage as it leaps forth in time of crisis. But the courage I would have youth possess, as they take their part in the better future, is neither physical nor military—it is the fearlessness to act in accordance with their convictions; courage to do right whether alone or in public—courage to be true to a trust.

In the "Lady of the Lake," when Roderick Dhu would summon his clansmen to battle, he placed the fiery cross in the hands of a valiant henchman. No mountain crest, no trembling bog or false morass could halt this trusted courier in the speedy performance of his assigned task. His duty performed, he passed the fiery torch to the second courier, the heir of Duncan's line, who, leaving the funeral rites of his deceased sire, accepted the trust, and even in the face of death paused not an instant until he had placed the symbol in the hands of his successor. Though Norman's bridal vows had just been spoken, Clan Alpine's cause, his chieftain's trust, took precedence.

As to these young men was successfully given the charge to summon Clan Alpine's warriors, so there has come successively to youth through the ages, a transferred trust to carry forward the cause of humanity. The passing of this responsibility from one generation to another, unlike Scott's story, has been imperceptible, and lingered along sometimes for years, but the responsibility has been as definite as that which passed from Clan Alpine's courier to courier.

Nor can youth evade that responsibility if they would. When it comes they may as recreants refuse to go forward, or even turn in an opposite direction as traitors to their trust, but onward or backward, each generation marks success or failure in man's struggle upward.

Whether youth's contributive acts will be progressive or retrogressive, cultural or beastly, will depend largely upon the kind of training given by those who place the banner in their hands.

A striking example of this has been enacted as if in drama within the last quarter of a century. Blinded by false ideals and fired by vain ambition, a paranoiac, with the power of a once mighty nation behind him, said: "The plow will be the sword, and the bread of posterity will be watered by the tears of war." And again, "What I am after is a violently active, dominating, intrepid, brutal youth. There must be no weakness or tenderness in it. I want to see once more in its eyes the gleam of pride and independence of the beast of prey."

It seems incredible that leaders of a reputably cultured people could, in less than a generation, step back to barbarism and revel in bestiality—and that, too, in an age when advancement in material sciences exceeds all other ages in the world's history.

As a consequence of that return to barbarism nations are grappling at one another's throats in a death struggle. Millions of persons lie dead, wounded, and unaccounted for. Homes have been blown to splinters, and their occupants left to wander helplessly and aimlessly, facing starvation and death. Men defeated have been compelled to labor for their conquerors. Nations once free have lost their independence. Millions of people have been forced to surrender all guarantees of personal liberty. Art galleries, monuments, historic buildings, and cities containing treasures of untold value to humanity have been ruthlessly destroyed. The holocaust of war continues and innocent men, women, and children are being maimed, mangled, and murdured. Man has subdued the earth, harnessed the waves, conquered the air. His slightest whisper encircles the globe in a second. He controls the mightiest forces of nature and commands them to contribute to his comforts and whims. But all this material advancement has brought man neither safety, security, nor peace. These marvelous inventions which make New York and London eight-hour neighbors, and the antipodes but a six-day trip—which enable us to sit in comfortable chairs, and see the struggle of nations and the crumbling of empires—all these are not yet making secure the progress and happiness of man. Something is lacking. What is it?

Mankind lacks an unfailing Guide—a Divine Ideal.

The end of World War II seems to be in sight. Bursting bombs, burning airplanes, sinking ships, are becoming fewer. The victory of individual freedom over dictatorship is temporarily assured. A million young Americans, and millions of others have given their lives that the world may have another chance to live decently. Theirs is the conquest, ours the responsibility. Man makes war—man can end war if he will.

From the hands of those million dead come to the Youth now living the banner and charge to carry forward to yet greater conquests.

The dominant motive in man and in nations is still self-preservation, self-advancement, self-comfort without consideration for the welfare of others, material achievements, accumulation of money, accentuation of power through the subjugation, even the enslavement, of the individual. From the root of selfishness spring all the pestilential vices that disrupt the harmony of human relationship. Envy, hatred, greed, bigotry, the exercising of unrighteous dominion in governing men and crushing them, unrestrained passion, ungoverned appetites, drunkenness and debauchery—these are enemies to be conquered in the better future.

You may call it a Utopian dream, if you will, but selfishness must be subdued before mankind can experience peace. No peace or freedom can come to this world so long as men live only for themselves. Self-preservation is the first law of nature, but it is not a law of spiritual growth. He who lets selfishness and his passions rule him binds his soul in slavery, but he who, in the majesty of spiritual strength, uses his physical tendencies and yearnings and his possessions to serve purposes higher than personal indulgence and comfort, takes the first step toward the happy and useful life.

This truth was taught not only "in the beginning" when the gospel was first revealed to man, but also when Jesus began His earthly ministry. On the Mount of Temptation was enacted the first scene in Christ's earthly drama of the abundant life. There he resisted the challenge to gratify his appetite; he turned aside the appeal to his vanity and pride; he scorned the bribe of worldly wealth and power as in spiritual victory he said to the Tempter: "Get thee hence." Only thus by the brilliant triumph of the spirit over the flesh can we hope for a better world.

Your fellow alumni of four years ago accepted the challenge, and have met in deadly conflict dictatorship and inhuman aggression. Thus far they have won a glorious victory, but many will fight no more. Others are too maimed to continue longer the struggle.

Yours now the task to carry on!

Down through the ages men have retreated before the formidable enemies you now face; and thinkers and some philosophers declare hopelessly that these enemies cannot be conquered, except by changing human nature, and that, they insist, cannot be done.

I believe with the English writer, Beverly Nichols, that it can be done, and that "human nature can be changed, here and now." Courage alone is not sufficient; a firm conviction is not sufficient. There must be the assurance that the conviction is in harmony with justice, with truth and righteousness.

At San Francisco there are representatives from 50 nations earnestly and conscientiously seeking to formulate plans that will end war and establish a lasting peace. There assembled are men of different political views, and of varying opinions as to the best form of government. But no matter what their political differences may be, if they would but apply fundamental Christian principles—for example, the age-old formula "do unto others as you would have others do unto you"—the objectives of the conference would be attained.

Likewise others of Christ's teachings, containing unchanging principles eternally operative in this changing world, should be applied by all who would work sincerely for a better future. For example, consider how contributive to the ending of war would be the application by individuals and nations of just two of the divine injunctions relating to arbitration and mutual happiness:

Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.

But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. (Matt. 18:15, 16)

Though man may not overcome selfishness entirely, if, as conflicts arise, he would but subdue it sufficiently to submit to Christ's principle of arbitration, brute force as manifested in this military conflict would cease.

Again, Jesus taught that men and women fail to live truly, and that they really amount to nothing unless they have spirituality. The spiritual force underlies everything, and without it nothing worth while can be accomplished.

Young men and young women, the future awaits you! It is yours! If you would end war and give peace to the world, you have campaigns to organize, and conquests to achieve. These are campaigns planned for the establishments of justice—these are conquests of the soul. Whether it is better to walk along the easy road of selfishness and indulgence than to strive through self-mastery and service for the realm of spirituality you must decide. "Whether it is better to serve God than man, judge ye."

SAFEGUARDS AGAINST THE DELINQUENCY OF YOUTH

IT WOULD seem that men and women are either groping blindly for the truth or have become lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. (2 Tim. 3:1-5)

It is in the spirit of Paul's charge and prophecy that I approach the subject of safeguards against delinquency of youth.

Children are being corrupted by the ever-increasing crime wave; youth are caught in its whirlpool, and are being contaminated overwhelmingly by it. According to the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, . . ."it is mounting in intensity. It is growing in severity. It is not isolated. It is nation-wide."

In calling attention to these conditions, I would not have you think that young people generally do not merit our confidence. It is the few, not the many, of whom we now speak. But no matter how firm our confidence in the majority of the young, we must not close our eyes to the fact that the number of delinquents and youthful criminals is increasing. In the interest of the moral atmosphere of our communities, the welfare of the state, the perpetuity of our democratic form of government, we must search for the causes of this upswing in crime, and, if possible, remove them and apply the proper remedies.

One cause of the increase in child delinquency is a letdown in home ideals. A growing desire for economic independence, or a too eager willingness to improve financial circumstances has influenced some mothers to neglect the greatest of all responsibilities—the rearing of a family. A married woman who refuses to assume the responsibilities of motherhood, or who, having children, neglects them for pleasure or social prestige, is recreant to the highest calling and privilege of womankind. The father, who because of business or political or social responsibilities, fails to share with his wife the responsibilities of rearing his sons and daughters, is untrue to his marital obligations, is a negative element in what might be and should be a joyous home atmosphere, and is a possible contributor to discord and delinquency. Fathers may and should exercise a helpful, restraining influence, where a mother's tenderness and love might lead to indulgence on the part of the children. In this respect, however, every father should ever keep in mind that he was once a mischievous youngster himself, and deal with his boy sympathetically.

The home is the best place in the world to teach the highest ideal in the social and political life of man; namely, perfect liberty of action so long as you do not trespass upon the rights and privileges of another.

The great need in the American home today is more religion. Parents should make it obvious both by their actions and their conversation that they are seriously interested, if not in outward forms, in the fruits of true religion. Example of parents should emphasize the need of honesty in our dealing with our family, our neighbors, and all with whom we come in contact; of kindness to our employees, of fair play to our employers, or good measure to our customers.

If the reports be true with reference to the indifference of the country as a whole toward Christian churches, we shall have to place next to the home, not the church, but the public school, as the most influential factor in lessening delinquency.

Present-day conditions emphasize the fact that the most paramount objective of the public school system from kindergarten to the university should be character building and the evolving of true, loyal citizens of the republic. The teaching of the three "R's," of the arts and the sciences, even the delving into research work, should be but a means to the development of true manhood and noble womanhood.

A third dominant force is the Church. Here every child should be more or less safeguarded. If every ward teacher were properly and fully to perform his duty, he would be aware of the activity or inactivity of every child, and of every youth in the Church, because each teacher should watch over the families which are assigned to him. In more direct contact with individuals are the quorum officers and instructors. The auxiliary associations comprehend in their enrollment every child and youth from six years of age and upward. Indifference manifest in the world generally toward the church should tend only to spur men of the priesthood and teachers in the Church to more earnest and diligent activity.

A fourth and final safeguard against delinquency of youth is the moral atmosphere of the town or community. This is determined by the ideals and actions of adults, and particularly of civic officers and those who are entrusted to enforce the law.

We are living in perilous times, but let us hope that they may be to the present generation as the fiery furnace that consumes the dross but purifies the gold.
