David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Conclusion

HAPPINESS AND THE RIGHT TO CHOOSE

FIFTEEN miles from Vernal, Utah, Uintah County, stands a hill over which people walked and rode at intervals for years without seeing anything unusual about it. They noticed two great rocks uniform in size, but to men bent upon pioneer duties they were only rocks. One day a man from the Carnegie Institute walked over the same hill. The nature of the rocks suggested to him that they probably belonged to the Jurassic period of the world's history. He knew that in these strata are sometimes found fossils of huge animals that once roamed over parts of the earth. What were only common rocks to the farmer, the cattleman, and the pioneer were to the trained mind of the scientist, fossilized remains of two vertebrae of a gigantic creature that had been extinct for centuries. In the course of a short time this discovery had a force of men carefully uncovering these fossilized remains, and the people of the surrounding valley looked on with interest and amazement, as a dinosaur, sixty-five feet long and thirty-five feet high, was disclosed to view. Following indications as he perceived them, this educator in the realm of science, by great effort and expense unearthed one of the finest specimens perhaps yet discovered. Others have since been unearthed, one of which is on display in our own University, and others are still lying in their original position in the quarry.

So men go through this life, catching occasional glimpses of a higher, a spiritual world; but unfortunately, they remain satisfied with but a glimpse, and refuse to put forth the effort required to uncover the beauties and glories of that spiritual realm.

Remember, my brethren . . . ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free.

Next to the bestowal of life itself, the right to direct that life is God's greatest gift to man. Among the immediate obligations and duties, and one of the most urgent and pressing for attention and action of all liberty-loving people, is the preservation of individual liberty. Freedom of choice is more to be treasured than any possession earth can give. It is inherent in the spirit of man. It is a divine gift to every normal being. Whether born in abject poverty or inherited riches, everyone has this most precious of all life's endowments—the gift of free agency, man's inherent and inalienable right.

With free agency there comes responsibility. If man is to be rewarded for righteousness and punished for evil, then common justice demands that he be given the power of independent action. A knowledge of good and evil is essential to man's progress on earth. If he were coerced to do right at all times, or were helplessly enticed to commit sin, he would merit neither a blessing for the first nor punishment for the second.

Thus we see that man's responsibility is correspondingly operative with his free agency. Actions in harmony with divine law and the laws of nature will bring happiness, and those in opposition to divine truth, misery.

Man is responsible not only for every deed, but for every idle word and thought. As a boy I questioned that truth when I first heard it expressed by my father. I was very much surprised, therefore, when, later as a student in the university, I read William James' psychology about the effect of thought and action on human character.

Freedom of the will and the responsibility associated with it are fundamental aspects of Jesus' teachings. Throughout his ministry He emphasized the worth of the individual, and exemplified what is now expressed as the work and glory of God—"To bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Only through the divine gift of soul freedom is such progress possible.

Individual freedom is threatened by international rivalries, inter-racial animosities and false political ideals. Unwise legislation, too often prompted by political expediency, is periodically being enacted and seductively undermines man's right of free agency, robs him of his rightful liberties, and makes him but a cog in the crushing wheel of a regimentation, which, if persisted in, will end in dictatorship.

The Magna Charta, signed by King John at Runnymede June 15, 1215, was an expression of freedom-loving men against a usurping king. It was a guarantee of civil and personal liberty. These guarantees later found fuller and more complete expression in the Constitution of the United States. Governments are the servants, not the masters of the people.

This principle of free agency and the right of each individual to be free not only to think but to act within bounds that grant to everyone else the same privilege, are sometimes violated even by churches that claim to teach the doctrine of Jesus Christ. The attitude of any organization towards this principle of freedom is a pretty good index to its nearness to the teachings of Christ.

Let us by exercising our privileges under the Constitution—

(1) preserve our right to worship God according to the dictates of our conscience;

(2) preserve the right to work when and where we choose. (No free man should be compelled to pay tribute in order to realize this God-given privilege).

(3) feel free to plant and to reap without the handicap of bureaucratic interference;

(4) devote our time, means, and life if necessary, to hold inviolate those laws which will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life.

To sum up the whole question: in these days of uncertainty and unrest, the greatest responsibility and paramount duty of liberty-loving people is to preserve and proclaim the freedom of the individual, his relationship to Deity, and the necessity of obedience to the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Only thus will mankind find peace and happiness.

Man's success or failure, happiness or misery, depend upon what he seeks and what he chooses.
