David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Character

THE CROWNING GLORY OF MAN

THE world needs men, men of character, God-fearing men.

What is the end and purpose of religion, "swaying the lives of men the centuries through"? It is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." And what is the crowning glory of man in this earth so far as his individual achievement is concerned? It is character—character developed through obedience to the laws of life as revealed through the gospel of Jesus Christ, who came that we might have life and have it more abundantly. Man's chief concern in life should not be the acquiring of gold, or of fame, or of material possessions. It should not be the development of physical prowess, nor of intellectual strength, but his aim, the highest in life, should be the development of a Christ-like character.

There are four pictures upon which I always love to look. Three are imaginary, one is real. The first of these is the picture of Christ before Pilate when that Roman official said to the angry mob, "Behold the man!" As he said it he pointed to Jesus, crowned with thorns, bearing upon his shoulders the purple robe. He pointed to one at whom the angry mob sneered, condemned as a felon and blasphemer, and yet when he said, "Behold the man!" he described one who was perfect in character, who was conqueror over weaknesses and temptations, and who could say, as he did to his fellow workers, "Peace be unto you! I have overcome the world." He is our pattern.

The other picture is Christ in His youth. Have you not admired the paintings of the best artists who have tried to picture purity and strength in that young boy of twelve years? I have, and I never look upon one of the choicest of these without feeling that I am looking upon one who is the embodiment of youthful strength, vigor and purity.

The third is the picture of the boy who, as Hawthorne describes him, looked upon the great stone face, and, while thinking of the ideals and virtues characterized in that great work of nature, developed those same virtues in his own life.

The fourth is a picture in real life, a youth whose clear eyes picture the strength of young manhood and the purity of the life he has led. What more beautiful thing can one see in nature than that? We love beauty in womanhood; we also love beauty and strength in young manhood, and that strength and beauty come as a result of true living.

By overcoming difficulties and temptation, and by rendering service to others, each may develop toward the Christ character as He revealed it among men.

ELEMENTS OF CHARACTER

THE author of the poem "The Builder and the Wrecker" might well have had in mind Michaelangelo as he stood, several hundred years ago, by a large shapeless stone which had stood in the lot for 40 years, and nobody could make anything of it. That great artist, probably the greatest, took his chisel and his hammer and shaped out of that huge, shapeless rock, his first great piece of sculpture, "David," the leader of Israel. Later it was carried forth through Florence amid the acclaim of thousands.

Are we builders, or are we wreckers? Are we going to carve something great out of the life given to us, or are we going to let it sink into insignificance? It takes no effort to become a prodigal son or a prodigal daughter. You can slip into sin without effort. There is no pride which you should arrogate to yourself because of indulgence in passion or appetites. To master the appetite, to control the passion of anger requires effort, and that effort develops character.

There was a time when all this building lay as rubble around here. Your bricks, your steel, your cement, your lumber, were lying around in a heterogeneous mass, but it took effort to bring it into order. Tonight you see a beautiful building. Every brick in its place, every stone properly laid, steel beams supporting the roof, the tower, every shingle, every piece of building material laid, and you have a completed structure.

Of what do you build your character? Let me name one Article of Faith which will answer that question:

We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul—We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things.

"We believe in being honest"—the foundation virtue of all character. Honesty and sincerity are the basic virtues of a noble character.

"We believe in being honest, true"—true to self. That man is untrue to himself who would take advantage of a neighbor. That man or woman is untrue to himself or herself who would refrain from being kind to those who merit kindness. Being true to self means being true to the best that is in one, not the lowest, not the meanest, but true to the highest ideal. If we lived up to just that one virtue, placed it into our character as we place the bricks in the walls, no boy would ever do a thing that would cast reflection upon his father's good name.

True to the country. To have citizenship in this great Republic should make every man's heart respond in loyalty and look with distrust and condemnation upon anybody who is the beneficiary of the freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution and who will undermine it or seek to destroy the liberty of the individual. Now is the time for us to keep our eyes open, for there are sinister men abroad who would destroy the liberties of our country.

"We believe in being honest, true, chaste,"—Chastity is the foundation of virile manhood; chastity, not indulgence, contributes to virility. Nature will let that energy come through the intellect or through other sources. Chastity is the virtue that contributes to the peace and harmony of the home. More homes are ruined and more hearts broken because of unchastity than by the violation of any other virtue.

"We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent," —benevolent in heart, beneficent. "We believe in doing good to all men."

Those are the elements which contribute to a great character, especially when you add to them faith in God, whom you recognize as an Omniscient, Omnipotent Being, who is our Father, and who asks us to contribute to His glory, for without His children God would have no glory, no matter how many worlds He created. That is why He said: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

Faith—faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the one perfect man who ever trod the earth. No matter what may be the surprises of the future, He will never be surpassed. He is our ideal. His is the perfect character.

It is easy to become a prodigal, as it is easy to be a wrecker, but it takes effort to build a house such as this, and to build a character. Ella Wheeler Wilcox was right when she said:

It is easy enough to be virtuous, When nothing tempts you to stray, When without or within No voice of sin Is luring your soul away. But it's only a negative virtue Until it is tried by fire; And the life that is worth The honor of earth Is the one that resists desire.
