David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Christianity Applied

What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? Can faith save him? (James 2:14)

IN THIS significant passage, James decries the impotency of faith as a merely intellectual perception and implies the importance of the application of truth to daily life and conduct. He teaches that "faith is dead and useless unless it expresses itself in a true life and true Christian activities." There has been, and is today, too much discrepancy between belief and practice, between the proclamation of high ideals and the application of these ideals to daily life and living.

The Church, accepting Christ as the revelation of God to man, believes that Jesus in His life and teachings reveals a standard of personal living, and of social relations, which, if fully embodied in individual lives and in human institutions, would not only ameliorate the present ills of society, but bring happiness and peace to mankind.

If it be urged that during the past two thousand years so-called Christian nations have failed to achieve such a goal, we answer that all failure to do so may be found in the fact that they have failed to apply the principles and teachings of true Christianity.

To every sincere follower of Christ, religion should denote not only a sense of relationship to God, but also an expression of that feeling in actions with respect to right and wrong, and obligation to duty.

For six thousand years and more the human family has suffered from unrestrained expressions and manifestations of selfishness, hatred, envy, greed—animal passions that have led to war, devastation, pestilence, and death. If the simplest principles of the Savior's teachings had been observed the recent world war, for example, could have been averted. The nation or nations that began that holocaust violated some standard or standards of the Christian religion—with what result? Seven million men killed. Five million more dead of starvation and disease. Twenty million wounded, five million of whom are maimed and crippled for life. Six million men imprisoned. Twenty million women in Europe deprived of homes of their own. Countless millions who suffered privations in the trenches, and in lonely homes of the poor. Fifty billion dollars' worth of material and property destroyed. One hundred billion dollars to provide for the cost of the war and interest.

And even now as the passing of time dims the memory of that terrible experience, we again hear rumblings of threatened and deadly conflict. Indeed, actually today in some parts of the world, horrors are being enacted that make the soul shudder. Innocent human beings, noncombatants, helplessly, desperately fleeing to save their lives, are blown to pieces by death-dealing missiles from the air; children left homeless, maimed and slaughtered indiscriminately; starving mothers seeking to give away their famishing babes if by so doing they can save their lives. Because these atrocities are 6,000 or 8,000 miles away, we fail to sense fully the horror of it all. But imagine if they were here, and your boy or girl, your mother, wife, or babe were subjected to such peril! If there be a means of averting such calamities, plain common sense, to say nothing of religion's appeal, would prompt its acceptance.

The abundant life is obtained not only from spiritual exaltation, but by the application to daily life of the principles that Jesus taught.

These principles are few and simple and may, if desired, be applied by every normal person. The first of these, and the foundation upon which a true Christian society is built, is:

"Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, mind and strength"—a belief in a Supreme Being who lives and loves His children—a belief that gives power and vigor to the soul.

Another is: The acceptance of the truth that life is a gift of God and therefore divine. The proper use of this gift impels man to become the master, not the slave, of nature. His appetites are to be controlled and used for the benefit of his health and the prolongation of life, his passions mastered and controlled for the happiness and blessing of others and the perpetuity of the race.

A third principle is: Personal integrity. By this I mean plain, everyday honesty, sobriety, and respect for others' rights, such as will win the confidence of one's fellows. This recognition applies to nations as well as to individuals. It is as wrong for a nation, because it is powerful, to steal from another and oppress it, as it for an individual to rob and kill his neighbor.

A fourth essential is: Social consciousness that awakens in each individual the realization that it is his duty to make the world better for his having been in it.

Some day intelligent human beings will realize the importance and benefit of living in right relations one with another. When that time comes, the Savior's prayer will be in people's hearts—"Make them one, as thou, Father, and I are one." Then when that time comes: "The war drums" will "throb no longer and the battle flags" be "furled in the Parliament of man, the Federation of the world."

This condition can be achieved not alone from mere belief, nor from oratorical exhortations, but by the application in business, social, and national life of the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
