David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Christmas

WITH satisfaction and thanksgiving for achievements of the past year, we join the Christian world in another Yuletide celebration. In doing so, however, we express the sincere hope that with commemoration of Christ's birth there be connoted, as never before, the significance of the life and teachings of the Man of Galilee.

"Behold the man," said Pontius Pilate, Roman Governor of Judea, as Jesus, mockingly bedecked with a purple robe, his hair platted with a crown of thorns, stood before the mob who cried, "Crucify him, crucify him!"

Blinded by ignorance, bigotry, and jealousy, the crowd saw in the condemned man only a malefactor, a violator of traditional law, a blasphemer; one whom they madly and unjustly condemned to the cross. Only a comparatively small group of men and women beheld him as he really is—the Son of God, the Redeemer of mankind!

For nineteen centuries Christ's birth has been celebrated by nations that call themselves Christian. Annually the pealing of bells, the harmony of music, and the declaration of voices have united in heralding anew the angelic message "on earth peace, good will toward men."

However, as on the occasion of that historic trial, so through the ages, men have beheld him from different view-points. Some, who reject him as venomously as did the rabble, see in him and in his disciples "investors of a Christian moral system that has undermined and sapped the vigor of the modern European world." Others with clearer insight, begotten by experience, behold him as the originator of a system that "promotes industry, honesty, truth, purity, and kindness, that upholds law, favors liberty, is essential to it, and would unite men in one great brotherhood."

Many behold Him as the "one perfect character—the peerless personality of history," but deny His divinity.

Millions accept Him as the great Teacher, whose teachings, however, are not applicable to modern social conditions. A few—O how few!—of the approximately 2,000,000,000 inhabitants of the globe, accept Him for what he really is—"the only begotten of the Father; who came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness."

True, the present age is entirely different from that in which Jesus lived. People among whom He associated could not even imagine the many conditions, problems, and perplexities of this modern world. Science has brought to light discoveries scarcely ever before dreamed of. The automobile, the radio, the airplane practically annihilate time and distance, and make nations on opposite sides of the globe next-door neighbors. Jesus' message and personality reached only groups around the shores of Galilee, but today even an ordinary voice may be heard by millions! Intercommunication is almost instant, and transportation barriers are practically surmounted.

Yet, notwithstanding all these achievements, dissatisfaction with existing social and political conditions is becoming more and more manifest. Mistrust and misunderstandings between capital and labor continually bring distress and destruction of property. Wars for expansion in which the innocent are mutilated and killed are carried on today as in the days of barbarism. Arbitration as a means of settling international questions is even now stifled by outbursts of ancient brute force. The question of taxation, the production and proper distribution of the products of the soil and of the factory are perplexing the wisest minds. Men need a beacon light to guide them as they grope in the mist of these perplexities.

That light is He whose birth the Christian world is celebrating at this Yuletide. It is He who in the bloom of perfect manhood, and with the inspiration of divinity said, "I am come that ye might have life, and that ye might have it more abundantly."

Men say His teachings are not applicable to modern-day conditions. How do they know, since true Christianity has never been actually tested by any nation or nations?

Fundamental in all Christ's teachings was the idea that wrong thinking is a crime. He condemned avarice, enmity, and jealousy in the mind almost as vehemently as He did the results that avarice, enmity, and jealousy produce. Can anyone in this modern world truthfully gainsay the practicability of such teaching? Equally applicable to present conditions are His teachings regarding the value and sacredness of human life, the virtue of forgiveness, the necessity of fair dealing, the crime of hypocrisy, the sin of covetousness, the saving power of love, universal brotherhood, the immortality of man, and many other vital principles.

Today civilized nations are sitting on a mountain of explosives, accumulated in defiance of Christ's teachings. Let the heat of hatred, suspicion, and greed become a little more intense and there will be such an international explosion as will greatly retard if not forcibly drive from the midst of mankind the hoped-for peace heralded by the heavenly hosts when the Son of Man was born. The good will that was to usher in universal brotherhood will be replaced by envy, greed, and hate, with resultant misery and death.

To peace-lovers everywhere, we say, behold in this Man of Galilee not merely a great Teacher, not merely a peerless leader, but the Prince of Peace, the Author of Salvation, here and now, literally and truly the Savior of the world! Behold in His true light the only Man through whose name and teachings the world can find "on earth peace, good will toward men."

CHRISTMAS, HAPPIEST TIME OF YEAR

CHRISTMAS is the happiest season of the year; Spring with her bursting buds, variegated colors and manifestation of teeming life inspires new hope and gives promise of happy days; Summer crowns the year with gorgeous beauty and brings pleasures peculiarly her own; Autumn with her fruits, ripened crops and brilliantly painted hillsides fills the heart with gratitude for Nature's bounty, yet the shortening days bring a tinge of melancholy and the frosty air presages the approach of Winter—that "brings silence in the harvest field and blackness in the mountain glen."

Each season has its own peculiar pleasures, joys and glories, which are hailed with varying degrees of welcome and delight by individual groups and nations. There are birthdays and holidays in every season—each with its own joyous characteristic commemoration and celebration, but at Christmastide there is world-wide tribute and universal joy.

What is the source of the joy of this almost universal holiday? It is found in the fact that everyone has in his or her heart the desire to make somebody else happy. There is a losing of self for the good of another. Selfishness is replaced by a feeling to do good; sordidness is banished by gratuity, enmity by friendliness, and doubt and suspicion by confidence and trust. On that day we glimpse the truth that peace can come to earth only through "good will to men." It is the spirit of giving that makes us truly happy.

If the world can be so happy in Winter, when, in northern climes at least, "From snow-topp'd hills the whirlwinds keenly blow, howl thru the woods, and pierce the vales below," how simple it should be to have the joys of Christmas mingle with the murmuring life of Springtime, or with the full bloom and sunshine of Summer, or with brilliantly bedecked Autumn. Why not be happy throughout the whole year, and every year?

To do this let us supplant the spirit of getting from others by the spirit of giving; the spirit of selfishness by the spirit of helpfulness. Let us add the little word up to giving and make it giving up. What a different world this will be when men and women everywhere will strive to give up mean, petty, selfish, sordid, uncharitable feelings and attitudes, and replace them by kindness, friendliness, forbearance and sympathy and mutual helpfulness. When that day comes the angels will again sing—

"Glory to God in the highest; and on earth peace, good will toward men."

THE MESSAGE UNHEEDED

THIS is an unusual Christmastide. True, as heretofore, we send our gifts and hearty good wishes; bedeck Christmas trees with brilliant lights and sparkling ornaments; we ring the bells, and sing sweet carols and hymns of praise—but underneath it all there is a heaviness in our hearts not hitherto experienced, for soldiers ruthlessly slain. Also our complacent assurance of safety from foreign attack has been suddenly shaken. As never before in our lifetime, we sense a nearness of submarines and death-dealing bombs. Deviltry is rampant throughout the nations, and hate, avarice, ambition, perfidy and pride like a fearful flood of destruction threaten to inundate the world. Leaders of some nations have not only rejected, but have denounced the Prince of Peace, and are worshipping the god of war.

Yes, this is an unusual Christmastide, and our celebration is not without alloy. But as gold seven times tried is freed from dross, so may we in the furnace of trial and tribulation have our minds so purified that we may discern more clearly between the destructive forces of Evil, and the peace-producing principles of the glad tidings heralded at the birth of the Babe of Bethlehem.

For nineteen hundred years, the birth of the Savior of the world has been celebrated by millions, but the acceptance of the principles of the glad tidings heralded by the heavenly host has been more of a pretense than a reality. The message of the Gospel—glad tidings of great joy which is unto all peoples—has gone unheeded! For many years, thinking men have deplored this digression from and lack of interest in religion and the Gospel of Christ, and have warned the world of its dire consequences. The Gospel of Jesus Christ looks to the establishment of the Kingdom of God which shall make of humanity one large family of genuine love and good will among all its members. Such a kingdom cannot be established by force or authority, but by a new life within the individual soul.

In the story of the birth of Jesus we are told that there were with the angels a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace, good will toward men." In that announcement are implied—almost definitely stated—three guiding principles to the realization of the establishing of the Kingdom of God.

First, is an acknowledgment of the existence of Deity to whom we shall give glory and honor. Second, is the establishment of peace through individual righteousness. Such a peace will result in the third principle, the brotherhood of man.

Our faith in God springs from the heart. It cannot be other than personal. Jesus said the poor in spirit should possess the Kingdom of God. Who are the poor in spirit? Those, who, in deepest consciousness, realize their need of spiritual possessions, not earthly possessions; those who yearn to be in harmony with God and His teachings. Again he said that it is the peacemakers who shall be called the children of God. What does such a faith as that mean? The Lord becomes the center of our being, the guide to our thoughts and acts. Men must feel that around and over all there is our Father. They must have a faith that this universe is not left to the guidance of an irrational and random chance, but on the contrary, is ordered and controlled by a divine intelligence and wisdom.

Now, the second: As faith in God, so peace on earth has its source in the heart of the individual. Peace is the price of eternal vigilance and constant righteous efforts. A noble and godlike character is not a thing of favor or chance, but is a natural result of continued effort and right thinking, the effect of long-cherished association with godlike thoughts. An ignoble and bestial character by the same process is the result of the continued harboring of groveling thoughts. That is the message of the Savior.

The peace taught by the Savior refers to the individual just as much as it does to communities. That man cannot be at peace who is untrue to his better self, when he transgresses the law of righteousness, either in dealing with himself in indulging in passion or in appetites, yielding to the temptations of the flesh, or whether he is untrue to trust, transgressing the law of righteousness in dealing with his fellow men. Peace does not come to the transgressor of law. Peace comes by obedience to law, and it is that message which Jesus would have us proclaim among men—peace to the individual that he may be at peace with his God; perfect harmony existing between himself and law, the righteous laws to which he is subject and from which he never can escape; peace in the home, families living at peace with their neighbors, exempt from family and neighborhood brawls; striving to be exempt from the petty jealousies, petty aspirations, and ambitions that come into the home and bring discord and unhappiness; peace in the families between fathers and children, mothers and fathers, husbands and wives.

Jesus taught that from within the heart of man come evil thoughts, sexual vice, acts of theft, murder, adultery, greed. When men commit these crimes individually or collectively they trespass upon human rights and, of course, bring misery into the world. Greed prompts the accumulation of wealth even at the sacrifice of human life. What a different world this would be if men would accumulate wealth not as an end, but as a means of blessing human beings and improving human relations. A Christian conception of the right and value of a human soul would have prevented the slaughter that is at this moment being perpetrated in various parts of the world. A war of aggression is barbarous, whatever the pretext may be!

Brotherhood involves service and not conquest. It involves confidence in man, in your brother; not suspicion and hatred. It involves truthful dealings; not chicanery and fraud. As fundamental to brotherhood and peace, Jesus recognized the rights of every man. When asked: "Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar?" He said: "Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."

It is the spirit of brotherhood in the cheer of Christmas that makes it so glorious. Thank heaven for the spirit of Christmas that brings us closer to each other in expression of such brotherhood!

PEACE AND GOOD WILL

IF I were to ask you to name the one city that has given to the world a greater civilization than any other city, without hesitation you would name Jerusalem. You would give that ancient city this distinction, not because it was the "City of David," nor because it still holds the veneration of the three great religions of mankind, but because you would associate with it the life, the teachings and death of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world.

Five miles south of Jerusalem is Bethlehem, a little town of equal historical importance, which will also be venerated as long as there are Christian hearts to feel or Christian lips to utter prayer. Its importance, too, comes not because of the fact that it is one of the oldest cities in Palestine, nor because we associate with it the beautiful story of Ruth, and many other important persons and incidents in Biblical history, but because in Bethlehem was cradled the Savior of mankind.

"Jerusalem" (the Canaanite "Urusalim," the Hebrew "Yarushalayim") means the "Abode of peace." "Bethlehem" ("Beit Lahm") means the "House of bread," perhaps because from early times it has been a fruitful district, and because the original plant from which the cultivated wheat was developed has been found wild only near Bethlehem. It is significant that from the home of bread, the "staff of life," springs also mankind's "Bread of Life."

Peace! Life—Eternal Life! To these two words the approaching festive season, in which we celebrate the birth of the Redeemer, should add greater meaning.

Peace, the opposite of fear, was the message given to the shepherds by the angels, who said:

"Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy."

Peace was heralded by the heavenly hosts that sang:

"Glory to God in the Highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men."

"Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace," cried the aged Simeon as he beheld through inspiration the Blessed Child that should be "a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel."

Peace and good will undoubtedly filled the hearts of the Wise Men as they gave their glittering gold and costly gifts to the true King of the Jews. In comparison with the rapture that filled their beings, valueless, indeed, seemed their wealth of treasure as on bended knee they worshiped their king, whom they had found through their learning, and their sincere searching for Truth.

Thus the brief but beautiful story informs us that by birth, by heavenly announcement, and later by early training Jesus became allied with the humble toilers, with the honest in heart, with sincere seekers after truth, and through these, with all classes of men whose "physical, mental, and moral burdens He sought to take from their weary shoulders."

For nineteen hundred years and more He has been an inspiration to countless millions of men and women. His has been the influence that has fired the imagination of poets; His the influence that has guided the artists' touch that has given imperishable beauty to the world; His the influence that has put new harmony into musicians' souls, and sent vibrating through the ages songs of praise and thanksgiving; His the power that has supported through centuries the humble laborers whose only comfort through unrequited toil and oppression sprang from the realization that One was standing at the end of life's journey saying, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest"; His the influence that has given every good things to the world today; His the life that was sacrificed to bring peace and good will and eternal salvation to all mankind.

And yet, after nineteen hundred years where shall we look to find peace? Not in Jerusalem, the "abode of peace," for there the Mohammedans and Christians are opposing the Jews, because the latter desire to find a home in the Holy Land. Not at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, where a Mohammedan still keeps the keys, because none of the Christian sects will trust each other with them. Not in Bethlehem, where on the walls of the rock-cut manger or limestone grotto, the traditional birthplace of our Lord, hang costly paintings so dust-covered and begrimed that the visitor can scarcely discern what they are, and they remain undusted and uncleaned because no Christian sect will permit the others to touch them. Not in Europe, where strife among nations still follows the world's greatest wars. Not among Christian sects that rail at each other, and misjudge their fellows who happen not to believe as they. Not in the heart of man or woman who harbors enmity or ill will against any human being, or against any of God's creatures; for peace and hatred cannot abide in the same soul.

Only in the heart that loves, only in the Church of Christ where love prompts service to one's fellow men and loyalty to God, shall we find peace. "For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."

He prayeth best who loveth best All things, both great and small; For the dear God who loveth us, He made and loveth all.

May Christmas find love and a desire to bless others abiding in the heart of every Latter-day Saint. In all such hearts and homes, then, there will be peace and good will toward all men. Where this peace abides, it matters little whether the possessor be rich, or poor, for he will have, in addition to the peace that gives "joy unspeakable," the assurance which the Son of Man gave when He said:

I am the Bread of Life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth in me shall never thirst.

Peace, good will, and Life everlasting are the blessings, then, we wish you as we repeat once again the glad old greeting: A MERRY CHRISTMAS, AND A HAPPY, PROSPEROUS NEW YEAR.
