David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Church

THE CHURCH AND ITS DISTINGUISHING FEATURES

ON a boat I met a choice Christian gentleman who asked: "What are the distinguishing features of your Church, as compared with the other Christian churches?"

I told him I would name three:

(1) Divine Authority by Direct Revelation;

(2) The Organization of the Church;

(3) The Eternal Nature of Ceremonies and Covenants.

The first distinguishing feature is most important. It is not a distinguishing feature merely to say authority, or divine authority, but authority by direct revelation. Only the Lord has the right to say who shall represent Him. The Bible is not sufficient authority. So if historically the right of divine authority was not perpetuated, then the only way in which it could come to men is by direct revelation.

The second distinguishing feature is the organization: (1) Quorums, (2) Auxiliaries, (3) Educational Opportunities, (4) Judicial Phases. Visualize the Priesthood—I am not now referring to the authority which was restored, but to the men and boys to whom this authority has been given. Visualize these people grouped in working sections or companies, from the father ninety years old, if he is alive, down to the boy twelve years of age. In those groups you find exemplified all that human society seeks in social groups and in societies. As we study this organization, if it is God's revelation, then we should find within this Church a satisfaction of every human need. So here we find in these quorum groups fellowship, brotherhood and opportunities for organized service. No man who is worthy of that fellowship can be kept out of it—not one.

The auxiliaries are headed by the Relief Society, our mothers and sisters and daughters. Associated with them is the Sunday School, an educational institution established for the teaching of the Gospel, all the Church meeting every Sunday to study its principles as revealed by the Son of Man. Next in order come the Young Men's and Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, having charge of the recreation of the young, guiding the leisure hours of youth, directing in music, in literature, in art, in debating, in drama, as well as in other practical principles of religion. Following the Mutuals we have the Primary Association. There, too, we find men and women organized, directing the leisure hours of childhood, from four years up to twelve in the case of boys, and from four up to fourteen in the case of girls. Weekly religion classes also are held by the Primary groups.

The third phase of Church organization relates to education. The educational features of the Church are very comprehensive and complete. All the quorums and groups I have named are in themselves educational factors. But that is not all. We have the seminary, correlating the high school study; the institute, correlating college work; and Church schools, at great expenditure. Hence the longing of the soul for education and knowledge is gratified. We are saved only as fast as we gain knowledge.

The judicial part of the Church is as interesting as the educational, or the Priesthood, or the auxiliary. In the first place, we have peace officers, members of the Priesthood, appointed to see that no iniquity exists, no backbiting, neither hardness of heart nor evil-speaking. Next to them we have the Bishop's court before which any member of the Church can bring another who has offended him. Should the decision not be agreeable, the man who desires to make his appeal may do so to the high council. Six of these men will be appointed to see that the complaint has the proper hearing, and six of them will see that the defendant has due consideration. If the decision is not satisfactory there may be an appeal in writing to the First Presidency of the Church. Hence wrongs may be righted and justice meted out without the great expense of courts. Legal matters, of course, are left to the law.

A fifth great feature in the organization is the ecclesiastical group. Here we find opportunities for social welfare—so efficient that no little child need go hungry; no little boy need stay out of school because he has no shoes, nor any little girl because she has no dress. The welfare of each family may and should be known every week. There is a clearing house, by means of which a man out of work may be directed to employment. Should, however, efforts fail and the family be in need, there is ample source of means to supply that family's needs during the temporary period of unemployment.

The third distinguishing feature is the eternal nature of covenants and ceremonies.

This principle applied to marriage means simply this: When a young man and a young woman go to the marriage altar in the temple, each one knows that the other is worthy of that responsibility which they are assuming. He is worthy of fatherhood, for his life is uncontaminated by evils resulting from indulgence in social vices; and she is fit for motherhood because she has lived in accordance with the principles of purity emphasized by the Church. Their hearts are united in love, the sweetest bond, the noblest, most divine attribute of the human soul. As they kneel to solemnize that sacred vow, that union is formed, not until death parts them, but for time and all eternity.

The eternal nature of covenants and ceremonies goes further than the family relation. Every man who says "Our Father" acknowledges the brotherhood of man. The eternal nature of covenants precludes the loss of one of God's children; at least, every one will have a chance to accept the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and go on to perfection. And so temples are built in which vicarious work is performed for the salvation of those who had not an opportunity to hear the Gospel.

The Church in its conception of Deity recognizes God's personality, intelligence, love and fatherhood; in its organization, it presents the most efficient methods for human service, social uplift, and progressive steps toward universal peace and brotherhood; and in its idea of salvation it comprehends the whole of the human family.

CHURCH VALUES

EVERY phase of the Church seems to me to be applicable in some way to the welfare of the human family. When I consider the quorums of priesthood, I see in them an opportunity for developing that fraternity and brotherly love which is essential to the happiness of mankind. In these quorums and in the auxiliaries I see opportunities for intellectual development, for social efficiency. In the judicial phase of the Church I see an ample means of settling difficulties, of establishing harmony in society, of administering justice and of perpetuating peace among individuals and groups. In the ecclesiastical organization I see an opportunity for social welfare such as cannot be found in any other organization in the world. Thus do Christ and His Church become my ideal, my inspiration in life. I think it is the highest ideal for which man can strive.

Such faith in the Great Teacher and in His Church I consider a safe anchor for young people to possess, and I freely take issue with any man who deliberately destroys such a faith without offering something better in its place. There are occasionally men who pride themselves on being iconoclasts; but unfortunately, when they break their socalled images they supply nothing to replace them. They destroy ideals but offer no others. Such a one seems to me to be heaving anchor and starting out on the ocean of life before his course is even charted.

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC ADVANTAGES

WITH every progressive age of the world intellectual, noble-minded leaders have sought for a better way of living than that which is current. The good life, a social utopia, has been the quest of the ages. To sense the need of reform has been easy; to achieve it has been difficult and often well-nigh impossible. Ideas and suggestions proposed by the wisest of men have seldom been practical, often fantastical; yet in most cases the world in general has been made better by the disseminating of new ideas, even though the experiments proved failures at the time. In this respect the century just past, as the present one, was no exception.

The first half of the 19th century was marked by a general feeling of social unrest. Observant people became dissatisfied with social and economic conditions, and thinking men sought for remedial changes. In France, early in the century the fanciful theories of Charles Fourier were circulated. He attempted to outline the future history of our globe and of the human race for eighty thousand years. Today his books are not even read. In England and in the United States, Hugh Doherty and Albert Frisbane made modified experiments of Fourier's theories which resulted in failure. Robert Owen founded a commercial society at New Harmony, Indiana. Although supported by a fortune that he had amassed by intelligent and frugal efforts, and although he was encouraged by the Duke of Kent who became his patron, his scheme for the betterment of mankind came to naught in 1827. He returned to England where he tried several similar experiments with the same result.

George Ripley, a Unitarian minister, conceived a plan of "plain living and high thinking." He had as his associates such able men as Nathaniel Hawthorne, Charles A. Dana, afterward assistant Secretary of War in the United States, and John S. Dwight. Ripley's impulse was really religious rather than economic, and was due to a kind of monastic desire for withdrawal from the sordid world rather than a desire for a new society. He and his associates became the founders of what was known as the Brook Farm, a "Great Experiment" as it was called, to make the world an agreeable place to live in. It came to an end in 1846.

It has been charged by a cynical writer that the Mormon Church was but one more excrescence of the fermenting body politic of this religious social reaction.

It is true that religious excitement led Joseph Smith to seek the right church, the proper mode of worship, the right way to live. A desire to know this impelled the youth to seek the Lord for wisdom in the spring of 1820, the greatest result of the answer to his prayer being the organization of the Church, in the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr., on Tuesday, April 6, 1830.

In considering the Church purely as a social organization having as one object the amelioration of social ills and the advancement of mankind, one should keep in mind at the outset the facts:

For one hundred years this organization has survived financial panics, social upheavals, and religious turmoil, and today as a means of supplying the highest needs of mankind conforms to the best concepts of sociologists.

Government represents the authority of the group, usually exercised in an external, coercive way, to enforce the will of the group upon its individual members. That government is best which has as its aim the administration of justice, social well-being and the promotion of prosperity among its members.

Considered politically the world is upset at the present time in its opinion as to the best form of government. We are just witnessing the downfall of monarchies. Rising from these monarchial ruins have come the dictatorship of the proletariat in Soviet Russia, the Fascist regime in Italy, and democracy as exemplified chiefly in Great Britain in her dominions and in the United States. It is apparent that men are seeking for a better form of government than most nations now have. Will they find it in the government by a dictator or in the government by the people, or in a combination of the two?

"Efficiency and progress are favored" says Edwin A. Kirkpatrick, in Fundamentals of Sociology, "when the Government is such that the local community has a good deal of responsibility for its own affairs, and the central government has final authority to legalize those institutions and rules of procedure that have been shown to be permanently useful."

A careful analysis of the organization of the Church reveals the fact that it embodies all the strength of a strong central government, and every virtue and necessary safeguard of democracy. (1) It has the authority of priesthood without the vice of priestcraft, every worthy man being entitled to a place and a voice in the governing quorums. (2) It offers a system of education, universal and free in its application, the safety valve, the very heart and strength of a true democracy. (3) It offers a judicial system that extends justice and equal privileges to all, alike applicable to the poor and to the millionaire. (4) In its ecclesiastical groupings, efficiency and progress are enhanced because every local group attends to its own affairs, and yet each is so closely united with the central government that every mode of procedure proved useful and beneficial to the people can be adopted without delay for the good of the entire group.

Truly from the standpoint of enhancing efficiency and progress, the Church of Christ has that form of Government for which the nations today are seeking.
