David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Conference

THE GENERAL CONFERENCES

TO attend the General Conference of the Church, Latter-day Saints will come by train, by automobile and by airplane. In the vast throng are men and women who, in years gone by, came to conference in vehicles drawn by horses and mules. In my grandmother's day, she and others, on more than one occasion, walked from thirty-six to fifty miles, "and sang all the way!" But no matter what the means of conveyance, the significant thing is that for nearly a century people have come from all parts of the country to attend these annual and semi-annual gatherings.

Some will have traveled a thousand miles; others from one to five hundred miles; and many from distances that necessitate their leaving homes and business interests from three to ten days. Every one will bear his own expenses, including fares and hotel bills to and from the conference, his only impelling motive being to secure help and instruction that will make him more efficient in his efforts to make the world better and happier.

Thus, not only in numbers but in expression of true self-sacrificing service, the conference of the Church becomes one of the most significant religious gatherings in the world. Nearly every profession and vocation will be represented. In these assemblies, as in all other meetings of the Church of Christ, the man of brawn and muscle sits by the side of the man of intellectual attainments. The blacksmith, the plumber, the carpenter, the farmer, mingle in friendship and brotherhood with the doctor, the professor, the lawyer—all mutually respecting one another—united in one common noble purpose, and working in bonds of true brotherhood to accomplish it. Members they are of one great body bound by mutual love, whose lives are consecrated to the service of humanity.

The authoritative messages and instructions from the servants of God; the inspiration received for greater service in the cause of man's happiness and peace; the union of compassionate brotherhood that polishes and enlightens all classes—these and many other commendable features stamp the General Conferences of the Church as one of the great potential assemblies of the world, teaching in all its phases the great truth that "to live is not to live for one's self alone, but to live for one another." In this the Conference is but the Church in miniature—the true Christspirit of service permeates the whole.
