David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Courtship

COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE

SCIENCE and the wide dissemination of knowledge have given us three fundamental things which determine our lives. These are heredity, environment, and self-effort, or what we make of ourselves by our own determination.

What we are by heredity is determined; we cannot change it. We, who spring from families that have observed the Gospel teachings, have inherited good qualities as well as good names. The least we can do is to transmit the same inheritance to our children. We are recreant to our obligation to society if we do not give to our progeny all the nobility bequeathed to us by our ancestors.

In our early youth, our environment is largely determined for us, but I wish to refer to the thought that in courtship and marriage we can modify, aye, can control to a very great extent, our environment. Morally speaking, we can carve the very atmosphere in which we live.

But the most important of these elements now is personal effort—that which we make of ourselves.

Association is the element in which our hearts become warm. How important it is, then, that the companion of each be chosen wisely and prayerfully. The choosing of a companion determines our future happiness or unhappiness. It is a part of wisdom, therefore, to associate only with those from whose company you can select a life's partner with whom you will be congenial. If in such companionship you recognize negative characteristics in him who attracts you, try to let your judgment rule your heart. Don't fool yourselves, girls, by thinking that after you are married, a man will overcome evil habits or negative traits of character. Let him prove himself before marriage.

What are the positive characteristics for which we should seek?

Among the dominant characteristics a true lover should possess are: first, honesty; second, loyalty; third, chastity; and fourth, reverence.

Never marry a man who would deceive you, who would tell you a lie.

The real guiding principle, however, is the divinest attribute of the soul—love.

Young men and women have just entered into that state of life when they are driven by heaven-bestowed passions—I say God-given passions. There are young men, who, recognizing this fact, say: "Having them, why cannot we gratify them?" And they receive justification for such gratification sometimes from modern psychologists—false leaders who say that repression is wrong; that indulgence is the natural course of life. Do not be misled. I repeat, you are at that period of life in which your physical nature manifests itself, but you must also remember that God has given you, in that same period of life, powers of reasoning; he has given you judgment, and these for a divine purpose. Let reason and judgment be your guide—your balance.

Did you ever stand by the side of a power engine—throbbing, throbbing, throwing out its power and disseminating heat? On those stationary engines, you will find balances. If it were not for them the whole building might be blown up. But as the heat intensifies, those balances are thrown farther out and out, so that the whole thing is under control. So you have your reason, your judgment, as balances to your passion. Try not to lose these balances, or there may be an explosion that will wreck your life.

The seeds of a happy married life are sown in youth. Happiness does not begin at the altar; it begins during the period of youth and courtship. In the Church there is but a single standard. It applies to the boys as well as to the girls. If you follow that standard—indeed, if you will listen to the promptings of your best self, your clearest judgment, the whisperings of your own true heart, you will learn this lesson: That self-mastery during youth and the compliance with the single standard of morality is (1) the source of virile manhood; (2) the crown of beautiful womanhood; (3) the foundation of a happy home; and (4) the contributing factor to the strength and perpetuity of the race!
