David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Death

LIFE AFTER DEATH

"OH, if I only knew!"

Such was the cry of a grief-stricken mother who clasped the silent, prostrate body of a beloved son. In the perfect bloom of health and youthful vigor he had bounded from her presence to join his playmates, that Fourth of July morning, in the celebration of the national holiday. Unfortunately, at that time, firecrackers and other explosives constituted part of that celebration. An accident—an explosion—a few lingering hours of suffering—and her boy lay still in death! A true, dear friend, whose vision, even in sorrow, penetrated the seemingly impenetrable gloom that hung over the household, said comfortingly:

"Be brave, Ann. This loss, to you as terrible as it is sudden, is but temporary. Your boy still lives and you will again meet him."

"Oh, if I only knew!" came the yearning expression from her questioning soul.

If she only knew that death is not an eternal abyss—if she only knew that beyond the grave her son possessed his loving personality, radiant boyhood, intelligence, and eternal life! If she only knew this, what comfort would replace her poignant grief!

That the spirit of man passes triumphantly through the portal of death into everlasting life is one of the glorious messages given by Christ our Redeemer. To Him this earthly career is but a day, and its closing but the setting of life's sun; death but a sleep, followed by a glorious awakening in the morning of an eternal realm. When Mary and Martha saw their brother only in the dark and silent tomb, Christ saw him still a living being. This fact he expressed in the two words, "Lazarus sleepeth."

The restoration of Lazarus at the grave, the reuniting of the spirit and the body, was but the foreshadowing of the resurrection of the Christ, an event commemorated at Easter time by Christians throughout the whole world. If everyone participating in Easter services "only knew" that the crucified Christ actually rose the third day from the tomb—that after having greeted others and mingled with others in the Spirit World, His spirit did again reanimate His pierced body, and after sojourning among men for the space of forty days, ascended a glorified soul to His Father, what benign peace could come to souls now troubled with doubt and uncertainty! While it is true that knowledge of individual immortality does not depend upon the actuality of the resurrection of Jesus, yet the establishment of the fact that He arose from the grave and communicated with His disciples "would furnish in many ways the strongest support to that hope."

"The direct evidence that the tomb could not hold Jesus is threefold: (1) the marvelous transformation in the spirit and work of his disciples; (2) the direct testimony of the earliest New Testament writer, Paul; and (3) the practically universal belief of the resurrection found in the canonical and extra-canonical Gospels, but also in its life and activity through the succeeding centuries. This evidence rests not merely upon historical documents, but is written in the life of the great civilized nations during the intervening centuries."

Although there is missing the conclusion of the most important paragraph of the recently-discovered Gospel of Peter, yet we are justified in adding to Paul's direct testimony the direct testimony of Peter, as follows: "But I, Simon Peter and Andrew my brother, took our nets and went on the sea. And with us was Levi, the son of Alpheus," from which "it may be inferred with great probability that the original described an appearance of Jesus to Peter."

More important even than the direct evidence furnished by Paul, of the reality of Jesus' resurrection, is the personal testimony of Joseph Smith, who says, "I saw two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spoke to me, calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other, "This is my beloved Son, hear him!'"

In the light of such unimpeachable testimony as given by the ancient apostles—testimony dating from a few years subsequent to the event itself—in the light of that most marvelous revelation in this age of the living Christ, it seems difficult indeed to understand how men can still reject Him, and doubt the immortality of man.

If only they would "do His will" instead of looking hopelessly at the dark and gloomy tomb, they would turn their eyes heavenward and know that "Christ is risen"!

On life's vast ocean diversely we sail, Reason the card, but passion is the gale; Nor God alone in the still calm we find, He mounts the storm, and walks upon the wind. —Pope

DEATH NOT VICTORIOUS

IN WHATEVER form death approaches us, we generally look upon him as relentlessly cruel. Occasionally we perceive an act of friendliness about him, such as when he offers relief from helplessness or lingering suffering; but most frequently we regard him as a heartless enemy.

In all his approaches, he comes as a conqueror — striking down ruthlessly the babe in its mother's arms, as cruel frost takes the budding rose. The youth also full of glorious promises of fruitful manhood and womanhood; the loving mother whose protecting care and love are needed for her dependent children; or their father whose provident help is needed for the support of loved ones — all who come in his pathway death strikes indiscriminately.

Death is the cessation of physical life — the total and permanent cessation of the functions of mortal actions of an organism as in the complete stoppage of the functions in the brain and the organs of respiration and circulation. If we consider death as the cessation in any of the parts of an organism, we may define it as a failure to respond to one's environment.

In this sense, the person who is sightless, who is unresponsive to the waves of ether reflected from the objects in the physical environment, is dead to the world of sight. Thus it is also to the person who is deaf to the world of sound. So it is also with the one who becomes paralyzed in limb, whose sense of touch becomes atrophied. Yet so long as the brain functions and the heart beats we do not consider dead any person so afflicted. Helen Keller when a child was blind, deaf and speechless. Yet there was that something within her which longed for freedom, as the caged bird dashing itself against the wires of imprisonment. Death is not conqueror until he has caused all organs to cease action. At that very moment he ceases to be conqueror and the one he hoped to conquer becomes victorious.

Death then becomes the door to immortality.

There are three ways in which men live after death:

First, in memory of deeds and service wrought. As harmony lingers after the notes are sounded, as the sky is lighted along the path of the fallen star, as the waves from the spot where the rock sank grow ever wider and wider until the furthest shores are touched, so the influence of a loved one whose physical organs have ceased to function continues to reverberate in the lives and memory of all who knew him.

A second way in which a man lives though his functionless body sleeps, is in the perpetuation of his life through the race. Parent's looks, gestures, quirks of mentality, spiritual characteristics are transmitted to the children. Largely what men are today, the next generation will be.

The third way that life conquers death is in its becoming free from the physical house in which it has lived. If a man lived only in deeds, then there would inevitably come a time when posterity would cease to mention those deeds or even to recall them. So in that sense, death would be victorious.

True immortality is found only in the persistence of personality after death. Confident that he would thus live after his body had ceased to function in the physical world, John Quincy Adams thus expressed himself to a friend on immortality. When the friend inquired how he was, the venerable man replied:

Thank you! John Quincy Adams himself is well, sir, quite well, I thank you. But the house in which he lives at present is becoming dilapidated. It is tottering upon its foundations. Time and the seasons have nearly destroyed it. The roof is pretty well worn out. Its walls are much shattered, and it trembles with every wind. The old tenement is becoming almost uninhabitable, and I think John Quincy Adams will have to move out of it soon; but he himself is quite well, sir, quite well.

"Be of good cheer," said the Man of Galilee to His disciples when He was about to leave this mortal stage to go to the world beyond. "In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." And the last enemy that He put under his feet was death. Christ came with a divine message of man's immortality. For this we need not be dependent upon the stories of Lazarus, the widow's son, or the twelve-year-old daughter of Jairus, for we have the life, death and resurrection of the Savior Himself—a personal exemplification of the divine message, "I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live."

To our departed loved ones, then, let us apply the words of the Savior to His apostles: "I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am ye may be also."

With such divine assurance in our hearts we face the inevitable with grief assuaged, and with unfaltering faith we can re-echo the victorious cry of the apostle, "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?"

DEATH OF A FRIEND

HIS labors were characterized by zeal, courage, and indefatigable effort; his daily life, by sincerity, undeviating integrity, dignified humility, and an earnest desire to make better and happier all who came within the radiance of his life. His appreciation of his parentage, his loyalty to the Church, his unclouded realization of possessing pure desires, gave him a strength of character that was admirable. In dealing with his own shortcomings or physical ailment, he was stern and unyielding; when dealing with others, he was kind and charitable.

He proved himself an able and fearless defender of the Truth. His frank, open nature, sound judgment, and clear exposition of the principles of the Gospel won the respect and admiration even of those who opposed him.

Death has no claim upon such as he. To him it is "but passing through a dark entry, out of one little dusky room of his father's house, into another that is fair and large, lightsome and glorious, and divinely entertaining." As a true servant of Christ, he has won the welcome:

"Well done, thou good and faithful servant . . ."
