David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Drama

THROUGHOUT the years many people, particularly church -going people, have considered the stage more of an evil than a good influence, one worker going so far as to declare that if one accept the Bible, one must condemn the stage, or vice versa — "The same individual cannot defend both." Such an extreme attitude, of course, condemns the theatre as being "from first to last an evil place."

The theatre can be made a wholesome means of recreation and entertainment, or it can be used to present the sensual and base in human nature. Hamlet was right when he said,

The purpose of playing, both at first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show Virtue her own feature; scorn, her own image; and the very age and body of the time, his form and pressure.

Now, as there are some human relations in life which are proper in privacy but objectionable in the presence of others, so there are phases of social relations which never should be depicted on the stage. Some theatre owners justify such objectionable presentations by claiming that the "public demands them." The fact is that only the low and vulgar, whose daily thoughts and actions are so tinctured, are pleasantly entertained by vulgarity, obscenity, or even the depicting of the "shady" side of society.

It is the duty of the M.I.A. to present in the drama that which is not only entertaining but uplifting and educational — plays that emphasize the best in human relations rather than the lowest. This should be done for several reasons; two, particularly:

In the first place, young people memorizing their roles may retain throughout their lives passages learned and repeated in these home dramatics. As I write this line, there come to mind lines in "Eugene Aram," presented by an M.I.A. group in Huntsville, sixty years ago.

Ye mystic lights — worlds upon worlds — infinite, incalculable — Can we look upon you, note your appointed order and your unwavering course, and not feel that we are indeed the poorest puppets of an all-pervading and resistless destiny?

Over sixty years — and the sentiments, and even the scenes still remain!

A second reason, and more important, for presenting meritorious plays is their effect upon the audience. To young people especially, a well-written, well-enacted play is not only a "mirror" of nature — it is reality itself; and formative impressions are made for good or ill.

The drama is a very important phase of the M.I.A. It is entertaining, contributes to social refinement and to educational development. It should create a taste for the best and highest in literature and in life.
