David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Easter

IF A MAN DIE, SHALL HE LIVE AGAIN?

SINCE man in his forgetfulness of immortality first looked with wonderment at the starry heavens or sought in vain to solve the mystery of his being, there has harbored in every intelligent human being's mind the age-old query propounded by Job: "If a man die, shall he live again?"

It is the question of the ages, and though divine messages, like flashes from the eternal, gave to every generation an affirmative answer, yet millions throughout the centuries refused to accept the light as authentic, and accordingly lived their alloted time in doubt and died in dreaded darkness; because, they reasoned, no one had ever returned from the realm beyond the grave. "For forty centuries, in one unbroken column, the race of man had been marching into the shadows. And of all the millions who had descended into the shadowed valley, not one had ever returned. . . . There was in all earth's area not one empty grave."

The most significant event, therefore, in all human history, was the discovery of the empty tomb on that memorable first day of the week, when the answer to the eternal yearning of millions of souls was given in the immortal testimony:

"Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: He is risen: He is not here; behold the place where they laid Him."

Many years before Christ made immortality a reality, men heralded the return of spring with rejoicing and festivity, and called their celebration Easter. To Christians, the resurrection revealed an eternal spring for the spirit of man — the passing of the winter of doubt, and the heralding of man's new birth into immortality. It seemed appropriate, therefore, for the early followers of the risen Lord to associate with the great spring festival the demonstrated reality of Christ's victory over death. Formerly, the glorious truth of this greatest of all miracles was cheerfully and gently borne into every soul by the salutation, "Christ is risen," and by the prompt response, "He is risen indeed."

In this age when the negative answer to the ever recurring question, Is there life after death? begins in doubt to oppress men's souls, we can awaken the heart to gladness by listening on this Easter morning to "the testimony, last of all, which we give Him: That He lives!"

Truly He lives, the resurrected and glorified being, and since He lives, so do our departed loved ones, and so shall we.

This is the divine message now associated with the great spring festival, Easter.

Christ the Lord is risen today, Sons of men and angels say, Raise your joys and triumphs high, Sing ye heavens and earth reply.

EASTER MESSAGE

FOR many centuries, the resurrection of Jesus Christ has been celebrated at Easter, a spring festival that has been adopted from the Pagan celebration given in honor of Astarte or Eostro, a Saxon goddess corresponding to the Ashtoreth of Syria. The name, origin, and time of this celebration are not so important as the reality of the event that now gives this festival significance.

Is it a fact that Christ did take up His body and appear as a glorified resurrected being? Prove this to be true and you answer the question of the ages, "If a man die, shall he live again?"

That the literal resurrection from the grave was a reality to the disciples who knew Christ intimately is a certainty. In their minds there was absolutely no doubt. They were witnesses of the fact. They knew, because their eyes beheld, their ears heard, their hands felt the corporeal presence of the risen Redeemer.

The deep significance of their testimony may be better understood when we realize that with Jesus' death the apostles were stricken with gloom. When He was crucified their hopes all but died. That His death was a reality to the disciples is shown in their intense grief, in the statement of Thomas, in the moral perplexity of Peter, and in the evident preparations for a permanent burial of their Master. Notwithstanding the often repeated assurance of Christ that He would return to them after death the apostles seemed not to have accepted or at least not comprehended Christ's statement as a literal fact. At the crucifixion they were frightened and discouraged. For two and a half years they had been upheld and inspired by Christ's presence. But now He was gone. They were left alone, and they seemed confused, helpless, panic-stricken. Only John stood by the cross.

Not with timidity, not with feelings of doubt, and gloom, and discouragement is a skeptical world made to believe. Such wavering, despairing minds as the apostles possessed on the day of the crucifixion could never have stirred people to accept an unpopular belief, and to die martyrs to the cause.

What was it that suddenly changed these disciples to confident, fearless, heroic preachers of the gospel of Jesus Christ? It was the revelation that Christ had risen from the grave. His promises had been kept, His Messianic mission fulfilled.

On the evidence of these unprejudiced, unexpectant, incredulous witnesses, faith in the resurrection has its impregnable foundation.

The Church stands with Peter, with Paul, with James, and with all the other apostles who accepted the resurrection not only as being literally true but as the consummation of Christ's divine mission on earth. Other great religious leaders among the nations of the world since history began have taught virtue and temperance, self-mastery and service, obedience to righteousness and duty; some have taught a belief in one supreme ruler and in a hereafter, but only Christ broke the seal of the grave and revealed death as the door to immortality and eternal life.

Since Christ lived after death, so shall men, each one taking that place in the next world for which he is best fitted. Since love is as eternal as life, the message of the resurrection is the most comforting, the most glorious ever given to man; for when death takes a loved one from us, we can look with assurance into the open grave and say, "He is not here; he has risen."
