David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Education

SPIRITUAL EDUCATION

THE greatest education in the world is spiritual education, spiritual development. I always have thought that. I still think so. That which develops character should be the aim of every public school in the United States, every high school, every college, every university.

Emerson, that great thinker, was right when he said: "Character is higher than intellect. A great soul will be fit to live as well as to think." If that were the real aim, the real purpose, of all our institutions of learning throughout the United States, and we had the strongest men and the ablest women as teachers, instructors, and directors, we should have less difficulty with lawlessness, and the 16 billion dollars that we are now spending annually to take care of delinquents and criminals could be reduced and the amount thus saved could go to salaries and make teaching worthwhile, even financially.

The other day, President Eisenhower presented his Foreign Aid message to the Congress of the United States. After stating that our economy cannot be strong and continue to expand without the development of helpful economic conditions in other free nations, and without a continuous expansion of international trade, and further, after stressing the necessity of destroying the conditions under which totalitarianism grows—poverty, illiteracy, hunger, and disease—he concluded by making the following significant statement:

"Nor can we hope for enduring peace until the spiritual aspirations of mankind for liberty and opportunity and growth are recognized as prior to and paramount to the material appetites which Communism exploits."

The President of the United States touched on the most important feature, the greatest principle contributing to peace.

I recognize the practicality of giving the people food. I recognize the necessity of helping them to produce, to improve their economic conditions. That is the practical phase. But we shall never have peace until we recognize what the President stated in the next to the last paragraph of that great presentation to Congress.

Burns expressed it several hundred years ago:

Nae treasures, nor pleasure, Could make us happy lang; The heart ay's the part ay That makes us right or wrang.

EDUCATION OF YOUTH

THE great influencing factor in the class room is the teacher, his personality, what he thinks, not just what he says, but what he is, really and truly in his heart—this is what influences his students.

On the proper education of youth depend the permanency and purity of the home, the safety and the perpetuity of our nation. The parent gives the child an opportunity to live; the teacher enables him to live well.

It is the teacher's responsibility to awaken in the child a love for truth, a desire to seek happiness in life through righteous living. A child misdirected may be the loss to mankind of an eminent scientist, a discoverer of new truths, a man whose light and vision might have hastened that future day of universal brotherhood and peace. Most truly is a child a fragile beginning of a mighty end. One of the greatest of life's tragedies is to see such a possible ending shattered in its early beginning.

Every person who enters the realm of teaching assumes the responsibility of co-operating with every youth under his tuition to make out of the living, breathing soul an upright character. The responsibility of the teacher, however, does not end in his duty to teach truth positively. He enters the realm of what not to do as well as the realm of what to do. In the garden of the human soul, as in the fields of human endeavor, there are thorns and thistles as well as flowers and useful plants. He merits condemnation who would crush in a boy's mind a flower of truth and sow in its stead a seed of error.

I think there is not a normal child living who does not at some time or other in his life face the eternal questions: "Where did we come from?" "Why are we here?" "Where do we go from here?" When the youth questioningly pours out his heart to a teacher in the Church, the teacher can answer unhesitatingly in accordance with the revealed word of God.

To enter the soul of a boy in that critical period and to sow the seed of truth, of faith, instead of doubt is the teacher's responsibility. Impress the boy with the fact that conformity to the Lord's word or law will invariably contribute to man's happiness and salvation. This is true. In other words, there is eternally operating in the moral world a law of compensation and retribution in actual degree to the extent of obedience or disobedience. In this sense, of course, the word "law" has a deeper significance than a rule of dictum prescribed by authority for human action. It means rather a uniform order of sequence.

Thoughts are the seeds of acts and precede them. Mere compliance with the word of the Lord without a corresponding inward desire will avail but little. The Savior's constant desire and effort were to implant in the mind right thoughts, pure motives, noble ideals, knowing full well that right words and actions would inevitably follow. He taught, and modern physiology and psychology confirm, that hate and jealousy, and other evil passions, destroy a man's physical vigor and efficiency.

What a man continually thinks about determines his actions in times of opportunity and stress. A man's reaction to his appetites and impulses when they are aroused gives the measure of that man's character. In these reactions are revealed the man's power to govern, or his forced servility to yield.

Man is endowed with appetites and passions for the preservation of his life and the perpetuation of his kind. These, when held under proper subjection, contribute to happiness and comfort, but when used for mere gratification, lead to misery and moral degradation.

Health, happiness, peace of mind and character come through self-restraint. The only thing which places man above the beast of the field is his possession of spiritual gifts. Man's earthly existence is but a test as to whether he will concentrate his efforts, his mind, his soul, upon things which will contribute to the comfort and gratification of his physical instincts and passions, or whether he will make as his life's aims and purposes the acquisition of spiritual qualities.

If the student becomes conscious of the operation of this law, the teacher may implant in him a faith that will be an anchor to his soul.

It is the responsibility and duty of a teacher as he appears before his class to have a hopeful attitude and a pleasing appearance. Let the teacher radiate confidence and faith in what he teaches and cherish an abiding assurance that Truth will eventually triumph.

EDUCATION—THE BEST INVESTMENT

THE fostering of full economic freedom lies at the base of our liberties. Only in perpetuating economic freedom can our social, political, and religious liberties be preserved. Our hope of preserving our liberties, our way of life, lies in true education.

Education is an investment, not an expense. The most potent influence in training our youth to cherish life, to keep their word of honor, to have increased respect for humankind and love of justice, is the life and personality of the teacher. If the people of the United States would have the highest returns for their financial investment in education, they must as a matter of sound business judgment have in all our schools, teachers of outstanding leadership and wholesome influence.

It is time for the statesmen, leading businessmen of our country, to face that situation! If we had just such teachers in every class through our grade schools, our high schools, our colleges, and our universities, we could reduce the cost of crime to the minimum. It could not be otherwise, and if we neglect it, we merely turn out into society students who are void of loyalty to their country, who look upon depradation on society as clever, and their wilful violation of the law as entirely justifiable. The main function of education is the preservation and improvement of the democratic way of life.

To achieve this goal, teachers must teach students, not subjects alone; students will acquire subjects. A good teacher realizes that his most important purpose in teaching is—

First, to inspire the student to love study; awaken within him a desire to rise above himself.

Second, to teach the student how to study; train him to think. Or, in other words, inspire the student to love truth, and second, teach him how to find it. Accomplish that, and the student will do the rest, as he should.

I know that we shall still be facing the eternal question, "What is truth?" but in the search to find it, the soul rejoices.

THE PARAMOUNT PURPOSE

Now Morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime

Advancing, sow'd the earth with orient pearl. (Milton)

IF I were to apply the entrance of well-trained youth into the streaming ranks of humanity to that poetic picture of the breaking upon the world of the effulgent light of morning, you would accuse me of making a strained comparison, of attempting to give to education an unmerited, overestimated value.

Yet, when I picture thirty million undergraduates and pupils in our public schools, I can but think that if every graduate and every child were influenced even in a slight degree to seek a higher and better life, the moral tone of our nation would be improved, and the foundation of our government made more secure.

Of course, the annual influence of that army of young people upon society is indeterminable and some may claim comparatively infinitesimal, but infinitesimal or not, it is an influence which, howsoever imperceptible, is constantly raising or lowering the moral and intellectual standards of communities.

Our nation is facing stupendously critical problems, not the least of which is the present-day indifference toward the need of better training and proper education of youth—America's most precious asset, her greatest safeguard, her most important, most potentially profitable enterprise!

Students enter school primarily to gain economic or social advantage. But this aim is not always achieved, nor is it, nor should it be, the highest purpose of education. However, we must not underestimate the value of obtaining an education for a livelihood. Education for economic advancement is a good investment for the individual as well as for the State.

To train childhood along these conventional lines there was expended on education, including high schools, during 1950, five billion dollars. At first thought this seems to be a great sum of money—as much as the American people spend on horse racing every year! In that same period it is estimated that crime and criminals cost the government five times that amount.

Our country's greatest asset is its manhood. Upon that depends not only the survival of the individual freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution and Bill of Rights, and all other ideals for which the founders of the Republic fought and died, but the survival of the best that we cherish in present-day civilization throughout the world.

Only through proper education can these fundamental principles become fixed and guiding influences in the lives of human beings. Our educational system will radiate such principles just to the extent that we employ in our public schools, high schools, colleges, and universities men and women who are not only eminent in their particular professions, but loyal to the Constitution of our land, influential as leaders, noble in character. The most potent influence in training our youth to cherish life, to keep their word of honor, to have increased respect for human kind and love of justice, is the life and personality of the teacher.

The contribution of general education to the industrial and commercial greatness of the country is obvious on every hand—in research laboratories, in increased productivity of farms, in achievements of electrical, physical, chemical, engineering sciences, in harnessing, either for the benefit or destruction of man, the boundless force of atomic energy. But what true education has done and may do to awaken in the human heart a sense of the end and aim of human existence on this earth, what it has done to raise the standard of citizenship, how it has helped to make living happier by contributing to the prosperity, peace, and security of our own country, are beyond evaluation!

I look upon all recipients of true education as individuals and groups radiating an influence that makes less dense and ineffective the darkness of ignorance, of suspicion, of hatred, of bigotry, avarice and greed that continue to envelop in darkness the lives of men.

EDUCATION FOR CITIZENSHIP

WHEN I speak of Citizenship, I have in mind citizenship not in a world confederation, to which ideal manifestly mankind has not yet attained, but citizenship of the United States of America, where, as we all know, the public schools are created and regulated by law and financed by public funds. The policies of the schools are determined by public officials who are selected either directly or indirectly by the people. These schools are public not only in control and support, but also in terms of their availability to all.

By law, the public schools of this nation must be nondenominational. They can have no part in securing acceptance of any one of the numerous systems of belief regarding a supernatural power and the relation of mankind thereto. That restriction applies to the atheist as well as to the believer in God. The scientist who tells young people that religious faith is to be condemned because it is "unscientific" is violating the Constitution of the state and of the nation as much as he who would take advantage of his position to advocate the superiority of any religion.

Teachers can and should without promoting any particular belief or non-belief encourage pupils to regard with approval participation in religious activities appropriate to their home and family background.

A general objective of education is to help young people develop healthful, emotional, social attitudes. Nobody will disagree with that as a general statement; but let us for a moment be a little more specific: Education for citizenship demands the discharge of four basic obligations:

I. Obligation to Teach the Proverbial "Three R's."

In an educational platform for the public schools (1952) this obligation is given first importance. The phases of education for which the schools have primary or chief responsibility include reading and writing, arithmetic, spelling, and the basic essentials of oral and written composition, the social studies (geography, history, and civics), and science. Reading is an important, primary responsibility of the schools. And equally important is the responsibility of the grade and the high schools to teach pupils to speak grammatically. The young man who said, "I hain't studied no grammar, but I can talk just as good as them which has," would have been a more creditable citizen had he been a better representative of our school training.

Legible handwriting, proficiency in arithmetic for ordinary needs, and the ability to spell one's writing vocabulary are also essential elements of education for which the schools accept primary responsibility.

These opportunities are open to all children, irrespective of creed, color, social or financial standing. Notwithstanding all this, it is reported that there are three million American children of school age not in school, and two million more who are in schools in which they are receiving an inadequate, sub-standard education. Five million children, or even two million children, not being trained for citizenship is a condition to justify grave concern, especially when we realize that the success of our republican form of government depends upon an intelligent electorate. The nation cannot succeed as it should, either politically or morally, half educated, half illiterate.

II. Efficient Leadership.

A second major responsibility of the schools from grades to the university is to develop efficient leadership, a leadership that is loyal to the best interests of the country.

A paramount necessity in discharging this responsibility is the securing of a sufficient number of leader-teachers to give to an ever-increasing school population even the rudiments of a public school training. The kind of leaders to whom we should like to entrust our children has been clearly set forth as follows by Dr. Ralph McDonald, who concludes that "the teachers of our young must be strong and vigorous, keen of intellect, balanced in outlook, superior in personality traits, deep-rooted in their spiritual foundations. They must have a passionate devotion to human freedom and be anchored to an abiding faith in the improvability of man. To such an outstanding personality must be added education in the heritage of the human race, in a loving understanding of human growth and development, in precepts of democracy, in the lore of the school and in the skills of teaching."

The dignity, the responsibility of the profession merit just such teacher-leaders—models for pupils to pattern after—ideals for youth to emulate—their guides—their inspiration. If the people—the stockholders in this most important business in the nation, the proper rearing of our children—would demand such outstanding teachers in our schools, the present ratio between what the nation spends annually for education and for crime would be materially changed: $6,000,000,000 last year, the cost of education—$20,000,000,000, the cost of crime!

If we spent $12,000,000,000 for efficient teacher-leaders and $14,000,000,000 for crime (assuming that the increased expenditure for educational leaders would reduce the cost of crime), it would cost no more, and make a better citizenry.

"Wishful thinking," you say,—"a dream!"

Is it a dream—and nothing more This faith, That nerves our brain to thought —our hands to work For that great day when wars shall cease and men Shall live as brothers in a unity of Love Live in a world made splendid?

Proper education can make both dreams realities!

But it is not only in educational endeavor that the nation needs leaders. From our high schools, junior colleges, and universities, we must develop leaders in other fields of endeavor.

III. Training for the American Way of Life.

Education for citizenship requires more emphasis upon the advantages and blessings of the American Way of Life. Next to life itself freedom is man's most cherished possession. When you and I were students we thrilled with Patrick Henry's words: "I know not what course others may take; but as for me, give me liberty, or give me death!" Our interpretation of liberty then was largely confined to the idea of the Colonies freeing themselves from the autocratic government of King George III. Little or nothing was said about freedom to write, to speak, to work, to plant, to sow, to sell, to build—in fact, to do as we pleased so long as we did not infringe upon the rights and freedom of others. You and I were free individuals living in a government that would protect us in our life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. We accepted our way of life as we did the sunshine from Heaven, as a free gift to which we were entitled. Today millions of children are taught that each life belongs not to himself, but to the State, and the advocates of this false theory are energetic in seeing to it that every child is thoroughly indoctrinated with it.

Communism is antagonistic to the American way of life. Its avowed purpose is to destroy belief in God and free enterprise. In education for citizenship, therefore, why should we not see to it that every child in America is taught the superiority of our Constitution and the sacredness of the freedom of the individual? Such definite instruction is not in violation of either the Federal or the State Constitution. Teach that free enterprise is the right to open a gas station or a grocery store, or to buy a farm if you want to be your own boss, or to change your job if you do not like the man for whom you work. Under Communism you work where you are told, and you live and die bossed by hard-fisted bureaucrats who tell you every move you dare make. Free enterprise is the right to lock your door at night. In Communist countries the dread secret police can break it down any time they like.

IV. More Emphasis Upon Moral and Spiritual Values.

Education for citizenship demands more emphasis upon moral and spiritual values. Our government was founded on faith in a Supreme Being as evidenced by the Mayflower Compact, the Declaration of Independence, by George Washington, and Benjamin Franklin in the Constitutional Convention, and by a hundred other incidents prior to, during, and following the birth of this republic. Said the Father of our Country: "We have raised a standard to which the good and wise can repair; the event is in the hands of God."

And Benjamin Franklin, recognizing the apparent inability of the Convention to solve perplexing problems confronting it, stated his faith in an overruling Providence and his assurance that God will answer prayer: "The longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth: That God governs in the affairs of men. And if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without His notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without His aid?" God and individual freedom are fundamental principles in our glorious Republic, and our obligation is to keep in our schools a reverence for Deity and respect for the dignity of the individual man.

I love the Stars and Stripes, and the American Way of Life. I have faith in the Constitution of the United States. I believe that only through a truly educated citizenry can the ideals that inspired the Founding Fathers of our nation be preserved and perpetuated.

I believe that four fundamental elements in such an education are:

May our educational system from grade school to university ever seek and merit His divine guidance!

EDUCATION BEYOND VOCATION

ON the morning of January 26, 1957, it was my privilege for the first time to go through the new Union Building. To say that I was surprised at its extensiveness and its serviceability but feebly expresses my feelings—I was astonished!

Its purposes in general were named as being both social and educational. It is of its educational value that I wish to speak.

It is claimed by some that the basic ideals of education should be performed outside the University. The University should be devoted to advanced study, professional training, research, and education of leaders. Therefore, it must be limited, if it proposes to succeed in any of these tasks, to those who have demonstrated their capacity for advanced study, professional training, research, or leadership.

Notwithstanding this claim, the fact remains that a university constantly and continuously contributes to this fundamental purpose of true education—that of development of character and citizenship. No matter what the phase of university study or research, there is ever-present in the student's mind—sometimes faintly, sometimes dominantly—what has been observed as "a sense of the end and aim of human existence on this earth."

Leading toward the students' answers to this ever-present question is a teacher's constant influence.

There are three groups of motivating influences in education contributing to the education of the student: first, the faculty; second, the buildings, research laboratories, libraries, etc.; third, human relations.

Through a hundred years these influences have been operative upon the student body of the University of Utah. On November 11, 1850, when the school opened there was only one teacher, few books, and no buildings. Only one prime, fundamental object of the University was named—that of preparing leaders.

The influence of a good teacher is incalculable. I have said elsewhere: Imagine what it would mean to the national integrity of America if every one of the half million graduates, in addition to his having earned his diploma, could cherish the memory of a noble character of whom throughout the years he could say as a Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States said of one who influenced his University career, "I admired him for his learning, loved him for his goodness, profited greatly from both. He believed that scholastic attainments were better than riches, but that better than either were faith, love, charity, clean living, clean thinking, loyalty, tolerance, and all the other attributes that combine to constitute the most precious of all possessions—good character."

When means, instruments, games, rooms, etc., are not provided, students will find ways and means. During the visit to the Union Building of which I have already made mention, there were awakened in memory extra-curricular experiences of sixty years ago. In place of the well-furnished rooms for social communications as now provided, I recalled the huge boulders under the trees on the lawn facing Second West—also the larger vacant spot on the northwest of the old building on which we held football practice. I heard in memory the Coach's yell, "Who missed that tackle?" and my answer, "I did," and with that the sense that a similar lackadaisical effort that made me miss the tackle, in a contest might lose the game. A true sportsman gives his best to his task, and to the good name and honor of his school.

The "Little Theatre" recalled "Room 22" in which the Normal Society met and by the law of association of ideas the play "Eugene Aram," and his comment on the immensity of the heavens: "Ye mystic lights; worlds upon worlds, infinite, incalculable!—Can we look upon you, note your appointed order and your unvarying course, and not feel that we are indeed the poorest puppets of an all-pervading and resistless destiny?"

As a contributing factor to the social life of the students, the Union Building is in these modern days indispensable; as a means of education beyond vocation, most effective.
