David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Environment

HELPFUL ENVIRONMENT

THE Church has always encouraged legitimate amusements. Helpful environment has been in the Church ever since its organization. Back in the days of Nauvoo we find the drama introduced by the Prophet Joseph. We find acting in that drama men who later became prominent leaders in the Church. Among them was the man who succeeded the Prophet Joseph, Brigham Young. He, imbued with the necessity of influencing the people in their amusements and of using their recreation as a means of instilling virtue, integrity, and honesty, brought to these valleys that spirit. Why, even on the plains, after a day's march, the wagons were drawn up in a circle, a man with the violin would take his place by the campfire and there on the prairie the sturdy Pioneers would join hands in a dance, and participate in amusement that fostered the spirit of the Gospel. Two years had not passed after their entrance into the "Valley" before they built the "bowery," and there presented undoubtedly the first drama that was ever given in the West.

Later they built the Social Hall. Perhaps there are those in the audience today who, after listening to the opening prayer, joined hands in the cotillion, dancing in a spirit best understood by the remarks of President Brigham Young, who once said, in substance: "The atmosphere of the dance should be such that if any elder be called from the party to go to administer to a sick person, he could leave with the same spirit that he would go from his elders' quorum meeting." All over this land, today, in the excellent community centers established by those early pioneers, you will find the amusements characteristic of the spirit of the community, fathers, mothers, boys and girls, mingling together in the dance, in the drama, and in other social functions, the modifying and uplifting influence of the Church permeating all gatherings.

BETTER ENVIRONMENT

If there is righteousness in the heart, there will be beauty in the character. If there is beauty in the character, there will be harmony in the home. If there is harmony in the home, there will be order in society, And if there is order in society, there will be peace in the world. (Ancient proverb)

FROM the pulpit and public press, even in homes and social circles, we hear discouraging comments on the delinquency of Youth.

If there is concern about the recalcitrance of boys and girls, this generation is no exception to those which have preceded it. Our great-grandfathers and their great-grandfathers worried about the forwardness and recklessness of their children, and the bleakness of their future just as we do today.

Speaking generally, I have confidence in our young people. Youth is influenced by example and environment. Dominating groups exerting this influence are the home, the church, the school, social circles, and civic conditions.

There are too many delinquent fathers and mothers. Our homes are the centers that determine the type of our citizenry. To dignify home and parenthood is one of the noblest aims of human society. Quarreling among parents and children, faultfinding, backbiting, smoking cigarettes, drinking intoxicating liquors, using profane language make a home environment that contributes to delinquency. No parent can consistently teach faith in Christ who profanes the name of Deity. Profanity is never heard in the well-ordered home. Swearing is a vice that bespeaks a low standard of breeding. Blasphemous exclamations drive out all spirit of reverence. Irreverence is always a mark of delinquency.

The great Chinese philosopher, as a minister of crime, is reported to have set free a son who had offended the canon of filial behavior, on the ground that the father who had so ill-taught him was the one to blame. Said he, "When superiors fail in their duty, should inferiors die? This father never taught his son to be filial. To act upon this charge would be to kill the innocent."

It is the duty of the Church to render such assistance as is possible; first, to find these delinquents, and then to awaken higher ideals in daily living and to inspire faith in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

But only a small percentage of children and youth ever come in contact with the Church. In New York alone fifty thousand children are unaffiliated with any Church. A potent factor, therefore, in character development is the public school.

To these democratic institutions come children from all kinds of homes, including the delinquent. All I can say this morning is that every teacher in church and in school should realize that he has the moral as well as the assigned responsibility to impress upon his students the true value of the highest and noblest things in life.

With the great masses of sensationalism and artificial stimulation to which the child of today is subjected in this age of mechanical wonders, it is of the gravest importance that society realize that it is only in the example of sincere living upon the part of the individual members of society that the child finds a dynamic impulse for his own wholesome development.

If we are sincere in our desire to reduce this delinquency among youth, let us look to ourselves as members of the community and as leaders and officials in civic circles.

A nation that has conquered great material difficulties and harnessed its physical powers must have some more effective means of combating the cynicism of its youth—the cynicism born of widely flaunted dishonesty of those in high places, insincerity of leadership, and gaudy pageantry of crime. It is the duty of every law-abiding citizen to see to it that our children have a wholesome community environment in which to live during their tender and impressive years. We must keep our young people, as far as possible, in a wholesome and not a demoralizing environment.

The mission of the Church is to proclaim the truth of the restored Gospel; to uplift society that people may mingle more amicably one with another; to create in our communities a wholesome environment in which our children may find strength to resist temptation, and encouragement to strive for cultural and spiritual attainment; to make ineffective the influence of designing men who would make profit out of their fellows who are fallen so low as to be slaves to their appetites and passions—and who would fill their purses through the weaknesses of addicts to gambling, and the pitiable courtesan outcasts. The Gospel is a rational philosophy that teaches men how to get happiness in this life, and exaltation in the life to come.

The mission of the Church is to establish the Kingdom of God upon the earth, "which is not a mystical but a real Kingdom. It is a body of people dominated by ideals of productivity, which is mutual service. We do not strive for the things which satisfy but for the moment and then leave a bad taste. We strive for the things which build us up, and enable us and our children to be strong, to flourish, and to conquer. We strive to make ourselves worthy to receive the world by fitting ourselves to use the world more productively than others. We believe that obedience to God means obedience to the laws of nature, which are but the manifestations of His will; and we try by painstaking study to acquire the most complete and exact knowledge of that will, in order that we may conform ourselves to it."
