David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Faith

FAITH THE STEADFAST ANCHOR

THE good ship Marama had anchored off the island Rarotonga, and the passengers who desired to go ashore had to go in small boats to the landing. When asked why he didn't run his vessel nearer the shore, Captain Aldwell replied by pointing to huge steel ribs lying wave-beaten on the reef, grim and solemn reminders of the result of going too near the submerged coral in a treacherous harbor! A few years previously the captain of that wrecked vessel had anchored, and undoubtedly in ordinary circumstances all would have been safe and well; but in the sudden storm that arose, he had been unable to get his boat to sea, and in spite of strenuous efforts had seen his beloved ship dashed upon the rocks. But the commander of the Marama not only anchored, but anchored in safety.

It is glorious when one's soul is so anchored, for when it is, it is anchored in truth. When this is the case, life is truly a joy. Notwithstanding the trials and difficulties incident to everyday life, such a one finds a solace entirely unknown to the drifter. Storms of passion and tempests of doubt may wreck the drifter on the rocks of despair, but they spend their fury in vain upon the man of faith.

As the water lily starts and slides Upon the level in little puffs of wind, Tho' anchored at the bottom, such in he.

To be so anchored is the sincere desire of every honest person; but the great question How? is always clamoring for an answer. Fortunately, an answer has been given both in sacred literature and in the lives of men. "Whoso believeth in God," says the prophet Ether, "might with surety hope for a better world . . . which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men." And Leland says, "When in God thou believest, near God thou shalt be." If this be true, surely we have found the answer to the longing of the heart; for to sense nearness to God, to have an unwavering confidence in Him as our Father, and to know that He has a divine Plan of Salvation for His children, is to have the surest, safest anchor known to humanity.

But note, the Prophet Ether says, "Whoso believeth in God." There is a difference between believing and believing in. As I once wrote in an Elders' lesson: We may believe what a person says without believing in him. If we believe in a person, we imply that we admire that person's character, and desire to emulate his worthy example. We naturally make part of ourselves the virtues we see in our ideal.

Now with this thought in view, let us ask ourselves in deep earnestness if we really and truly believe in Christ. If we do, we surely cannot help but express that belief in a constant desire to emulate the Savior's manhood, to cultivate His gentleness; to partake of His purity; to practice His forgiveness; to make His sinless, perfect life our constant guiding star, our one hope and aspiration.

Faith in God — faith in Jesus Christ as the Savior of the world; faith in His Gospel as a guide through life; a faith that springs from the heart and is therefore genuine; a faith that moves to noble and God-like action; such a faith is an anchor to the soul, immovable — infinite!

Such is the faith that inspired the Apostles of our Lord. Such, the faith that gave strength and peace even in martyrdom to the despised and persecuted early Christians! Such is the faith that opened the heavens to the boy prophet Joseph Smith. Such is the faith that is the uplifting power among the leaders of the Church of Jesus Christ today!

All who have such faith, though they may be tossed about in a sin-torn, tempestuous world, have nevertheless the safest and most steadfast anchor of the soul. Pray for it; strive for it; there is no salvation without it.

WHAT MY FAITH MEANS TO ME

MAN'S span of life may be comprehended by three terms: that which was, that which is, and that which will be. "Mormonism" means to me the true philosophy of these three subjects of being. It explains the past; it is a safe guide for the present; it unveils the future.

It gives to me an assurance that God is truly my Father, and that therefore I must have inherited his immortality. This explanation of my beginning is the anchor of my soul amidst the unsettled, never-resting theories advanced in attempted explanations of the origin of man. So far as man's ante-mortal state is concerned, I rejoice in the fact that he "was in the beginning with the Father."

My faith means an unfailing guide through the present existence, a final solution of life's problems. It teaches me that only through individual effort may true success and happiness be obtained. Only through cleanliness and purity of thought, of word and of action may we enjoy to perfection the inspiration of the Lord. There is no aristocracy of birth in the Kingdom of God, no truly eternal reward to an individual through the excellency of another's character. Everyone must work out his own salvation. This life is truly a garden in which every person gathers fruit from the seed he plants. If he plant weeds, weeds he will harvest. If he plant flowers and useful grains, beautiful flowers and rich harvest will reward him. But an abundant harvest is the result only of painstaking, intelligent cultivation.

Though I've had but glimpses of the comprehensiveness of the Gospel, yet it includes for me all the conditions necessary for the physical, the intellectual, the moral and the spiritual development of the human life. Obedience to it means obedience to the laws of health and happiness. It means the keeping of the body pure and undefiled and the spirit attuned with the Infinite.

My faith is a constant inspiration to search always for truth; to seek ever for what is "virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy."

My faith as well as my heart assures me that the dearest possession a man has is his family. In the Gospel we have the divine assurance that the ties of kindred will transcend the boundaries of death and continue throughout the endless ages of eternity. Thus my faith means more to me than all else in the world; for it gives me the assurance that when the marriage vow bears the seal of the Holy Priesthood it is as eternal as love, as everlasting as spirit.

The Gospel is to me the true philosophy of life. It comprehends our birth, which is but a "sleep and a forgetting"; our present existence, which is a school in which we learn by experience the great lessons of life; our future, which, if we graduate with honor, is an everlasting existence where, as progressive, personal beings we may live in God's eternal realm forever. "The stars may fade away, the sun himself grow dim with age, and nature sink in years; but man shall flourish in immortal youth, unhurt amidst the war of elements, the wreck of matter and the crash of worlds."

FAITH TRIUMPHANT

THE most ominous threat to the peace and happiness of mankind in this the twentieth century is not the probable misuse of the atomic bomb, but the dwindling in men's hearts of faith in God. "Epochs of faith are epochs of fruitfulness; but epochs of unbelief, however glittering, are barren of all permanent good."

The Scriptures tell us that "without faith it is impossible to please God," that through faith prophets and men of old "subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong."

It was faith that braved Columbus to sail on and on into the unknown horizon until he discovered a new land. It was faith that brought to America the Mayflower, "freighted with the destinies of a continent." It was faith that impelled President Brigham Young and the Utah pioneers to establish permanent settlements in a forbidding, defiant western desert.

Faith is more potent in human endeavor even than judgment or experience. Let me illustrate:

One hundred years ago today a group of men with a 900-mile prairie trail behind them, were hacking their way through underbrush on a mountain trail and prying loose boulders that rolled with an echoing crash into the bottom of the ravine below. Trudging slowly and wearily up this ravine moved a caravan of covered wagons. The advance company of Utah pioneers were nearing the summit of "Big Mountain," from which they would obtain their first glimpse of the Great Salt Lake Basin. In the western fringe of that Basin lay the "Dead Sea of America" shimmering in the sunlight more like a threatening omen than a promise of prosperity.

If that barren, seemingly unproductive valley could be made fruitful, could become the center of a western empire, it would most surely be one of the most striking examples in history of faith triumphant over human judgment and experience.

Of the great pioneers of history, Brigham Young is given place among the foremost. But suppose he had failed, as men who knew western America better than he thought he would. What a tragedy would have befallen thousands — what severe censure history would have heaped upon such a foolhardy leader!

Picture his situation a century ago. Upon him rested the responsibility to supply food and shelter for the 152 persons who composed that first company seeking a home in a desert land, with the season so far advanced that there was little or no hope that crops planted would mature. Besides these 152 persons, there were thousands of others who had left their homes in Nauvoo after the martyrdom of their Prophet, who were following their leader to this hoped-for place of refuge and peace. Approximately 2,000 were at Mt. Pisgah (Union County), Iowa, 145 miles from the west bank of the Mississippi River.

There was another colony at Garden Grove (Decatur County), Iowa, 126 miles east of Council Bluffs. Six thousand others were at Winter Quarters on the banks of the Missouri River, six miles from Omaha. Ten thousand people were already on the march towards the Great Basin, which gave scant assurance that even a small colony could gain subsistence. All told, there were 40,000 Mormons between the British Isles and Emigration Canyon, Utah, who, with confidence in a great leader, were moving toward some unknown refuge yet to be designated.

The judgment of the scout and of the trapper regarding the chances of survival was against settlement. Major Morris Harris, for example, said, among other discouraging facts about the Great Salt Lake Valley: "It is sandy, and destitute of timber and vegetation except for the wild sagebrush." Captain James Bridger thought it imprudent to bring a large population into the Great Basin until it was ascertained that grain could be raised. He offered to give a thousand dollars for the first ear of corn ripened in the Basin. "I have been here 20 years," he said, "and have tried it in vain over and over again."

At Green River Samuel Brannan, who established a colony where San Francisco now stands, met the Pioneers and gave a glowing description of climate and productivity of the soil in sunny California.

Notwithstanding these warnings of the desolation of the country, and the plea to go on to more productive climes, there was that assurance in President Young's mind which had greater influence upon him than the trapper's experience of unproductivity and of monthly frosts, and more influential than the glowing description of the California Coast.

Greater than human judgment, towering above man's experience, was the great leader's trust in God. In referring to this faith which had guided him, he said: "As I viewed a portion of Salt Lake Valley, the spirit of light rested upon me and moved over the valley, and I felt that there the Saints would find protection and safety." The unwavering faith of that dauntless band in a divine Providence — that invisible power which "makes the discords of the present harmonies of the future," lives on imperishably. Their undying fortitude and heroism have been and will continue to be a guiding and an encouraging light to all who read their simple but incomparable story.

I have made reference to this epoch in pioneer history not only to pay slight deference to the brave men and women whose migration westward contributed so much to the development and progress of the western United States, but also to emphasize the superior power of faith as a motivating force in human endeavor. Men die, but principles live on. Ideality is ever the true source of inspiration and progress.

Anybody who thoughtfully observes the trend of this modern world cannot fail to have noticed a revolt among people generally against what they consider old-fashioned conventions and moral standards, against restraints and inhibitions. Faith is the eternal light that will dispel these threatening clouds. With all my soul I cry with Emerson:

The end of all political struggle is to establish morality as the basis of all legislation. It is not free institutions, it is not a republic, it is not a democracy that is the end — no, but only the means. Morality is the object of government. We want a state of things in which crime shall not pay. This is the consolation on which we rest in the darkness of the future and the afflictions of today, that the government of the world is moral, and does forever destroy what is not.

The economic progress of our country during the past century has been phenomenal. So also has been her influence politically among the nations. Today America is reputedly the only nation in the world "capable of sustaining western civilization."

Opposed to her is Russia, which has renounced faith in God and in His overruling power in the universe.

The threatened impending clash between these two nations is more than a test of political supremacy, more than a fight between capitalism and communism — it is the evercontending conflict between Faith in God and in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and Disbelief in the philosophy of Christian ideals. Faith in man is the power that leads to brotherhood; faith in God, the ladder by which men climb toward perfection. Faith is strength; doubt is weakness and disintegration.

There can be no question about the outcome of the anticipated ominous clash, which we earnestly hope and pray will never come, between these two great nations of conflicting ideals, if the inhabitants of America will but keep their faith in the Lord of Heaven and earth, and in the principles of peace taught by His Son on the shores of Galilee two thousand years ago. The guiding light in our time, as in pioneer days and always, is faith in God and in the ultimate establishment of the brotherhood of man through the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
