David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Free Agency

CROSSROADS OF LIFE

IN the journey through life, every normal person has the choice of two great highways — one leading to progress and Right; the other to retardation and Wrong.

As real to us as the consciousness of life itself is the awareness of the ability to make a choice. There exists an eternal law that each human soul shall shape its own destiny.

Free men must live in a world of moral order, in which men are made by education and experience. The very fact that we ask, "Whither shall we go?" or "What shall we do?" or, as Peter asked, "To whom shall we go?" implies the power of choice.

Upon the decision we make often depends success or failure, peace or discontent, happiness or misery. Such a decision may determine whether one responds to the call of one's soul to rise, or yields to the tendency to grovel.

In this material realm man is simply a creature of nature. He progresses as he lives in obedience to the laws of nature. Subject to his environment he is continually fighting forces in order to survive. In this physical stage of life, self preservation, the first law of nature, is the dominant idea of the individual and of the race. As a result, selfishness is a characteristic trait. In the business world particularly but also among the professions and trades, we can trace the primitive elements of this eternal struggle for existence. David Harum's "silver" rule, "Do unto the other fellow what he wants to do to you, and do it first," is often the dominant ideal.

Not only that, but in man's existence in this world of nature or material realm, there is a phase lower than the struggle for livelihood and comforts, and that is the tendency to grovel. To accumulate means honorably is natural and most commendable. "He who will not provide for his own is worse than an infidel." When, however, a man harbors the thought that he will exist by injuring his neighbor, that moment he begins to circumscribe his life: bitterness replaces happiness; sordidness supplants generosity; hatred takes the place of love; and beastliness disfigures humanity. Soon the ghoulish spirit, preying upon life to achieve its selfish end, sinks to the depths of degradation.

At this very hour there are aching hearts, broken homes, and sacrificed lives as a result of selfishness and unrestrained indulgence. How much pain and suffering must this old world experience before young men and women who carve the moral atmosphere in which they live will condemn as a united body the inconsiderate, grasping nature that appeals only to the baser life of man?

Those who choose to remain in this material world and who close their eyes to the promise and possibility of a higher life, merely acknowledge that our purpose here is to be born, to live, breathe, prepare in a general way for those who follow after us, and then to die — "A stupid round of existence not one whit higher than that of the silkworm."

Let us, then, in all sincerity, accept the fact that man is not just a mere animal, a creature of the flesh which profiteth nothing — but a spiritual being, a soul. Sometime or another every normal man, I am sure, is possessed with an irresistible desire to know his relationship to the Infinite. He realizes that he is more than a physical object that is tossed for a short time from bank to bank, only to be submerged finally in the ever-flowing stream of life. There is something within him which urges him to rise above himself, to control his environment, to master the body and all things physical, and to live in a higher and more beautiful world.

There is in man not an instinct, but a divinity that strives to push him onward and upward; this sense or feeling is present with every normal human being, ready to perfect it, in response to which all men ought to be earnestly and sincerely engaged in the search for and development of spiritual peace and freedom.

Spirituality is the highest acquisition of the soul, "the supreme crowning gift that makes man king of all created things." It is consciousness of victory over self, and of communion with the infinite. It is best expressed in doing, not in dreaming.

The guiding principles to the realization of the higher life are not many or complex. Indeed, they are few and simple, and can be applied by everyone in any phase of life:

I. Recognition of the Reality of Spiritual Values

The first is a heartfelt recognition of the reality of spiritual values. This brings us into the very realm into which Jesus would lead us for the abundant life. He taught that men and women fail to live truly and that they really amount to nothing unless they have spirituality. This was the burden of His sermon when the people turned and left Him, and now as we face it, I repeat His question to you. "Will ye also turn away?"

II. Sense of Obligation to the Social Group

The second guiding principle on life's pathway is a sense of obligation to the social group. Supplant the thought that dominates the selfish world as expressed in the words "The world owes me a living," by the nobler prayer, "God, give me power to lend a helping hand to others." There is sound philosophy in the paradoxical saying, "Whosoever shall save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it."

III. Resultant Self-Mastery

The third guiding principle to the realization of a higher life is the power of self-denial and the resultant self-mastery. There can be no fullness of life where there is slavery; and the man who is subject to his appetite and passions is the most abject slave. He who can rule his passions is greater than a king.

IV. A Consciousness That the Ultimate Purpose of Life is the Perfecting of the Individual

This implies an intelligence directing creation, and to me it implies a divine personality, a beneficent Father . . . The light throwing its beams upon the entrance to the spiritual realm is shining today as it shone 1900 years ago. That light "cannot fail to reveal to men sooner or later, the divine ideal by which they should live."

The power of choice is within you — the roads are clearly marked — one offering animal existence, the other life abundant. In making the choice, may God give you clear-seeing, strong wills, courageous hearts! Having chosen wisely, may you walk with heads erect, with countenances open, indicative that you have wronged no one. Even though the tasks of life become heavy and sorrow weighs upon you, may the light of the Christ-life beckon you on still undismayed.

Back of the work, back of the sorrows, back of the life ever glows the ideal. How constantly we keep our eyes upon it determines whether we shall fall as failures along life's highway or fulfill the divine purpose of our being.

FREE AGENCY—A DIVINE GIFT

NEXT to the bestowal of life itself, the right to direct that life is God's greatest gift to man. One of the most urgent needs is the preservation of individual liberty. Freedom of choice is more to be treasured than any possession earth can give. It is inherent in the spirit of man. It is a divine gift to every normal being. Whether born in abject poverty, or shackled at birth by inherited riches, everyone has this most precious of all life's endowments — the gift of free agency—man's inherited and inalienable right.

With free agency there comes responsibility. If man is to be rewarded for righteousness and punished for evil, then common justice demands that he be given the power of independent action. A knowledge of good and evil is essential to man's progress on earth. If he were coerced to do right at all times, or were helplessly enticed to commit sin, he would merit neither a blessing for the first nor punishment for the second. Man's responsibility is correspondingly operative with his free agency. Actions in harmony with divine law and the laws of nature will bring happiness, and those in opposition to divine truth, misery. Man is responsible not only for every deed, but for every idle word and thought.

There is another responsibility correlated and even coexistent with free agency, which is too infrequently emphasized, and that is the effect not only of a person's actions, but of his thoughts upon others. Man radiates what he is, and that radiation affects to a greater or less degree every person who comes within that radiation.

Freedom of will and the responsibility associated with it are fundamental aspects of Jesus' teachings. Throughout His ministry He emphasized the worth of the individual, and exemplified what is now expressed as the work and glory of God — "To bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Only through the divine gift of soul freedom is such progress possible.

Force rules in the world today. Individual freedom is threatened by international rivalries, interracial animosities and false political ideals. Unwise legislation, too often prompted by political expediency, if enacted, will seductively undermine man's right of free agency, rob him of his rightful liberties and make him but a cog in the crushing wheel of regimentation. This course, if persisted in, will end in dictatorship.

Governments are the servants, not the masters of the people.

This principle of free agency and the right of each individual to be free not only to think but to act within bounds that grant to everyone else the same privilege, are sometimes violated even by churches that claim to teach the doctrine of Jesus Christ. The attitude of any organization toward this principle of freedom is a pretty good index to its nearness to the teachings of Christ.

He who tramples underfoot one of God's greatest gifts to man, who would deny another the right to think and worship as he pleases, propagates error, and makes his own church in that regard, as far as he represents it, a propagator of evil.

No greater immediate responsibility rests upon all citizens of this republic and of neighboring republics, than to protect the freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States.

In these days of uncertainty and unrest, the greatest responsibility and paramount duty of liberty-loving people is to preserve and proclaim the freedom of the individual, his relationship to Deity, and the necessity of obedience to the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Only thus will mankind find peace and happiness.

THE RIGHT TO CHOOSE

IAM not one of those who sees in this world-catastrophe the hand of God as its cause. I do not believe that God has caused the misery, the famine, the pestilence, and the death that are now sweeping the war-torn countries of Europe. I do believe that the conditions of the world today are a direct result — an inevitable result — of disobedience to God's laws.

I believe that God is love, that He is our Father and desires the happiness and eternal life of His children. Indeed, this is His glory, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man," and, as recorded, "He gave to man that he might be an agent unto himself." Men may choose the right or they may choose the wrong; they may walk in darkness or they may walk in the light; and, mind you, God has not left his children without the light.

God is watching over the destiny of nations. Someone has said, "There is a divinity that shapes our ends, rough-hew them as we may." We may "rough-hew our end," we choose our course, but God will overrule our acts and the acts of nations for the consummation of his divine purposes. If it were true that God designed all this misery to come upon the nations, we should read the maxim just quoted in this way: "There is a divinity that shapes our ends rough, hew them as we may."

God is standing in the shadow of eternity, it seems to me, deploring the inevitable results of the follies, the transgressions and the sins of His wayward children, but we cannot blame Him for these any more than we can blame a father who might say to his son, "There are two roads, my son, one leading to the right, one leading to the left. If you take the one to the right it will lead you to success and to happiness. If you take the one to the left it will bring upon you misery and unhappiness and perhaps death, but you choose which you will. You must choose; I will not force either upon you." The young man starts out and, seeing the allurements and the attractiveness of the road to the left and thinking it a short cut to his happiness, he concludes to take it. The father knows what will become of him; he knows that not far from that flowery path there is a mire hole into which the boy will fall; he knows that after he struggles out of that mire hole he will come to a slough into which he will flounder. He sees others who have chosen that path in that same slough, and he knows that in their struggles to get on dry land there will be fighting. He could see it long before the boy reached that condition, and he could, therefore, foretell it. The father loves the boy just the same, and would still continue to warn him and plead for him to return to the right path.

God, too, has shown the world, through His prophets in ages gone by, that many of His people, individuals as well as nations, would choose the path that leads to misery and to death, and He foretold it, but the responsibility is upon those who would not heed God's message, not upon God.

FREEDOM OF CHOICE

LET us get a mental picture of a scene in Capernaum. On the day previous to this meeting in that ancient city, Jesus had fed the multitude with five loaves and two fishes. Following that memorable event, Jesus, having withdrawn in solitude for prayer, joined His disciples on the water, and they sailed across from the east side of the lake over to the city of Capernaum. Some of the multitude had continued on their journey to Jerusalem, and others had walked around the north end of the lake, and the next day were surprised to meet again Jesus and the Apostles. As they had done the day before, they surrounded Jesus, and as He spoke to them, He made a peculiar remark. Said He, "Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled." Then the Savior delivered to them a sermon on the "bread of life." Great Teacher that He was, He used present interest to lead to eternal truths. Here, having in mind the multiplication of the loaves, knowing these people were thinking of that, He gave them a sermon on the "bread of life," and while the references therein have nothing to do with the Sacrament, He said: "Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day." Putting a literal interpretation on this saying, the listeners turned away from Him. Some of them said that this was a hard saying, and they left the synagogue. Jesus, speaking to His disciples, said: "Will ye also go away?" And Peter, the spokesman, answered: "Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that Thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God."

Here we have the implied responsibility of life; the choosing of the right way, or the choosing of the wrong — whether to follow the Christ or to turn from Him.

What a glorious thing it is that we have the privilege and the ability to make that choice! What a glorious thing it is that when we choose, we can follow the dictates of our conscience and not the dictates of a usurper. Think of it now — the value of freedom of choice! That was the great principle involved when war arose in Heaven when Lucifer would have deprived God's children of the right to choose. Lucifer said to the Lord: "I'll go down and bring all your children back, but you give me the glory." Jesus, however, said: "Send me, and the glory be Thine." Satan's attempt to deprive the children of men of their free agency brought contention in Heaven — the only time about which we have any record that God would permit war in Heaven. And yet, the Lord would not deprive even the Adversary of the right to choose; and so Satan "turned away."

But Christ came and died that you and I might have freedom of choice. That is one of the great principles of life, and to make the right choice is life's greatest obligation. In making that choice in life, too many of us think that the individual is the only one concerned, but that is not true. There is no one who is not obligated to somebody else.

First, there is your mother; there is your father. You cannot do anything that will hurt you without hurting them. Never arrogate to yourself the thought that it is nobody's business what you do—you are a part of your mother, and are more precious to her than life itself, perhaps; and you are unfaithful and recreant to duty who would bring sorrow and heartache to your mother.

Choose the virtues which bring happiness and contentment. Those who cherish them have a clean conscience. To them the world is bright and full of cheer.

The message of Christ the world will have to accept before peace can come. God bless our country, for it is fighting for the freedom of this world and the right of each man to have that freedom which was given to man in the pre-existent State.
