David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Gospel

THE PROMISE OF THE GOSPEL

ON ONE of the most solemn occasions of His entire ministry, Jesus said to His chosen Twelve: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." These significant words contain both a promise and a statement of fact. The promise: If men will hearken to His words they shall find peace. The fact: In the world there is tribulation. There is also an implication that each is dependent upon the attitude and actions of men themselves.

No one will deny that the world today is full of tribulation. A look at the map of the continents discloses the fact that Destruction rides the waves of every ocean, and not a land but is or may be threatened with deadly bombardment. In the pathway of barbarous war, stealthily stalks the spectre of starvation, and lurking menacingly close, ready to add to the scourge of misery and death, are the ghastly destroyers, Disease and Pestilence. Sad though it is, in this world-wide holocaust the innocent must suffer even more poignantly than those whose guilt merits the disaster and death they have fostered.

Tribulation means distress or suffering caused by oppression, persecution, affliction, etc., and these are the result of injustice and cruelty on the part of those who at present would not only subjugate but exterminate all who refuse to subscribe to their dictation or to a particular way of life.

The real source of all this lies in the hearts of men where are born and fostered the vices that breed suspicion, hatred, avarice, greed, enmity, dishonesty, treachery, blasphemy, a denial of the existence of God and of an orderly universe.

The result is that tribulation is rampant! The spirit of the anti-Christ is abroad! The achievements of science in power, speed, and mechanism misapplied by gangsters and renegades are being utilized not for the progress and happiness, but for the oppression and subjugation of the peoples of the globe. Dictatorship is on a rampage while Liberty and Freedom seek for protection and effective means of defense!

Whenever honor, virtue, and integrity are disregarded, seeds of sorrow and suffering are sown. In World War I, Belgium was invaded because of the violation of a sacred treaty considered by the perpetrators merely as "a scrap of paper." As a consequence, among other tragedies, beneath the ruins of Fort Loncin lie buried three hundred and fifty loyal soldiers who preferred death to dishonor. In the present war a broken promise preceded the invasion and subjugation of Czechoslovakia. As a result of treachery and jealousy more than three thousand officers and men were massacred at Pearl Harbor—and so we might multiply illustrations, showing how tribulation and anguish of soul come from dishonor, deceit, ambition, suspicion, hatred, etc.

Isn't it about time that man, the boasted crown of creation, began to use just a little of the God-given reason he possesses, and to seek earnestly and conscientiously for the "things" that will bring peace?

The Gospel not only promises peace and contentment, but names the conditions upon which peace and contentment are predicated. These conditions apply to the nation as well as to the individual.

The Lord has promised that "This land (America) shall be a land of liberty," provided iniquity shall not abound.

Notwithstanding her many shortcomings, her weaknesses and sins, and the blunders of those who guide her destiny, in the main the United States has been as unselfish in her international dealings and as willing to help the downtrodden and oppressed, as any nation in all history. While God will inevitably punish her transgressions, He will as inevitably reward her virtues; so, in these days of tribulation, comfort and hope can be found in the promise of the Gospel that this nation is secure so long as it abides by the principles of righteousness and peace; and that "there shall be none to take away the land of their inheritance."

Conditions that will bring peace and comfort to the individual are as easily found and named as are the evils and vices that bring tribulation, and if cherished in proportion to their worth are as easily practiced. A few of the fundamentals of these Jesus referred to when He said: "These things I have spoken unto you that in me you might have peace." Summarized they are (1) acceptance of Christ as the Way, the Truth, and the Life; (2) a love of God manifested in deeds; and (3) a love for one another; in other words, as the Savior said on another occasion: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, with all thy mind, . . . and thy neighbour as thyself."

But skeptics and pessimists say that these principles are too general, too idealistic, that mankind is too near the beasts of creation, struggling to eke out an existence, even to attempt to apply them in daily life. In reply we say, men and women have practiced them and have been happy, and have made the world better in so doing. A group did it in Jesus' day, and they have influenced millions of lives since. There have been millions since their day, some heralded on the pages of history and others of whom the world has never heard who, through love of God, truth, and of fellow men, have "never yielded to the pressure of circumstances," and who, though they faced persecution and even death, could say in their hearts as the Prophet Joseph Smith declared as he turned into the path that led to his martyrdom: "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of no value to me."

It is gratifying to know that there are hundreds of thousands of men and women today who are turning their hearts yearningly toward the Way, the Truth, and the Life. The world needs millions more whose influence will counteract the evil spread by the multimillions who love the world, the flesh, and the anti-Christ.

After all, the spiritual life is the true life of man. It is what distinguishes him from the beasts of the forests. It lifts him above the physical, yet he is still susceptible to all the natural contributions that life can give him that are needful for his happiness or contributive to his advancement. The spiritual force underlies everything, and without it nothing worth while can be accomplished.

The Gospel, Glad Tidings of Great Joy, is the true guide to mankind; and that man or woman is happiest and most content who lives nearest to its teachings, which are the antithesis of hatred, persecution, tyranny, domination, injustice —things which foster tribulation, destruction, and death throughout the world.

Finally, a belief in the Gospel robs death of its terror, and gives assurance of eternal life for each individual. It is true that from the moment of birth we turn toward death; and

Come he slow or come he fast, It is but death that comes at last.

Yet, the promise of the Gospel is that "He that believeth in Christ, though he were dead, yet shall he live."

What the sun in the heavenly blue is to the earth struggling to get free from winter's grip, so is the Gospel to sorrowing souls yearning for something higher and better than mankind has yet found in this war-ridden world.
