David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Government

THE ENEMY IN GOOD GOVERNMENT

TIMELY references and appropriate warnings have been given on the danger and evils of war. There is another danger even more menacing than the threat of invasion of a foreign foe. It is the unpatriotic activities and underhanded scheming of disloyal groups and organizations within our own borders.

Disintegration is often more dangerous and more fatal than outward opposition. For example, an individual can usually protect himself from thundershowers, and even from tempests, from freezing weather or intense heat, from drought, or floods, or other extremes in nature; but he is often helpless when poisonous germs enter his body or a malignant growth begins to sap the strength of some vital organ. So it is in government. It is the enemy from within that is most menacing, especially when it threatens to disintegrate our established form of government.

Today there are in this country enemies in the form of "isms." I call them "anti-Americanisms." Only a few of the leaders fight openly—most of the army carry on as termites, secretly sowing discord and undermining stable government. I have been informed from several sources that some of these spurious political growths are sprouting here in our own midst, that members of these groups have even received instructions regarding what to do in case this country should become involved in war. The nature of these instructions savors very much of the diabolical gunpowder plot in the time of James the First of England.

Of course there are errors in government which some would correct; certainly there are manifest injustices and inequalities, and there will always be such in any government in the management of which enter the frailties of human nature. If you want changes go to the polls on election day, express yourself as an American citizen, and thank the Lord for the privilege that is yours to have a say as to who shall serve you in public office.

Next to being one in worshipping God there is nothing in this world upon which this Church should be more united than in upholding and defending the Constitution of the United States.
