David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Happiness

CONDITIONS OF HAPPINESS

LET US consider conditions in which we can always find happiness, conditions that are to the little seeds of joy in our souls what the ray of light and moisture are to the flowers and growing plants.

First is Trust in God. To have faith that God is our Father is the safest anchorage of the soul and brings peace and solace under any condition; and the second is Confidence in our fellow men. You note at once, of course, how these go back to those two great commandments: "Love the Lord with all thy might, mind, and strength, and thy neighbor as thyself."

Now let us not consider these merely as orthodox principles. They are fundamental in our happiness and salvation here. I know that it is a little difficult today to keep confidence in certain groups of men. It is dreadfully discouraging to lose confidence in an associate. When we see and read about human jackals who are preying upon society, we find it hard sometimes to keep our poise and let the sunshine of confidence enter our souls, and yet I believe it is true that mankind generally is growing better. This I do know, that often when we misjudge a brother and seem to lose confidence in him, if we will go to him and find his point of view our confidence will be restored.

I am happy when I know that my associates are happy. We cannot be happy if our loved ones are discouraged or ill. We are social beings and our lives are intricately woven one with another, and we progress as a body when individuals in the body progress.

There are seeds of happiness planted in every human soul. Our mental attitude and disposition constitute the environment in which these seeds may germinate. There is as much need for sunshine in the heart as for sunshine in the world. Mankind needs encouragement and cheer.

ELEMENTS OF HAPPINESS

GIVING thanks means a fulness of thanks, which is the outward expression of a grateful feeling. Gratitude is the feeling itself. That is in the heart. Thankfulness is measured by the number of words; gratitude is measured by the nature of our actions. Thankfulness is the beginning of gratitude; gratitude the completion of thankfulness.

I know that many of us have had difficulties, disappointments and failures where we wanted so much to succeed; wounded feelings from barbed tongues; sickness; some of us have passed through the experience of death of loved ones; these are all incidents in life which, when not understood, may harrow our feelings until we are crushed.

I am aware, too that there have been jealousies, petty intrigues, meannesses, misunderstandings on occasions, and that men and women magnifying these weaknesses of human nature have made themselves miserable, and perhaps scattered gloom instead of sunshine into the hearts of their associates.

But notwithstanding these disagreeable, discouraging facts, I am sure that we have cause to rise above petty things and, as the Psalmist says, make known among the people the Lord's deeds, which are always good and beautiful.

Courtesy, respect, deference, and kind consideration are all pleasing attributes that may be shown on all occasions, and wherever manifested contribute to the pleasure and sweetness of human relations.

If there were more reverence in human hearts, there would be less room for sin and sorrow, and more increased capacity for joy and gladness. To make more cherished, more adaptable, more attractive, this gem among brilliant virtues is a project worthy of the most united and prayerful efforts of every officer, every parent and every member of the Church.

Truly, it is fitting to give thanks to the Lord, and to talk of all His wondrous work; and in doing so, we must include the greatest of all of His blessings—the sending of His Only Begotten Son, to give to all our Father's children redemption, and to those who will listen and obey the Gospel, salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of our Father. Obedience to the principles of the Gospel brings happiness, and happiness is what all men seek.

Happiness consists not of having, but of being; not of possessing, but of enjoying. It is a warm glow of the heart at peace with itself. A martyr at the stake may have happiness that a king on his throne might envy. Man is the creator of his own happiness. It is the aroma of life, lived in harmony with high ideals. For what a man has he may be dependent upon others; what he is rests with him alone. "What he obtains in life is but acquisition; what he attains is true growth."

THE PRINCIPLE OF HAPPINESS

ALL mankind desires happiness. Many also strive sincerely to make the most and best of themselves. Surprisingly few, however, realize that a sure guide to such achievement may be found in the following declaration by Jesus of Nazareth: "Whosoever will have his life shall lose it: And whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." This significant passage contains a secret more worthy of possession than fame or dominion, something more valuable than all the wealth of the world.

It is a principle, the application of which promises to supplant discouragement and gloom with hope and gladness; to fill life with contentment and peace everlasting. This being true, its acceptance would indeed be a boon to-day to this distracted, depression-ridden world. Why, then, do men and nations ignore a thing so precious?

Is the truth in the paradoxical statement, "losing one's life to find it," so illusive that mankind cannot grasp it? Or is it so in conflict with the struggle for existence that men consider it impractical?

Even so, the fact remains that He who is "The Way, the Truth and the Life" has herein set forth an immutable law, obedience to which will ameliorate those social and economic conditions in which "Man's inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn."

Specifically stated, this law is, "We live our lives most completely when we strive to make the world better and happier." The law of pure nature, survival of the fittest, is self preservation at the sacrifice of all else; but in contrast to this the law of true spiritual life is, Deny self for the good of others.

THE HAPPY LIFE

THE whole purpose and end of existence is life, and to obtain in that life, peace. The happiest life is the life that is promoted by the ideals of true religion.

You may remember an old story that appeared in one of our early school books in which the author pictures some people sailing down the river towards the Niagara Falls, and the man on the shore cries:

"Young men, ahoy, the rapids are below you!"

But they went on laughing and carousing. Later he cried:

"Young men, ahoy, the rapids are below you!"

But they heeded not his warning call until they suddenly realized that they were in the midst of the rapids, and with all the power at their command they failed to turn their boat upstream, "So," he says, "shrieking and cursing, over they went!"

The lesson left an indelible impression upon me, but today it seems incomplete. It is one thing to stand on the shore and cry: "Young men, ahoy, there is danger ahead"; and it is another thing to row into the stream, and, if possible, get into the boat with the young men and by companionship, and by persuasion, by legitimate force when necessary, turn the boat from the rapids. Too many of us stand on the shore and cry: "Young men, ahoy!" Let us get into their lives, let us touch their personality by our personality, and let them feel that there is something real in this religion; that it is the greatest thing in life, that nothing else can make them live as the true religious life does. When they feel this they love it, and until they do feel it, until they do sense an immediate blessing, following activity, we are going to find difficulty in calling them into that realm where there is peace. Young people say: "We want to live. That is just what we are going to do. Let us have life, and have a good time." But their view is often distorted. They are seeking to live in the physical pleasures. They are seeking to live in the realm that brings only immediate sensation, and afterwards no peace. They fail to distinguish between the carnal pleasures and those which are intellectual and spiritual. I am not going to ask them not to have a good time. I think they should have a good time. Young men and young women are entitled to it; all men and all women are entitled to it. We are all here to enjoy life in its fullest and most complete sense; but to live one must live in obedience to law, physical law, intellectual law, spiritual law. Transgression of law always brings unhappiness; it always brings death when carried to the ultimate end.

I was deeply impressed with the remark made by an individual in a repentant spirit: "I have played a crooked game, and I have lost." That is the story of everyone who plays the crooked game. The one who plays the game straight, who deep down in his soul does the right thing because it is right, is the man who has that peace and contentment for which we all so much yearn.

THE TRUE SOURCE OF HAPPINESS

THE secret of happiness lies within each of us, side by side with our resolutions and desires. It never comes from without. It cannot be stolen; it cannot be purchased. It is above price. It is true that wealth and friends and material success may make it the brighter when it is already shining within, but when it is not in the heart, all outward contributions are like paint and powder on the sallow cheek, the mere semblance of the thing desired.

One source of happiness springs from the realization of having accomplished something worth while. Misery springs from the realization of having failed to accomplish something worth while. The accomplishing of a fixed determination in the quest for truth and nobility of soul always produces happiness. Failure and vacillation always bring corresponding unhappiness. One is like the godly sorrow that worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of; the other, like the sorrow of the world that worketh death.

Too many are not willing to pay the price. They drift along aimlessly, hoping that peace and comfort will come to them as does the sunshine on a summer day. They forget that rain, hail, snow, and the biting frosts of winter come in the same way. He who would possess happiness must pay the price of effort. "It is one of the laws of life that each acquisition has its cost." A muscle can be developed only by physical activity. Spiritual growth comes only by spiritual endeavor. And happiness is realized only through righteous desires and worthy accomplishments.

He who is virtuous only at intervals proves that his pretended virtue is but a sham. Such a person lacks sincerity, the foundation of a true character, without which happiness is impossible. He who is seeking for happiness alone seldom finds it, but he who lives, that is, who loses himself, to give happiness to others, finds that a double portion has come to himself.

HAPPINESS—THE CHIEF END OF EXISTENCE

"HAPPINESS" said the Prophet Joseph, "is the chief end of existence." If the Gospel gives salvation to man, happiness is the attribute which each one should possess. I do not mean that we shall not have trials, sorrows, difficulties. One person will get discords out of a piano; another will get beautiful harmonies. So it is with life. One will get discords, sadness, cynicism out of life; another will find joy, ecstasy. We get out of life just what we put into it, what we see.

In ancient days in Japan, there was a scholar who went out of the gates and came in at nights and gave a lecture to the workmen whom he met. One day as he started out to get his lessons from nature, a man approached him and said, "Will you please bring me tonight a rose that I may see the lessons you mentioned last evening?"

"Yes, I will bring you a rose."

A second one accosted him and said, "Will you bring a twig such as you used to illustrate your lecture last evening?"

"Yes, I will bring you a twig."

And a third, "Will you bring me a lily that I may study the lesson of purity you gave?"

And he promised to bring the lily. At sundown, after work, the three laborers were there to meet the educator, philosopher. To the first he gave the rose, to the second the twig, and to the third the lily.

Suddenly the one with the rose said, "Why, here is a thorn clinging to the stem of my rose."

The second said, "And here is a dead leaf on my twig."

Encouraged by the remarks, the third man said, "And here is dirt clinging to the roots of my lily."

"Let me see." And the educator took from the first the rose, from the second the twig, and from the third the lily. From the rose he plucked the thorn, and keeping the flower, handed the thorn to the first. He took the dead leaf from the twig and gave it to the second, took the dirt from the roots of the lily and handed it to the third.

"There," he said, "each of you has what attracted him first. You looked for the thorn and found it. I left it there. I left the dead leaf and you saw that first. You have it. You saw the dirt clinging to the roots of your lily, and I have placed that in your hand. I will keep the rose, the twig, and the lily, for the beauty I see in them."

In each one of us probably there is a thorn in the character; there may be a dead leaf clinging to the reputation of some of us; there may even be dirt. We shall find it if we look for it. But in each one there is also a rose and a twig and a lily, and the Lord has told us to look for the best, to judge not that we be not judged, for with what judgment we judge we shall be judged, and the measure we mete to others shall be measured to us again.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD

THE search for happiness has been progressing through all ages because the ideals of happiness are forever advancing. The greatest reward of happiness is the tribute of respect that comes to those who faithfully serve.

The first condition of happiness is a sense of freedom. Not many people in this country realize the sacredness of that condition. This old year saw the death of some men over in Russia. The persecution was headed by Beria, who had put to death many men, and who had tortured them to make them confess that they were villains or traitors. No trial, only punishment and torture until the condemned would admit or confess anything.

Such injustice! Such inhumanity! I sense it more keenly perhaps, because the president of one of our branches in Czechoslovakia was arrested behind the Iron Curtain. One evening he held a conference in his branch. Happy and joyous he went home, and in the night he answered a knock on the door. Two officers said, "Come with us!"

"Why?"

"Never mind why! Come with us!"

"I want to know what the charges are."

"You do not need to know the charges."

"I demand a hearing."

"You have had your hearing, and you have your sentence," and he was dragged from the side of his wife and children. He was taken away and his wife did not know where he was for six or eight months.

The second condition is a confidence that comes from self-mastery. A man who yields to every temptation is not happy. The woman who yields to every desire, every appetite, is not happy. "Let your needs rule you, pamper them—you will see them multiply like insects in the sun. The more you give them, the more they demand. He is senseless who seeks for happiness in material prosperity alone."

There is the virtue of the Word of Wisdom. Don't quibble about brown bread, white bread. Do not believe people who say you violate the Word of Wisdom if you eat white bread. Take the Word of Wisdom just as it is, as the Lord has given it. The whole lesson is: Resist those things which are not good. Hot drinks, tobacco are not good for man. Strong drinks are not good for man. Eat meat sparingly, but he also says that those who say that meat should not be eaten are not of God. God also said: "He that commiteth adultery shall be cast out." Let us see what the opposite is: Keep ourselves pure and unspotted from the sins of the world.

A third condition of happiness is work. Do your work, for there is compensation, there is happiness. A bishop came to the house during Christmas. "For two years," he said, "we have had our 100 per cent ward teaching. I have worked on the high council. I have worked in other positions, but the joy and happiness of being bishop exceeds all other labors." If you have work to do, do it well.

I shall name just one more, and that is an appreciation of what we have around us. I sensed it today as we went up through Ogden Valley and saw those snow-covered mountains as I saw them in youth, the spotless snow, the streams, low but rippling along, the places where we used to skate, the sunset over the lake. This world is filled with glories, but we pass them by too often.

Let us get the things which make us happy: free agency, a sense of self-mastery, the privilege of working, and an appreciation of God's goodness in nature. We shall find them by following the principles and ideals of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
