David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Heredity

HEREDITY AND COURTSHIP

CHOOSE your mate by judgment and inspiration, as well as by emotion! You farmers know the value of breeding. You are very careful to choose the right kind of stock. You know that profit lies in it. Inheritance—breeding in the human family—is just as important, or more so. I have here, taken from a book on home building, some statistics on progenity—antecedents. The first great argument that established a widespread belief in the inheritance of mental traits in man was Dalton's famous work on hereditary genes. He showed that greatness and intellectual acumen run in families.

The Adams family of Massachusetts is a good illustration: John Adams, President of the United States; John Quincy Adams, President of the United States; Charles Francis Adams, Ambassador to Great Britain during the Civil War; Henry Adams, author of great books that analyze himself unmercifully and that have set thousands of thoughtful souls wondering why they are here and what they are worth. Environment alone would not produce such a series of able men, nor proper training cause ordinary mortals to achieve what these men achieved.

In contrast, we have heard of the Jukes family, and of how the State of New York has spent upwards of two million dollars on this one family. We hear that six hundred or more of the Jukes tribe were living in New York in 1915, but only three were in institutions. "We are told that had the original Max and his wife and his two sons and five sisters with whom they consorted been sterilized, the cost would have been scarcely $350. If they had been segregated for life, the cost would scarcely have risen to $25,000, a pretty saving compared with $2 million, and the $2 million does not include the value of the goods which the family stole, the loss inflicted by the family through murders and through the spread of disease, and the cost of the general trail of ruin which they left in their wake. Is the Jukes family unique? Not at all! There are probably many others of the same sort in the United States."

It is important for young people to realize that intelligent home building begins with the young man and the young girl in their teens and that during courtship they should study the ancestry and home life of the man the girl is going to marry, or the girl whom the young man is to marry.
