David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Home and Family

THE HOME

PERMANENT homes in which sweet contentment abides are the strength of any nation. As contented individuals living in unselfish and loving communion make the happy homes, so contented, peaceful homes make the progressive, peaceful community; and groups of such communities constitute a peaceful, progressive nation. The perpetuity of our modern civilization depends upon well-ordered, well-governed homes.

Such homes are not dependent upon wealth and affluence. Indeed it is often in the humblest homes that the most binding elements and the most lofty sentiments are found.

In every well-ordered home in the Church, the glad free spirit of childhood is led to honor its country and to worship its God; and every man sees in the home the nucleus of eternal companionship and everlasting joy.

IMPORTANCE OF FAMILY LIFE

IPRAISE God for the instructions He has given His people regarding the sacredness, the sanctity, and permanence of the family relationship.

Let us teach youth that the marriage relation is one of the most sacred obligations known to man, or that man can make. Teach them that the family is the first institution ordained of God, and instituted among men. If every couple sensed the sacredness of this obligation, there would be fewer homes broken up by disagreements that lead to divorces. The safety, the perpetuity of our government, or of any republican form of government, depend upon the safety and permanency of the home. Herein we get a glimpse of one thing in which this people may be the saviors, in a way, of this great nation. The home is the place where the perpetuation of the principles of liberty as well as the instructions in the Gospel of Jesus Christ should be given to the children. When the home breaks up, then the children begin to wander off into sin. Then the law must reach out to bring them back and try to teach them some principles of service, and principles of true government; but oh, how helpless, how helpless the state, when the home has failed!

Homes are made permanent through love. If you feel that you have not the love of those little boys and girls, study to get it. Though you neglect some of the cattle, though you fail to produce good crops, even, study to hold your children's love.

Loyalty is another element of the permanent home. The loyalty you afterwards want them to show to the Priesthood of God should be manifest in the home—love, loyalty, virtue. Cherish these principles, as you cherish and treasure your life.

The Church in all its organizations is putting forth an effort to make ideal men in ideal communities; but after all, the responsibility of making those ideal men, those ideal boys and girls, rests with the parents, and next with the older brothers and sisters. The responsibility is with the family, God's unit in the social fabric of humanity. We shall never get away from it.

OBEDIENCE IN THE HOME

THERE is no home without love. You may have a palace and yet not have a home, and you may live in a log house with a dirt roof and a dirt floor, and have there the most glorious home in all the world, if within those four log walls there permeates the divine principle of love—love that draws from husband to wife, and from children to parents, that blessed obedience and compliance that makes life worth while.

If disobedience prevails, I believe firmly that parents fail to get obedience from their children during the first five years of childhood. I believe that during that most important period of child life the parents sow the seeds of obedience or disobedience. Some of us fill that period of child life with too many "don'ts," failing to make the child realize that a request from father, a request from mother should be complied with. Mother says: "Don't touch that," to the little child. The little child toddles along and touches it. What is the result? The seeds of disobedience are sown. You don't have to punish the child. Lovingly, kindly, but firmly teach the child that there are rules in the house which should be obeyed. Mothers, fathers, treasure sacredly and sense keenly your responsibility to the child during those first five plastic years of its life.

HOME BUILDING—AN ART

ILOOK upon the home as the basis from which radiate all good influences, and sometimes, I am sorry to say, bad influences, which affect society. If, in every home in the United States, there were a competent mother and a helpful father, our officers of the law would have much less to do in protecting society from the lawless.

At first thought some might object to my using the word art in connection with home building, but art is defined as "The skilful and systematic arrangement or adaptation of means for the attainment of some end. The practical application of knowledge or natural skill to the attainment of a particular end." It seems to me that the adaptation of knowledge and skill to the building of a beautiful home is the highest of attainments. In the true sense of the word, therefore, we are justified in speaking of home-building as an art.

In the art of home building there should be manifest the work and skill of two artists, the father and the mother. If these two work at cross purposes, the result of their efforts is frequently failure. If they work harmoniously, each supplying what the other needs, as they daily work upon their living creations, the result will likely be boys and girls who will be a credit and an adornment, not a blight or a curse to humanity.

Without discounting the worth and influence of the father, it is after all "the mother who makes us most." The noblest calling in the world is motherhood. True motherhood is the most beautiful of all arts, the greatest of all professions. She who can paint a masterpiece, or who can write a book that will influence millions, deserves the admiration and plaudits of mankind; but she who rears successfully a family of healthy, beautiful sons and daughters, whose immortal souls will exert an influence throughout the ages long after paintings shall have faded, and books and statues shall have decayed or have been destroyed, deserves the highest honor that man can give, and the choicest blessings of God. In her high duty and service to humanity in clothing with mortality eternal spirits, she is co-partner with the Creator Himself.

To have a mother artist in the home, it is important to look for inherited qualities and tendencies. The mother is influenced by her ancestry.

It is important for young people to realize that intelligent home building begins with a young man and a young girl in their teens; that often the health of their sons and daughters, if they be blessed with such, depends upon their actions before marriage. From the pulpit and press, and particularly in the home, there should ring the message more frequently that the boys and girls are laying the foundation for their future happiness or misery. Young men particularly must prepare for the great responsibility of fatherhood by keeping themselves physically clean that they may enter into that responsibility as a real man should enter, not as a coward or a deceiver.

It is important that young women realize the necessity of keeping their bodies clean and pure, that their children might enter the world unshackled by sin and disease. An unshackled birth and an inheritance of a noble character are the greatest blessings of childhood.

There is operating in this old world a certain law of obedience. There are conditions with which a child must comply, and against which he must not rebel. Now it is in the home where the child learns that. If you tell the child not to do a thing, and the child does it, and you let him go unrebuked, you are training him to a certain extent, no matter how infinitesimal it may be, in disobedience to law.

Another thing which a child should learn in the home is the matter of self-control. Home is the best place in the world, for he submerges himself for the good of another; he controls his temper, and that is where father should control his, and mother should control hers, and the child will grow up in an atmosphere of self-mastery. When he gets out into society, and meets with his playmates, he realizes he must give them respect and consideration. When things do not go just to suit him, he must find himself master of himself on the playground as he is in the home. One of the first fundamental lessons which a child should learn, therefore, is that there are certain laws to which he must be subject, and to which he must conform.

Unhappiness in the child's life, as in the adult life, springs largely from nonconformity to natural and social laws. The home is the best place in which to develop obedience which nature and society will later demand.

In no better way can high achievements in life be better realized than in excelling in the art of home building.

FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS

FAMILY ties should be eternal. The home is truly the cell-unit of society; and parenthood is next to Godhood. The relationship of the children to the parents should be one which would enable those children to carry out ideal citizenship as they become related to the state and to the larger forms of society. The secret of good citizenship lies in the home. There it is centered.

God has placed upon parents the responsibility of instilling these principles into the minds of children. Church schools, Sunday Schools, Mutual Improvement Associations, Primary organizations are all helps in government, established here to assist in the upbuilding and guidance of the youth, but none of these—great and important factors as they are in the lives of our youth—can supplant the permanence and the influence of the parents in the home.

Let us hold to that first word in the second part of the fundamental law of humanity, the Ten Commandments. Those first few refer to our relationship to humanity. The second part begins with the word "honor"—"Honor thy father and they mother."

Let us cherish in our homes, as we cherish the lives of our children themselves, that word "honor" with all the synonyms—respect, reverence, veneration—honoring mother, honoring father, having them honor us as we honor and revere God our Eternal Father. Let the element of honor, devotion and reverence permeate the home life.

Let us never lose sight of the principle of obedience. Obedience is heaven's first law, and it is the law of the home. There can be no true happiness in the home without obedience—obedience obtained, not through physical force, but through the divine element of love. Love draws from husband and wife and from children to parents that blessed obedience and compliance that make life worth while.

Another element which makes for a happy home life is mutual service, each member of the home working for the other. If you take from the home the relationship of parents to children, of children to parents and children to each other, you deprive humanity of one of the greatest means of teaching the true spirit of Christ: sacrifice for each other—salvation through service. That home is most beautiful in which you find each person striving to serve the other.

HOME AND CHILDREN

IN THE homes of America are born the children of America, and from them go out into American life American men and women. They go out with the stamp of these homes upon them, and only as these homes are what they should be, will children be what they should be.

There are three fundamental things to which every child is entitled: (1) a respected name, (2) a sense of security, (3) opportunities for development.

The family gives to the child his name and standing in the community. A child wants his family to be as good as those of his friends. He wants to be able to point with pride to his father, and to feel an inspiration always as he thinks of his mother. It is a mother's duty so to live that her children will associate with her everything that is beautiful, sweet, and pure. And the father should so live that the child, emulating his example, will be a good citizen, and, in the Church, a true Latter-day Saint.

A child has the right to feel that in his home he has a place of refuge, a place of protection from the dangers and evils of the outside world. Family unity and integrity are necessary to supply this need.

He needs parents who are happy in their adjustment to each other, who are working hopefully toward the fulfilment of an ideal of living, who love their children with a sincere and unselfish love; in short, who are well-balanced individuals, gifted with a certain amount of insight, who are able to provide the child with a wholesome emotional background which will contribute more to his development than material advantages.

HOME AND FAMILY—MAIN SOURCE OF TRUE HAPPINESS

IT IS man's privilege to be happy if he chooses the path that leads to happiness. The truest source is found in the home.

Learn the value of self-control. You are never sorry for the word unspoken. I believe the lack of self-control is one of the most common contributing factors of unhappiness and discord. We see something in the other which we dislike. It is easy to condemn it. And that condemnatory word arouses ill feeling. If we see it, and we refrain from speaking, in a few moments all is concord and peace instead of animosity and ill will. Controlling the tongue is one of the greatest contributing factors to concord in the home, and one which too many of us fail to develop.

Self-control on the part of governing children: I think the children should be properly directed and controlled, not permitted to run around without any limitation to their actions as they affect other members of the household. Do I mean that you should be cruel to that child? No! That you should whip a child? No! It is unnecessary. But it means that when you say "no," you mean what you say.

I rode on a street car from the Rio Grande up to Main Street a few years ago, and an active little boy was jumping around the seat. The street car is not a gymnasium. I heard the mother say, "Jack, don't do that!" Jack continued to do it. She said again, "Jack, don't do that!" Jack continued to do it. A third time: "Jack, if you don't stop that, I'll throw you off the street car!" Jack knew that his mother wouldn't do that and paid no heed. What a useless threat! Once—only once—should that mother have spoken: "Jack!" And if he had been properly trained, he would have known that Mother meant just what she said, and there would have been no difficulty. Teach the child self-control, self-respect, as well as respect for others, and you have a contributing factor to harmony in home life.

Foster home ties by continued companionship. I do not believe in the saying that "absence makes the heart grow fonder." It is companionship that fosters love, and when you have vowed your troth and made a covenant to be true to each other, do everything to foster that love, to cement it for eternity. There is nothing sweeter in the world than the companionship of husband and wife, and the confidence and love of children. Whenever you can, take those children with you, up through the park, even though once a summer, but let them have the memory of it. Fathers, take the little boys with you on a trip if you can. And husband and wife go together whenever possible.

Make accessible to children proper literature, music, and appropriate pictures. Teach children to sing. By example and precept encourage participation in Church activity, thus establishing life's two paramount ideals: First, to build character; and second, to render service. Let those children feel that if they would make home happy — if they would, just in a small degree, repay the kindness of parenthood and the sacrifices that Mother and Father have made, they will develop in themselves a noble character. That is all the father asks; that is all the mother desires.
