David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Honor

PROTECTING ONE ANOTHER'S HONOR

TRUE virtue is possessed by him who with unwavering integrity protects the honor and good name of his friends and associates. It is the best within him expressing itself.

In upholding the good in others he makes better his own soul. He that looks for the good shall find it; and he who protects another's good name makes brighter his own.

For life is the mirror of king and slave, 'Tis just what you are and do; Then give to the world the best you have, And the best will come back to you.

But the opposite is true as well. If every man is the keeper of his brother's good name, he who proves false to his trust weakens his own good character, stains his own soul. There is a mean element in human nature which "feeds fat" upon seeing weaknesses and faults in others — which secretly gloats upon others' failures. The more one yields to this meanness, the meaner he becomes. It is this depraved tendency to which Emerson refers when he says in substance: "An accident cannot happen in the street but the bystanders will be animated with a faint hope that the victim may die."

It is from this base side of humanity that spring slander, backbiting and calumny — three gross evils in society that produce discord, distrust, and devilishness — that cause poignant sorrow and broken hearts. Here, a little girl is weeping because she has been wrongfully accused of being dishonest. There, a virtuous wife is distracted because her husband doubts her and fails to protect her dignity and honor. Families are broken up because of distrust aroused by faults magnified and virtues overlooked. Ties of friendship are broken, societies and organizations weakened by dissension and ill will; and even governments undermined because men fail to defend the honor and good name of their colleagues and governing officials. Much of this is the result of the failure to look for the good and not for the bad in others.

Looking for the good does not mean being blind to the bad. Human nature is full of weaknesses and frailties; evils and sin abound everywhere. But in organized society, and particularly in the Church, there are means established whereby weaknesses may be corrected and evils overcome. They are made worse only when magnified and multiplied by gossip's idle tongue. It is a deplorable fact that the eye of the gossip and the slanderer sees not only no good in others, but "evil where no evil exists."

True religion as exemplified in the Gospel of Jesus Christ teaches that every man should be the defender of his brother's good name. It goes even farther by requiring everyone to overlook another's trespasses: "Ye ought to forgive one another"; then "see that ye are merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually . . . ."
