David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Hope

THE GOSPEL OF HOPE

THE world is passing through a period of transition, of sorrow, and to many of despair. Nations are being subjected to tyranny. The four devastating Horsemen — War, Famine, Pestilence, and Death — are galloping seemingly unchecked. Freedom of the individual to speak, to act, and to work is being shackled. Systems of government heretofore advocated as the best and safest for mankind are being questioned. Religious truths, once held sacred, are now doubted, ridiculed, or rejected.

Notwithstanding the topsy-turviness of the world generally, I bring to you a word of encouragement, a note of cheer, a message of hope and faith. I say this first because I have faith in the overruling power of Providence. Man, through his littleness, through his rejection of the Gospel, his selfishness and weakness, brings contention and strife upon himself. Gloomy clouds often hang heavily about us, but the rains that descend from them often prove a blessing. So it may be with the ominous clouds lowering today over civilization.

I do not believe in the advocacy of discouragement and gloom; better, the gospel of hope. Our plain duty is to move forward with a determination to do what the Lord requires of us, "to deal justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God."

Absolute trust in the Lord will awaken a desire, at least, to try to live in accordance with Christ's teachings, chief of which is to love, not hate one another. We should preach and practice the gospel of love, and decry, as well as deplore, manifestations of ill will and hate. Hate is cruel and vicious; even when unexpressed and smouldering, it consumes the individual as surely as when it bursts into flame. Hate feeds on envy. It prompts and justifies unrighteous conquest; it looks for weaknesses in others; lives in the realm of iniquity and feeds on falsehood and slander; it injures the hater even more than the hated.

There may not be any great act we may do to eradicate hate, war, and suffering; but there are many little but very important duties within our power and province to accomplish.

Men should curb their tempers, and when prompted to condemn others, hold their tongues. Each has equal rights to his views, and each may be equally sincere in expressing them, but hate and enmity should be kept out of any controversy.

I know of no better way to bring about harmony in the home, in the neighborhood, in organizations, peace in our country and in the world than for every man and woman first to eliminate from his or her heart the enemies of harmony and peace such as hatred, selfishness, greed, animosity and envy.
