David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Individual

IMPORTANCE OF THE INDIVIDUAL

IWAS with a party of friends recently, driving over a beautiful valley, not far from Salt Lake City. We passed a thriving wheat field. It was an impressive sight to see that dry farm of wheat, and one of the party expressed his admiration of the luxuriant growth in the field, and looked at it in general. There it stood apart from the sagebrush and barren surroundings. But he was not satisfied with looking at it in the aggregate; the conveyance was stopped and he looked at individual heads of wheat, and exclaimed, "Look what large heads." Just one; it was the individual stalk that gave him that impression. That was not enough. He broke the head, shuffled it in his hand, blew the chaff away, and examined each kernel. "The kernels," continued he, "are plump and solid." After all, the test of that wheat field was the individual kernel of wheat, and so it is in a community; so it is in the Church. The test, after all, of the efficiency of God's people is an individual one. What is the individual doing?

THE INDIVIDUAL

IF, as it has been said, the babe "is the center of the universe," then man is the center of all social activity.

I am one of those who believes that all institutions and organizations exist primarily for the purpose of securing to the individual his rights, his happiness and the proper development of his character. As soon as organizations fail to accomplish this purpose their usefulness ceases. "So act," says Kant, "as to treat humanity, whether in your own person or that of another, in every case as an end, never as a means only."

In all ages of the world men have been prone to ignore the personality of others, to disregard men's rights by closing against them the opportunity to develop. The worth of men is a good measuring rod by which we may judge of the rightfulness or wrongfulness of a policy or principle whether in government, in business or social affairs.

Taking a long glance at the world's history, with its confused mass of tangled events, we can glimpse an ever-increasing group momentum in favor of the rights of the individual. There was a time even since history began, when men were ruled by the aristocracy of brute force. Under this condition developed such group powers as the Huns, who ruled at one time all peoples between the Caspian Sea and the Chinese borders. Under this power the masses were but serfs. Indeed all conquered groups were compelled to pay tribute to conquerors. Those who refused were either subdued or exterminated. At one time, for example, the entire region between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean was laid waste — a good illustration of "Man's inhumanity to man."

Centuries passed and we find the world governed principally by the aristocracy of birth. The ruling power was climaxed in the declaration of the weak king, James the Sixth of Scotland, who became James the First of England, and who made the declaration that kings rule by divine right. Under this regime also, the individual who represents the masses was but a vassal whose principle right to existence in the mind of the ruling class was to pay tribute. For eleven years, Charles the First, son of James the First, contrary to the spirit and express declaration of the Magna Charta, ruled without a parliament. His tyrannical usurpation of the power and his refusal to recognize the rights of his subjects proved his undoing.

However, the aristocracy of birth has crumbled. Thrones of emperors and kings are today unoccupied. Titles may be bought for the fourth of a common fortune, or for the wealth of an actress. In the meantime there has arisen in the world another centralized power which may be called the aristocracy of wealth, in which success and influence seem in proportion to the amount a man possesses. Under that regime big business seems more concerned about raising the value of things than in raising the standard of living. Men are used to make money instead of money being used to make men. Of course, man is the ultimate means of wealth, but this personal power should not be exploited by any man or force advantageously situated.

We are living in an age of changing opinions, of swiftly shifting human relations. Man's wisdom seems baffled. In all our readjustments, plans and policies we cannot do better than keep in mind the divine admonition that the worth of souls is great in the sight of God.

There has been no little discussion as to whether the individual or society is the great end of all social developments. "From the Christian point of view there needs be no hesitancy in the answer so far as man is concerned. The saved individual is the supreme end of Divine Will."

Jesus always sought the welfare of the individual, and individuals grouped and laboring for the mutual welfare of the whole in conformity with the principles of the Gospel constitute the Kingdom of God. Jesus' regard for personality was supreme. When the Pharisees dragged into His presence the woman taken in adultery, Christ saw through the soul that had been stained with sin the personality that still contained the spark of hope, which He kindled into a light that warmed and guided a personality back to confidence and perhaps to righteousness.

While emphasizing the worth of the individual, I wish to say that the individual in turn owes a duty to society. The world today as perhaps never before is demanding that the employer consider his employees not merely as a part of a machine to make money, but as living, sensitive beings entitled to justice and right. It is equally obligatory upon the employee to recognize the employer as one who has equal privileges. It is the duty of the citizen to take this same attitude toward the leaders of his government, and the duty of the churchmen to recognize the rights of those appointed to preside.

I appeal to all members of the Church, and particularly to presidents of quorums and to officers of all auxiliaries, to put forth a unified effort to make sweeter and better the lives of men. Only in such effort can high ideals for which the Church was organized be realized. Let us prove to the world that we consider personality sacred and not a thing to be exploited for gain.

It is time for the world to try Christ's teachings. The Church is so completely organized and so constituted to inspire its members that we may confidently look forward to the day when all individuals will have a fair chance for the joy of living, when men will be measured by what they are and not merely by what they possess, and when an aristocracy of character will govern in organized society.

INDIVIDUAL INITIATIVE

AN outstanding doctrine of the Church is that each individual carries the responsibility to work out his own salvation and that this salvation is a process of gradual development. The Church does not accept the doctrine that a mere murmured belief in Jesus Christ is all that is essential to salvation. A man may say he believes, but if he does nothing to make that belief or faith a moving power to do, to accomplish, to produce soul growth, his protestation will avail him nothing.

To work out one's salvation is not to sit idly by, dreaming and yearning for God miraculously to thrust bounteous blessings into our laps. It is to perform daily, hourly, momentarily, if necessary, the immediate task or duty at hand, and to continue happily in such performance as the years come and go, leaving the fruits of such labors either to self or to others to be bestowed as a just and beneficent Father may determine.

I am not unmindful of the scripture that declares "By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is a gift of God." That is absolutely true, for man in his taking upon himself mortality was impotent to save himself. When left to grope in a natural state, he would have become, and did become "carnal, sensual and devilish by nature." But the Lord through His grace appeared to man, gave him the Gospel or eternal plan whereby he might rise above the carnal and selfish things of life and obtain spiritual perfection. But he must rise by his own efforts and he must walk by faith.

The responsibility is upon each individual to choose the path of righteousness, of faithfulness and duty to fellow men. If he chooses otherwise, and as a result meets failure, misery and death, he alone is to blame.

I believe in individualism as opposed to paternalism. In saying this I recognize the fact that a man's duties to himself and to his fellow men are indissolubly connected. Jesus taught that if a man is true to his own highest interests he cannot fail to discharge his obligations to his neighbors. Conversely, He taught that if a man is faithful to the interests of his fellow men, he cannot be faithless to his own. And as a man thinks so he acts.

Within my experience there has never been a time when the doctrine of individual initiative and individual effort should be more generally taught and more earnestly put into effect than at the present day.

Too many men are claiming that the world owes them a living, and are sitting effortlessly by, expecting the world to throw its luxuries into their passive laps. Too late they will learn that the earth rewards richly only the strenuous strugglers. Emerson quotes someone as saying that "the world is in a state of bankruptcy; that the world owes the world more than the world can pay, and ought to go into chancery and be sold." Such reputed insolvency involves all the population, and he who does not get out and rustle for himself is a contributor to the alleged bankruptcy.

Thousands, through no fault of theirs, are out of jobs, and are vainly seeking a means of an independent livelihood. However, failure to find it is no justification for idleness. There are fences to rebuild, barns to repair, yards to clean up, houses to remodel and to paint, vicious and destructive weeds to destroy as they deface the highway and ravage crops. Instead of waiting expectantly for the government to find work for us, let us look around and see if there is not work near at hand. Too many of us fail to take advantage of opportunities close by. We justify inactivity by nursing the impotent thought that success cannot be obtained without influence, money, social or political "pull."

In thus emphasizing individual effort, I am not unmindful of the necessity of co-operation. A single, struggling individual may be stalled with his heavy load even as he begins to climb the hill before him. To reach the top unaided is an impossibility. With a little help from fellow travelers he makes the grade and goes on his way in gratitude and rejoicing.

This, I think, is in harmony with the teachings of Jesus, who "sought to perfect society, not by popular agitation or by reorganization, but by perfecting the individual. He recognized the fatal fallacy in the dream of those who hoped to make a perfect state out of imperfect individuals. The ideal social state, which he described as the Kingdom of God, is a commonwealth in which all men are united and governed by a commanding love both for God and for their neighbors."

THE INDIVIDUAL'S RESPONSIBILITY

OUR country's most precious possession is not our vast acres of range land supporting flocks and herds; not productive farms; not our forests; not our mines nor oil wells producing fabulous wealth. Our country's greatest resource is our children, our young men and women whose characters will largely determine our nation's future.

Each one of us is the architect of his own fate, and he is unfortunate indeed who will try to build himself without the inspiration of God, without realizing that he grows from within, not from without.

Trees that can stand in the midst of the hurricane often yield to the destroying pests that we can scarcely see with a microscope. Likewise the greatest foes of humanity today are the subtle and sometimes unseen influences at work in society that are undermining the manhood and womanhood of today. The test, after all, of the faithfulness and effectiveness of God's people is an individual one. What is the individual doing?

Every temptation that comes to you and me comes in one of three forms:

(1) a temptation of the appetite or passion;

(2) a yielding to pride, fashion, or vanity;

(3) a desire for worldly riches or power and dominion over lands or earthly possessions of men.

Such temptations come to us in our social gatherings; they come to us in our politics; they come to us in our business relations, on the farm, in the mercantile establishment; in our dealings in all the affairs of life, we find these insidious influences working. It is when they manifest themselves to the consciousness of each individual that the defense of truth should exert itself.

This is an individual work, and what the individuals are, the aggregate is.
