David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Jesus Christ

THE MAN OF GALILEE

"GLORY to God in the highest; And on earth peace, Good will toward men." (Luke 2:14)

During the approaching yuletide, millions of people speaking different languages and cherishing various ideals will celebrate the birth of the Babe of Bethlehem. On February 12 the people of the United States pause to honor Abraham Lincoln; February 22, George Washington; on January 25, Scotchmen in many parts of the world sing the praises of Robert Burns. Joan of Arc is honored by France; Beethoven is paid deference by musicians; Shakespeare, by literary lovers in many lands. But Jesus is revered and worshiped by all Christian nations and classes of individuals. "Whatever may be the surprises of the future," writes Renan, "Jesus will never be surpassed."

When Mr. Landon (Eli Perkins) was preparing his volume on Kings of the Platform and Pulpit, he wrote to Colonel Robert G. Ingersoll for a copy of his most famous lecture. In the letter which accompanied the manuscript, Mr. Ingersoll said, "Whatever you do, don't put anything into the book against Christ. I may have said silly things about Him when a boy in Peoria, Illinois, but now regard Him as the one perfect man." "Jesus is the one universal man. Moses was a Hebrew, Socrates, an Athenian, Buddha, an Hindu, Mohammed, an Arab, Gladstone, an Englishman, Luther, a German, and Lincoln, an American; but Jesus belongs to us all. He is the universal man — the one perfect character."

As I say, millions of people this yuletide will celebrate the birth of Christ. This is really a wonderful fact after the lapse of nearly two thousand years, because, from a human standpoint, we know so little about Him. When we read about Abraham Lincoln, we can go through volumes and learn about his life, his characteristics, his temperament, his humor, his different moods. We can look at his photograph, study his handwriting, read his philosophy. From paintings and monuments we can estimate his character in the deep lines of his features, and in the iron frame of his body. If we study the life of Washington, we are helped in the same manner. Portraits of Robert Burns assist us in interpreting his poetry. The same things are true of Walter Scott, and other historical characters. When we hear a person's voice, we find it a means of interpreting his writings, his addresses.

The world has none of these helps in the case of the Man of Galilee. With one or two exceptions no man who has ever lived since the days of those who associated with Him can form a correct conception of what He looked like. There is no photograph which will give us an exact picture of His features. Artists have painted Him as they thought He looked. Some have made Him effeminate in an attempt to express His tenderness. French artists have introduced French traits in His life portrait; Italians, Italian features, etc.

Not only have we not His portrait, but we haven't His sayings in the original. In the New Testament we have what the Apostles remembered He said, but even that has not come to us in the language in which He spoke it. Much of His teaching was done in the Aramaic tongue. The old copies of the Gospel in that language have long since gone to decay. They were copied into the Greek, but even the oldest copy of the Greek, we are told, dates back only about four hundred years after the birth of Christ, the other copies having been lost or destroyed. What we have of His teaching is so little that we can put it into a vest-pocket edition. Yet, John tells us that if all He said and all He did were written the world itself could scarcely contain the volumes. In comparison to that think how little we have, how little we known from the human standpoint; yet, no being, no person has ever been on the earth who has wielded a thousandth part of the influence that this Man of Nazareth wields throughout the world. Nearly two thousand years have gone, and today He is acknowledged as the one peerless person among all mankind.

Wherein lies the secret of this greatness? We do not honor Him as a great discoverer, nor as a scientist, nor as a literary genius, nor as one noted in the realm of art, nor as one distinguished in the realm of invention, in statesmanship or war; in fact, in none of the realms in which the men and women of the world have won their laurels do we pay deference to Jesus.

We revere Him because His wisdom and spirituality comprehend and exceed that of all others.

Consider for a moment His example in regard to the three fundamental principles enunciated by the heavenly hosts that heralded His birth:

First, reverence for God; second, peace; third, good will toward men, or to express it in another way, Godliness, happiness, brotherly kindness.

I. The first principle, Godliness, Jesus exemplified every hour of His earthly existence. On the banks of the Jordan at the beginning of His ministry we hear Him say to John, the forerunner: "Suffer it to be so now, John, for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness."

On the Mount of Temptation, with earthly power and the riches of the world thrown at His feet, we hear Him say in sublime majesty, "Get thee behind me, Satan, for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve."

Before choosing the Twelve He spent the night in prayer, supplicating His Father in Heaven for guidance.

When He taught the disciples to pray, He included in the first petition Godliness; "Hallowed be thy name."

After the miracle of feeding the five thousand, He retired in solitude to pray. In Capernaum the next day we see Him grieved because He said the multitude had not seen the glory of God, but had eaten of the loaves and were filled.

At the Last Supper, addressing the Twelve, He said, "This is life eternal, to know Thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent."

In the Garden of Gethsemane: "Father, not my will, but thine be done."

After the resurrection: "Touch me not, Mary, for I have not yet ascended to my Father, and to your Father, to my God, and to your God."

II. Regarding peace: Peace has been defined as the happy, natural state of man, the "first of human blessings." Without it there can be no happiness, and —

"Happiness," said Joseph Smith, "is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof if we pursue the path that leads to it."

"Blessed are the peacemakers," said Jesus, "for they shall be called the children of God."

As fundamental to peace He recognized the rights of every man. When asked, "Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar?" He said: "Show me a penny. Whose image and superscription has it?" They answered and said: "Caesar's." Said He: "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which be Caesar's, and unto God the things which be God's."

Towards the closing scenes of His life He said to His disciples: "These things I spoke unto you that ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world." On the same occasion He said: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you." All through His life peace was on His lips and in His heart, and when He came forth from the tomb and appeared unto His disciples, His first greeting was "Peace be unto you."

Peace as taught by the Savior is exemption from individual troubles, from family broils, from national difficulties. Such peace refers to the person just as much as it does to communities. That man is not at peace who is untrue to the whisperings of Christ, the promptings of his conscience. He cannot be at peace when he is untrue to his better self, when he transgresses the law of righteousness, either in dealing with himself, in indulging in passion or in appetites, yielding to the temptations of the flesh, or being untrue to trust, transgressing the law of righteousness in dealing with his fellow men. Peace does not come to the transgressor of law; peace comes by obedience to law, and it is that message which Jesus would have us establish among men, would have us proclaim among men — peace to the individual that he may be at peace with his God; perfect harmony existing between his Creator and himself; perfect harmony existing between himself and law, the righteous laws to which he is subject and from which he never can escape; peace in the home; families living at peace with their neighbors, exempt from family and neighborhood broils, striving to be exempt from the petty jealousies, petty aspirations and ambitions that come into the home and breed discord and unhappiness; peace in the families between fathers and children, mothers and children, mothers and fathers, husbands and wives.

The spirit of the world is antagonistic to the establishment of peace. The law of nature is the survival of the fittest at all costs, but peace can come to the world only through obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

III. Good will: The word that expresses good will towards men is brotherliness.

Though Jesus gave his message particularly to the chosen house of Israel he knew no nationality, neither was he a respecter of persons. When the Syro-Phoenician woman came to him in faith, pleading for a blessing, he answered, "So great faith I have not seen in Israel. Go, your daughter is made whole." He healed the helpless at the pool of Bethesda. The woman taken in sin was told to go her way and sin no more.

Not only toward the poor and helpless, but toward the rich also He manifested brotherliness. To the well-to-do but despised Publican, Zaccheus, He said: "Zaccheus, come down, this day I will dine at thy house," and before the meal was finished Zaccheus, inspired as he had never been before with a desire for brotherliness, said: "Master, half my goods are Thine, and if I have taken anything unjustly from any man I will return it to him fourfold." Seeing that the spirit of the Gospel had entered his heart, Jesus answered: "This day hath salvation come to thy house."

It is this spirit of brotherhood in the cheer of Christmas that makes it so glorious. Brotherliness is but the manifestation of the spirit of Christ.

NONE OTHER NAME

WHEN Peter said, "there is none other name under heaven given among men" he was speaking of One with whose teachings and philosophy of life he was well acquainted.

In this day people are conjuring with names of rulers and leaders. The followers of each believe that political salvation lies in adhering to the theories advocated by their particular leader. Men generally are seeking a new and better order of life. It was so in Peter's day. He heard the arguments of Pharisees, of Scribes, and Sadducees. He knew the power of Rome, and saw people subdued and oppressed. In the midst of it all Peter came to one conclusion which he expressed before the rulers of the Jewish nation and the world—"There is only one name given under heaven whereby mankind may be saved."

Jesus' teachings may be applied just as efficaciously to social groups and national problems as to individuals if men would only give them a trial.

William George Jordan tells the story of some men in a ship, which, during a terrific storm, was driven far out of its course, and, helpless and disabled, was carried into a strange bay. The water supply gave out and the crew suffered the agony of thirst yet dared not drink of the salt water in which that vessel floated. In the last extremity they lowered a bucket over the ship's side, and in desperation quaffed the beverage they thought was sea water, but to their joy and amazement the water was fresh, cool and lifegiving! They were in a fresh-water arm of the sea and they did not know it! They had simply to reach down and accept the new life and strength for which they craved.

The illustration is applicable to a large part of mankind today. Men and nations are drifting. They have lost their bearings; their wisdom is baffled. Tried and true methods of the past have been discarded, and vague and indefinite theories offered as panaceas for social and economic ills. There is an inescapable necessity for a safe and experienced pilot at the wheel.

One of the soundest and safest bulwarks of society that is being undermined today is the family. Modern life is disintegrating the very foundation of the home. The evil of divorce is rampant. One out of every five marriages is wrecked on the shoals of divorce. For the proper solution of this problem we may turn with safety to Jesus as our guide. He declared that the marriage relation is of divine origin. In His teachings the family assumes supreme importance in the development of the individual and of society.

Another present-day problem, and one most menacing, is the perpetual quarreling and strife between capital and labor. A cancerous growth in the vitals of this economic struggle is the spirit of coercion. Today capital and labor are organizing seemingly not with a view of helping each other, but with a view of dominating and compelling. One group is just as selfish and domineering as the other. As soon as one gets the upper hand, it becomes dictatorial and domineering. Unrighteous dominion whether exercised by employers or by labor unions is contrary to the spirit and teachings of Jesus of Nazareth. The ends of justice will never be obtained by coercion. Man must work; it is his right, it is his privilege; it is as essential to man's welfare as eating or sleeping. When men organize to interfere with an individual's right to exercise his freedom of choice they are creating enmity and animosity in society.

I have no objection to labor unions, nor to employers' unions. When administered in righteousness and fair play such organizations can be of great service to a community and to individuals. What I object to and what every fairminded American should object to is the spirit of coercion and intimidation exercised by such groups.

Jesus decried and condemned coercion on the part of those who hold power. The intensity of His invectives against the pride, greed, and selfishness of Herod, Caiaphas, Annas, Pilate, Tiberius and others shows how deeply He was interested in pure government and how eager He was to uphold just authority. His ideal was that of a social organization in which every man would have the joyous consciousness of laboring and striving, not for himself, but for the welfare of His fellow men, and where the highest rewards and honors would go simply to those who were able to contribute the most to society.

Jesus taught that a man cannot be true to himself without being true to his fellow men. Neither can a man be true to his fellow men without being true to himself.

PEACE THROUGH JESUS CHRIST

HOW utterly foolish men are to quarrel, fight and cause misery, destruction and death when the gifts of a divine and loving Father are all around us for the asking—are already in our possession if we would but recognize them.

Christ is the light to humanity. In that light man sees his way clearly; when it is rejected, the soul of man stumbles in darkness. It is a sad thing when individuals and nations extinguish that light—when Christ and His Gospel are supplanted by the law of the jungle and the strength of the sword. The chief tragedy in the world at the present time is its disbelief in God's goodness and its lack of faith in the teachings and doctrines of the Gospel.

To all who believe in a living, personal God and His divine Truth, life can be so delightful and beautiful. It is glorious just to be alive. Joy, even ecstasy, can be experienced in the consciousness of existence. There is supreme satisfaction in sensing one's individual entity and in realizing that that entity is part of God's creative plan. There are none so poor, none so rich, sick or maimed that they may not be conscious of this relationship.

I know that for not a few of us the true joy of living is overcast by trials, failures, worries and perplexities incident to making a living and attempting to achieve success. Tearbedimmed eyes are often blind to the beauties that surround us. Life sometimes seems a parched and barren desert, when, as a matter of fact, there is comfort, even happiness within our grasp if we could or would but reach for it.

Next to a sense of a kinship with God comes the helpfulness, encouragement and inspiration of friends. Friendship is a sacred possession. As air, water and sunshine are to flowers, trees and verdure, so smiles, sympathy and love of friends are to the daily life of man. "To live, laugh, love one's friends, and be loved by them is to bask in the sunshine of life."

Conditions that will bring peace and comfort to the individual are as easily found and named as are the evils and vices that bring tribulation, and, if cherished in proportion to their worth, are as easily practiced. A few of the fundamentals of these Jesus referred to when he said: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace." (John 16:33)

Summarized they are (1) acceptance of Christ as the Way, the Truth, and the Life; (2) a love of God manifested in deeds; and (3) a love for one another.

Jesus taught that men and women fail to live truly, and really amount to nothing unless they have spirituality. The spiritual force underlies everything, and without it nothing worth while can be accomplished. "Spiritual needs can be met only by spiritual means. All government, laws, methods and organizations are of no value unless men and women are filled with truth, righteousness and mercy. Material things have no power to raise the sunken spirit. Gravitation, electricity and steam are great forces, but they are all powerless to change the motives of men and women. The wealth of Rockefeller cannot heal the broken heart, and the wisdom of all our universities cannot turn into the paths of righteousness a wayward soul."

The Gospel, the glad tidings of great joy, is the true guide to mankind; and that man or woman is happiest and most content who lives nearest to its teachings, which are the antitheses of hatred, persecution, tyranny, domination, injustice — things which foster tribulation, destruction and death throughout the world. What the sun in the heavenly blue is to the earth struggling to get free from winter's grip, so the Gospel is to sorrowing souls yearning for something higher and better than mankind has yet found in this old world.
