David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Jews

THE RETURN OF THE JEWS

A Glimpse of Prophecy in Process of Fulfilment

WHEN I was a small boy, I heard my father say that the Prophet Joseph Smith had prophesied that the Jews will some day rebuild Palestine. He also stated that as early as the year 1841 Elder Orson Hyde, of the Council of Twelve, had dedicated that land for the return of the Jews.

Of course, Palestine to me was an unknown country; but my impressions of it were (1) that it was barren and unproductive, and (2) that the Turks ruled it. Even these two ideas as I remember were very vague. But there was one impression made by father's reference to that prophecy which was deep and lasting, and which I expressed to myself in the following words:

"When we see the Jews going back to Palestine, we can believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet." Though my father spoke of it with as much assurance as if he were narrating an historical fact, such fulfilment, to my meagerly informed mind seemed indeed a very remote possibility.

That was about the year 1883.

On November 2nd, 1921, while performing a special mission, President Hugh J. Cannon and I had the privilege of visiting the city of Jerusalem. On the evening previous, when we had parted from our guide, we anticipated visiting the Mount of Olives the next morning; so we were surprised when we met Michael, our dragoman, to learn that he desired to change the program.

"Don't ask me why I change," he said; "just you trust me. I will tell you when we enter the city."

We then observed that the shops leading from the Allenby Hotel to the Jaffa Gate were closed and the windows barred; also that where a dozen automobiles had been parked the evening before to hire to tourists, now not any could be seen! In answer to our repeated question as to the meaning of this unexpected change in the business aspect of the city, Michael finally answered:

"This is a day of mourning. To-day the Mohammed-ans and the Christians throughout Palestine unite in protesting against Lord Balfour's declaration that Palestine shall be set apart as a Jewish state."

This was a surprise to me. At first I was inclined to treat the matter lightly, not crediting our man with a thorough understanding of the matter; but the more we questioned him and the more clearly we discerned his bitter antipathy toward the Jews, the more convinced I became that we were going to witness that day a most significant demonstration.

All shops were closed — excepting one, and that a stationery store kept by an Englishman. Neither camel nor donkey did we see in the streets, where yesterday there were scores. Men and women were gathering in groups. We soon began to sense a spirit of tension in the air.

Our dragoman was vehement, in subdued voice, in his protestations that the Jews should never rule Palestine. Said I, "Michael, standing here in David Street, this second of November, 1921, I'm going to tell you something to remember: No matter how much the Mohammedans and the Greek Christians oppose the Jews' coming back to Palestine, they are coming back to redeem this land."

"Never!" he cried with emphasis and bitterness. "These streets will flow with blood first!"

"The streets may and undoubtedly will flow with blood," I answered, "but that will not prevent the Jews from coming back to this land. Don't you believe the Bible?"

"I know the Bible says Jerusalem will be rebuilt," was his tacit admission; "but the time hasn't yet come."

"Yes," I answered, "it appears the time has come."

When we reached Mount Moriah, the site of Solomon's Temple, our ears caught the sounds of voices shouting. Soon there passed us a crowd of what appeared to be students and rowdy boys, crying, "There is no God but Allah, and Mohammed is his prophet!"

"There will be trouble today," reiterated Michael for the tenth or fifteenth time.

When at eleven-thirty a.m., we emerged from visiting the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and again entered David Street, there was a good deal of Moslem rowdyism manifest in the narrow streets of the city, and our guide was so worried that his mind was more on what was going to happen that day than on what had happened two thousand years before. And so were ours in a very few minutes.

As we walked up David Street, we met scores of Mohammedans going toward the Mosque of Omar to pay their noonday devotions. Suddenly behind them, we heard imprecating yells mingled with cries of "Help!" Hurrying forward, we saw two Jewish women, some children, and one or two men trying to escape from a mob who had sticks and stones in their hands. I saw one hurl a stone and strike a man in the back. The women's faces were blanched with fear. One of them clutched a small child in her arms. Fortunately, officers were near, who protected the pursued group, whose only offense, so far as we could learn, was the fact that they were Jews who had come to what they considered their homeland, and who happened to be out of the Jewish quarter.

A short walk took us to the street leading to that part of the city in which the Jews live. Against the protestations of our guide we ventured on for the purpose of inquiring of the Jews what all this uproar meant.

British soldiers in full uniform, including helmets, stood with bayonets fixed, guarding the street. Recognizing us as Americans, they permitted us to pass. The feeling in that quarter was truly ominous. Groups of foreign Jews eyed us with suspicion. We tried in vain several times to talk to some men, but they could not understand English. At length we approached a crowd in which there was a young man who could converse with us. In reply to our question as to what the trouble was all about, he said:

"The Mohammedans and the Christians are opposed to the Zionist movement; and they make this demonstration as a protest against Lord Balfour's declaration that Palestine shall be held as a Jewish State."

I shall never forget the scene in that Jewish street of Jerusalem — frightened women and children on balconies, or peering out of windows—expectant men moving slowly about in groups, or consulting in subdued conversational tones. I seemed to see not many years hence those doorways and stone steps covered with blood in a great struggle that is impending, of which the spirit of that day was as the rumbling of a pent-up volcano!

When we repassed the British soldiers, we expressed appreciation of their presence; for we realized that they were the protectors at least that day of fifty thousand Jews who had returned to the Holy City. Armed motor cars were in the streets. British officers were on top of David's Tower signaling to fellow officers in other parts of the city; official orders were cried throughout the town that no one would be permitted on any street after 5 o'clock p.m.—an order that was implicitly obeyed!

As I sat in my room that evening, thinking over the stirring events of the day, only a brief mention of which I have here given, I was overwhelmed with the realization of the significance of what we had witnessed:

(1) The Turkish rule of practically sixteen hundred years — seven hundred years of continuous possession — had been supplanted by the protecting power of Great Britain.

(2) Living in the Executive Mansion that very night, officiating as Governor General of Palestine, was Sir Herbert Samuels, the first Jew to rule in the Holy Land since before the days of the Savior.

(3) Jews were returning to the land by tens of thousands, and supporting their return was the Zionist Movement, a world-wide organization, backed by accumulated wealth of centuries, the sole purpose of which is to restore the Jews to their "Promised Land."

I recalled two remarkable prophecies recorded in the Book of Mormon, printed in English before 1830, and uttered over 2,300 years before. One of these relates to the attitude of the Jews toward their Savior, and reads as follows:

"When the day cometh, saith the prophet, that they (the Jews) no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made to their fathers." (1 Ne. 19:15)

One of those "covenants" was that the Jews should be returned to the land of their inheritance. But the question is, has that day come, when they no more "turn aside their hearts against the Holy One"? The testimonies of Dr. George Croly, author of Tarry Thou Till I Come; of Rabbi Henry Berkowitz of Philadelphia; of Isador Singer, Ph.D., editor of the Jewish Encyclopedia; of Harris Weinstock, author of Jesus the Jew; of Professor David Castelli and many other leaders among the Jewish people, seem to indicate most convincingly that their hearts are turning "no more against the Holy One." Says Henry Berkowitz: "This Jew, Jesus, is the greatest, noblest rabbi of them all," and Isador Singer adds: "I regard Jesus of Nazareth as a Jew of the Jews, one whom all Jewish people are learning to love."

The other prophecy is even more significant:

But behold, thus saith the Lord God: When the day cometh that they shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers that they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance, and it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from their long dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the four parts of the earth; and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance. Yea, the kings of the Gentiles shall be nursing fathers unto them, and their queens shall become nursing mothers; wherefore, the promises of the Lord are great unto the Gentiles. (2 Ne. 10:7-9)

And Orson Hyde, with the same spirit of prophecy, wrote as early as 1842, as follows:

It was by political power and influence that the Jewish nation was broken down, and her subjects dispersed abroad and I will here hazard the opinion, that by political power and influence they will be gathered and built up; and further, that England is destined in the wisdom and economy of heaven to stretch forth the arm of political power, and advance in the front ranks of this glorious enterprise.

This day we had witnessed the "nursing" influence and the protecting power of the Gentile nation in the restoration of Jews to Jerusalem, and that protecting power, the British nation, supported by the allies — other "Gentile" peoples!

What would have happened that day to the despised Jews, if such power had not been manifest, is not difficult to conjecture. As it was, a bomb had been thrown into the crowd, killing one man outright, mortally wounding two others, and severely injuring several men. Later in the day, near the Damascus Gate, three Jews were clubbed and stoned to death in reparation and vengeance. Next morning we learned that eight persons had lost their lives in skirmishes that took place in spite of the vigilance of the British troops.

As all these facts and a hundred others passed through my mind in panoramic review, I remembered what I had thought and had said to myself as a boy: "When we see the Jews going back to the Holy Land, we can then believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God." That was only a boy's conclusion and possibly drawn from insufficient data. However, the trend of world events, the facts of current history, and the signs of the times all tend to corroborate the truth and wisdom of that boyish thought. God's overruling power is being made manifest among the nations, for the redemption of Zion and the restoration of Israel.
