David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Kindness

THERE is no virtue which does not increase in lustre by sincere contemplation. Like jewels in a diadem, every virtue sparkles in beauty; but when one is singled out in concentrated thought and careful observation, it seems to increase in brilliance until it assumes an importance superior to all others. Since this is a characteristic of all virtues, none is undervalued when special praise is given to any particular one.

Recently, I have been deeply impressed with the need in this world of the application of the modest, unassuming principle of kindness — with the need of man's cultivating the simple art of just being kind.

Kindness is one of the choicest of gems in the coronet of Truth. This is evident from the value given it by prophets and inspired men in all ages. Through inspiration Isaiah makes "everlasting kindness" an attribute of the Lord and Redeemer; Paul classifies it among the choicest of virtues to be cultivated. Christ's short life among men was replete with acts reflecting this divine principle. His kindness won the loving but repentant sinner of Magdala, inspired hope and regeneration in the life of the woman sentenced to be stoned to death, and filled gracious mothers' hearts with eternal gratitude as He gently and lovingly blessed their little ones. Thus, just as His strength and perfect faith inspired the hardy fishermen of Galilee, and compelled even rulers of the Jews to seek wisdom and guidance at His feet, so His kindness shed its rays upon those who were weak and tender, guiding them along the pathway to peace and salvation.

Kindness is not an effeminate virtue, but like mercy "'Tis mightiest in the mightiest: it becomes the throned monarch better than his crown." It is never so brilliant as when it shines through strength.

If these positive admonitions and teachings by great leaders of men fail to awaken within us a desire to cherish this virtue, surely the effects of unkindness and of cruelty, which we behold on every hand each day, are sufficient to arouse even the most lethargic and indifferent soul. So I thought upon a return journey from the Armenian mission, through that country which above all others should be eager to follow the footsteps of Him whose life gave that land the title "holy." But cruelty, especially to poor dumb brutes, is manifest almost every hour.

Evidence of this is seen in the prostrate body of a faithful donkey probed and beaten until it fell dead by the roadside. From its partly-eaten carcass a jackal trots away until travelers pass by.

Such evidence is heard in the agonizing groans of the camel upon whose back is a raw spot as large as a man's hand, but on which a pack of four hundred or five hundred pounds is unmercifully thrown. If the poor brute tries to protest against this torture, he is forced into submission by the tightening of iron prongs that serve as a kind of combined bridle and halter and which close vice-like on each side of his mouth when the rope attached to them tightens. Perhaps the pain of the galled sore is less intense than that produced by the newly-inflicted wounds made as the iron prongs pierce the tender flesh and strike the jawbones!

The spavined horse lashed to greater speed or to stronger efforts to pull the heavy load is evidence also. I never see an unkind driver of such without almost wishing that he might strike the bone at the base of his "big toe" with a hammer, and then be compelled to walk in a tight shoe all day. Thus only could he be brought to realize what constant and life-sapping pain is endured by the poor spavined horse, compelled, notwithstanding pain, to do the driver's bidding!

Indirect and often direct results of unkindness are seen in the thin and hard-lined features of little girls sitting hour after hour, day after day at the loom, making the costly rugs that adorn the homes of the well-to-do!

Members of the Church, as well as missionaries, have experienced the effect of words and deeds prompted by the spirit of unkindness. Efficient and honest workmen have been discharged from positions, children have been beaten and driven from home. Men actuated only by the spirit of loving service have been maligned and beaten, and in various ways has Innocence been branded with wickedness — atrocious deeds that would not have been committed if the perpetrators of them had in their brutal natures just a little of the milk of human kindness.

Kindness is a principle of the Gospel too seldom taught and more seldom practiced. It is the forerunner of Love; it prepares the heart for reverence and true worship; for

He prayeth best who loveth best All things both great and small; For the dear Lord who loveth us, He made and loveth all — * * * Let us oft speak kind words to each other, At home or wher-e'er we may be. Like the warbling of birds on the heather, Their tones will be welcome and free.
