David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Kingdom of God

THE KINGDOM OF GOD — OR CATASTROPHE

TRADITION tells us that Peter, when on the Appian Way going towards Rome, was met by this question: "Quo Vadis?" (Whither goest thou?). Were that question put to people today, many pessimists would answer that we are headed for catastrophe, if not total destruction.

The paramount need in the world today is a clearer understanding by human beings of moral and spiritual values, and a desire and determination to attain them. Never before in the history of the world has there been such a need of spiritual awakening. Unless there is such an awakening, there is danger of catastrophe among the nations of the world.

But I feel, with all my soul, that the sun of hope is rising. Many thinking men and women are recognizing the need of man's looking up towards the heavens instead of his groveling in response to his animal nature. Whether we live miserably or live abundantly depends upon ourselves. Look introspectively, young man and young woman, and determine whether your innermost thoughts hold you on the animal plane or whether they tend to lift you into the mental, moral, and spiritual realm. And you be your own judge. Are you scheming to exploit another for personal gain? Are you justifying a lie? Are you entertaining the thought of robbing a young woman of her virtue? Are you, young women, justifying an act of unchastity in exchange for the attention or favor of a male companion? If these or other selfish sinful thoughts obsess you, then you are not following the path of the abundant life, but are contributing to the continuance of a sordid, unhappy world.

I call your attention to three incidents in the life of Jesus and some connotations of those incidents.

First, recall His experience on the Mount of Temptation. In that experience we find taught the sublime necessity of subordinating the animal part of our natures to the spiritual. Man is a dual being — he is human, physical, of the earth, earthy, but he is also divine, the offspring of God.

On the Mt. of Temptation Jesus resisted every appeal to His physical appetite — "Command these stones, that they may be made bread"; — every appeal to His vanity, — "I dare you to thrust yourself down" from the pinnacle;—every appeal to His selfishness and pride — every bribe offered by way of power and wealth in exchange for spiritual companionship with His Father. Resisting all, he said to the Tempter: "Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." (Matt. 4:10)

Then during his brief mission among men, he emphasized the value of entertaining noble thoughts. What you think will determine your character, not alone what you do, and what one thinks about in one's secret moments determines what he is. "A good tree bears good fruit; an evil tree, evil fruit." A good tree, He says, cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor an evil tree bring forth good fruit. That teaching lies at the very bottom of Christ's ethical teachings. His whole effort was to make the tree good, for when that end was achieved, the good qualities of the fruit were assured.

The second incident I take from the Sermon on the Mount — a mountain in the vicinity of the Sea of Galilee. "No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon." (Matt. 6:24) Then He added, "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matt. 6:33)

Keeping in mind the fact that we are the children of our Father in Heaven, when we seek the Kingdom of God first, we become conscious of a new aim in life. To nourish and delight the body with its appetites and passions, as animals do, is no longer the chief end of mortal existence. Spiritual attainment, not physical possessions, becomes the chief goal. God is not viewed from the standpoint of what we may get from Him, but what we may give to Him. Only in the complete surrender of our inner life may we rise above the selfish, sordid pull of nature.

"Giving God the Glory" is a sure means of subduing selfishness — a willingness on the part of the individual to keep God as the ideal in his life. Faith, therefore, is a foundation element in true character building; for an upright character is the result only of continued effort and right thinking, the effect of long-cherished associations with God-like thoughts. He approaches nearest to the Christ-spirit who makes God the center of his thoughts; and he who can say in his heart, "Not my will, but thine be done," approaches most nearly the Christ ideal.

The third incident is the scene with the Pharisees when a lawyer asked Him; "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" Jesus said unto him, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

"This is the first and great commandment.

"And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." (Matt. 22:36-39)

For two thousand years, practically, men have considered this sublime doctrine as impracticable — too ideal, they say; but if we sincerely believe in Christ's divinity, that He is "the Way, the Truth, the Life," we cannot consistently doubt the applicability of His teachings to every day life.

True, there are weighty problems to solve — evils of the slums, the ever-recurring conflicts between labor and capital, drunkenness, prostitution, international hatreds, and a hundred other current questions. But, if heeded, Christ's appeal for personal integrity, honor, fair dealing, and love is basic in the proper solution of all these social and economic difficulties.

Most certainly before the world even approaches these ideals, men's hearts must be changed. Christ came into the world for that very purpose. The principal reason for preaching the Gospel is to change men's hearts and lives. We can say in the words of Thomas Nixon Carver: "Come, our way of life is best because it works best . . . . We believe that obedience to God means obedience to the laws of nature, which are but the manifestations of His will; and we try by painstaking study to acquire the most complete and exact knowledge of that will, in order that we may conform ourselves to it."
