David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Knowledge

WHERE KNOWLEDGE IS ABSOLUTE

THOUGHT is the most real thing in existence.

What a man thinks, he knows as he knows nothing else in all the world.

One gloomy, misty morning a young elder was distributing tracts in Stirling, Scotland. He had been away from his home in Utah only a few months, but he had already encountered the opposition that prejudice and bigotry were hurling against the Church. For the first time in his life he had felt the sting of ostracism. He was in the land of his father's birth, in the home country of his ancestors, as far back as records could trace them. He spoke the same language as those around him. He was somewhat conversant with the history of the old Stirling Castle, with its romances and tragedies. He had read several of Scott's historical novels, and could read and quote from Burns' love songs with appreciation. He thought he was the worshipper of the same God as the professing Christians with whom he associated. He was not at a loss, therefore, for material for conversation on topics interesting to Scotchmen when opportunities for conversation presented themselves. Gradually, however, there had crept over him the realization that he and his companion were in no manner a part of the social or religious element of that city.

This ostracism was because of their religion.

Their Church was considered unwholesome, as something to be despised. Was it? Yet, after all, was it really worth the seeming sacrifices that he, his companion and thousands of others were making for it? Most surely someone was deceived. Either he was wrong or the people were. They seemed sincere in their opposition to his Church. He was sincere in his advocacy of it. Were they right or was he?

With these thoughts and feelings and a hundred others associated with them, he took his tracts that morning and entered a "close," distributing them from door to door from the ground floor to the top. When he came down a half dozen or more housewives were assembled at the entrance to the "close." As he passed them one sneeringly remarked, "Ye can gang awa' hame; ye canna hae ony o' oor lassies!"

Scarcely four months had passed since the sweetest girl in all the world had led him to hope that she would give her hand, as well as her heart, to him upon his return from his mission; so nothing could have been farther from his mind that morning than a desire to win the favor of any other girl. So the woman that sneered was deceived. But her taunt had in it a vile accusation, viz., that he was there to traffic in the virtue of women, and to cover such traffic with the garb of religion!

The most real things to him in all the world were his own thoughts and feelings, and he knew as he knew nothing else that those women, and all who thought as they, though the number might run into millions, were deceived.
