David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Life

LIFE AT ITS BEST

THERE is no one "good thing" which will give "eternal life." Life is an ever-flowing river on which one embarks at birth, and sails for fifty, seventy, eighty or more years. Every year that passes goes into an eternity never, never to return. However, each carries with it into the past no weakness, no bodily ailment, no sorrow, no lofty thought, no noble aspiration, no hope, no ambition—all these with every trait of character, every inclination, every tendency remain with us. We may resolve to let all our sorrows and weaknesses go with the passing time, but we know that every thought, every inclination is still ours, and we shall have to deal with it today.

If, at the end of each day, one finds his spirit heavy because of having failed, one's conscience pricked because of having manifested weakness or having indulged in sin, then on that day, at least, one has not found life at its best. No man has lived a well-spent day who, at night, tosses his head on a sleepless pillow because of a stricken conscience.

This observation leads us to a consideration of what is right and what is wrong. However, we need not be disturbed over the metaphysical question of the origin of sin, for here again the Gospel is a safe and sane guide. Just how evil conditions may contribute to life at its best seems to be in the minds of some a question for argument. A man must be depraved, indeed, who finds more thrill in failures and miseries of his fellow beings than in their successes, who finds greater joy in the riderless horse and the trampled jockey than in the thoroughbred and its rider that win the race.

The proper care of the body is an essential element in proper living. Life at its best means the abundant life in which the body functions properly; in which the mind is free to explore the universe and to try to solve its mystery; in which the spirit finds joy in the beauties and glories of nature as she spreads herself so beautifully and gorgeously around us every day—the snow-capped mountains, forests clothed in the mantle of pure white, diamonds sparkling on the snowy surface of our mountain valleys. In the spring, the brave, hardy, vari-colored pansies peep through the late snow to catch the welcome rays of the morning sun. Everywhere in springtime are bursting buds, and new-born leaves—in the summer, the perfume of flowers, mingling with that of new-mown hay and ripening grain—songs of birds and the hum of myriads of insects all contributing to the beauty and glory surrounding us.

Another element of life at its best is the joy of friends. Man is truly a social being and cannot live by himself alone. "All that he sends into the hearts of others comes back into his own." There are few things in life sweeter than friendship, declared by someone to be "the gift of the Gods, the most precious boon to man."

Another element is the family. The proper view of marriage places family life as the stabilizing group of all civilized society. Throughout the ages men have learned that our home joys "are the most delightful earth affords, and the joy of parents in their children is the most holy joy of humanity. It makes their hearts pure and good; it lifts men up to their Father in Heaven." In the well-ordered home, where confidence and love abide, you find life at its best.

We have the obligation to emulate the Christ-life in fair and honest dealing with our fellow men. To be honest is to manifest good sense. A knave may gloat over his having cheated his neighbor, but a man who is sincere can never be happy in any form of trickery or deceit.

Life at its best consists in keeping the body pure, the physical senses keen and appreciative of all things good and beautiful; in being able to rejoice in all that God has given us; having friends, and being a friend; in rearing a family, in which boys are trying to honor their name and girls are keeping true the ideals of motherhood; finally, in ever keeping in mind the "Light of the World"; and having found Him to study His teachings, and emulate His divine example. Life at its best is the life in which a man loves the Lord with all his might, mind, and strength, and his neighbor as himself.

LIFE'S REAL PURPOSE

WHAT is the real purpose of life? Youth has buoyancy of spirit—it is full of animation, hopeful expectancy of a joyous future. All such aspirations are in keeping with the real purpose of existence. He who has been termed the wisest American said: "Nothing can bring you peace but the triumph of principles."

There are two basic principles in life. The first is that success or failure is determined by your ideals. The kind of life you live, your disposition, whether you are cheerful or morose, whether envious or jealous, will be determined largely by the thoughts you entertain, of which your acts are but the outward expression. Thought is the seed of action. As definitely and as surely as the weaver shapes his flowers and figures out of the warp and woof of his loom so every moment the shuttle of thought moves back and forth forming character, and even modifying the lineaments of our features. What subordinate things one seeks will have less bearing upon the direction of one's life in producing hopefulness and joy or discouragement and gloom than does the dominant thought of the mind, the paramount wish of the heart.

Besides the aspect of your ideals and what you think about there is another fundamental, and I put it in these words: God desiring men to become like Him first made them free. In other words, the right to choose is a blessed privilege, a divine gift. Your character, then, your eternal destiny, are determined by your choice. Resist the thieves of jealousy, hatred, intemperance, unchastity. Harbor them, and as a thief they steal your character, make you miserable instead of happy, lead to criminality.

Live in all things outside yourself by love. As you serve others, the children around you, your father, your mother, your associates, ever striving to make yourself and the world better, then will your souls grow in wisdom. Therein you will find the guide to the happy life.
