David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Man

MAN'S DUAL NATURE

Choose You This Day Whom Ye Will Serve

(Joshua 24:15)

THERE is an old story which tells of the experience of a great artist who was engaged to paint a mural for the cathedral in a Sicilian town. The subject was the life of Christ. For many years the artist labored diligently, and finally the painting was finished except for the two most important figures, the Christ Child and Judas Iscariot. He searched far and wide for models for those two figures.

One day while walking in an old part of the city he came upon some children playing in the street. Among them was a twelve-year-old boy whose face stirred the painter's heart. It was the face of an angel—a very dirty one, perhaps, but the face he needed. The artist took the child home with him, and day after day the boy sat patiently until the face of the Christ Child was finished.

But the painter failed to find a model for Judas. For years, haunted by the fear that his masterpiece would remain unfinished, he continued his search.

One afternoon, in a tavern, the painter saw a gaunt and tattered figure stagger across the threshold and fall to the floor, begging for a glass of wine. The painter lifted him up and looked into a face that startled him. It seemed to bear the marks of every sin of mankind.

"Come with me," the painter said. "I will give you wine, food, and clothing."

Here at last was his model for Judas. For many days and parts of many nights the painter worked feverishly to complete his masterpiece.

As the work went on, a change came over the model. A strange tension replaced the stuporous languor, and his bloodshot eyes were fixed with horror on the painted likeness of himself. One day, perceiving his subject's agitation, the painter paused in his work, saying, "My son, I'd like to help you. What troubles you so?"

The model sobbed and buried his face in his hands. After a long moment he lifted pleading eyes to the old painter's face.

"Do you not then remember me? Years ago I was your model for the Christ Child!"

Well, the story may be fact or fiction, but the lesson it teaches is true to life. The dissipated man made a wrong choice in his youth, and in seeking gratification in indulgence sank ever lower and lower until he wallowed in the gutter.

Man has a dual nature: one, related to the earthly or animal life; the other, akin to the divine. Whether a man remains satisfied within what we designate the animal world, satisfied with what the animal world will give him, yielding without effort to the whim of his appetites and passions and slipping farther and farther into the realm of indulgence, or whether, through selfmastery, he rises toward intellectual, moral and spiritual enjoyments depends upon the kind of choice he makes every day, nay, every hour of his life. "Man has two creators," says William George Jordan, "his God and himself. This first creator furnishes him the raw material of his life—the laws and conformity with which he can make that life what he will. The second creator—himself—has marvelous powers he rarely realizes. It is what a man makes of himself that counts."

We need not shut our eyes to the fact that too many of our young folk respond to the call of the physical because it seems the easy and natural thing to do. Too many are vainly seeking shortcuts to happiness. It should always be kept in mind that that which is most worth while in life requires strenuous effort.

It is said that one Roman emperor offered a reward to anybody who would invent a new pleasure. Nero set Rome on fire for the mere pleasure of a new form of diversion. Rome fell because of extravagance, luxury, and dissipation. In personal as in national life, these are unfailing signs of decline and decay.

In their yearning for a good time, young people are often tempted to indulge in the things which appeal only to the baser side of humanity, five of the most common of which are: first, vulgarity and obscenity; second, drinking and petting parties; third, unchastity; fourth, disloyalty; and fifth, irreverence.

Vulgarity is often the first step down the road to indulgence. To be vulgar is to give offense to good taste or refined feelings.

It is only a step from vulgarity to obscenity. It is right, indeed essential, to the happiness of our young people that they meet in social parties, but it is an indication of low morals when for entertainment they must resort to physical stimulation and debasement. Drinking and petting parties form an environment in which the moral sense becomes dulled, and unbridled passion holds sway. It then becomes easy to take the final step downward in moral disgrace.

When, instead of high moral principles, a life of immoral indulgence is chosen, and man or woman gets far down in the scale of degeneracy, disloyalty is an inevitable part of his or her nature. Loyalty to parents becomes quenched; obedience to their teachings and ideals abandoned; loyalty to wife and children smothered in base gratification; loyalty to Church impossible, and often supplanted by sneers at its teachings.

At this stage, irreverence is an evitable consequence, a pretty sure sign of moral weakness. No man will rise high who jeers at sacred things.

The real tragedy of following false ideals is that by so doing we stifle and sometimes choke out spirituality completely. The body with its five or more senses, with its appetites and passions, is essential to life and happiness, but in the ultimate analysis it is only a means to a higher end. When man makes its gratification an end in itself, he frustrates the purpose of life and descends to sensuality.

Spirituality is the consciousness of victory over self, and of communion with the infinite. Spirituality impels one to conquer difficulties and acquire more and more strength. To feel one's faculties unfolding and truth expanding the soul is one of life's sublimest experiences.

Being "honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men," are attributes which contribute to spirituality, the highest acquisition of the soul. It is "the divine in man, the supreme, crowning gift that makes him king of all created things, the one final quality that makes him tower above all other animals."

MAN'S CHOICE—ANIMALITY OR SPIRITUALITY

OF ALL holidays observed throughout the Christian world, Christmas is the most significant; the event it celebrates, the most glorious. At this season, more than any other, people "Ring in the Christ that is to be," and to a limited degree, for a day at least, practice high ideals, which, if they were adopted by the majority of mankind, would contribute to the perfect humanity typified by the life of Jesus of Nazareth.

You may think it needless to be reminded of the obvious fact that Christmas means nothing to any creature excepting man. In all creation only human beings can sense the possibility of a spiritual realm or even of a life that rises above the animal plane of existence. True, Shakespeare says:

That ever 'gainst that season comes

Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated

The bird of dawning singeth all night long:

So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.

(Hamlet, Act I, sc. I)

But the stern fact of life is that animals, as other living things, can only grow and reproduce their kind in accordance with the fixed laws of nature and the divine command—"Let the earth bring forth the living creatures after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and the beast of the earth after his kind."

Thus every creature is responsive to physical demands which it must obey.

The human organism being material and chemical the same as that of the animal also is subject to the appetites, passions, and other cravings of the physical body.

To man, however, is given a special endowment not bestowed upon any other living thing. When the Creator "breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul," God gave to him the power of Choice. Only to the human being did the Creator say: "Thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee." As God desired men to become as He, it was necessary that He should first make them free.

Thus man was endowed with the greatest blessing that can be given to mortal being—the gift of free agency. Without this divine power to choose, humanity cannot progress.

Commenting upon this special endowment, a leading scientist, Dr. Lecomte du Nouy in Human Destiny says: "By giving man liberty and conscience God abdicated a part of his omnipotence in favor of his creature, and this represents the spark of God in man (`God is within you'). Liberty is real, for God Himself refused to trammel it."

Freedom of speech, freedom of action within boundaries that do not infringe upon the liberty of others are man's inherent right—divine gifts "essential to human dignity and human happiness."

What a travesty on human nature when a person or a group of persons, though endowed with a consciousness of being able to rise in human dignity to realms indiscernible by lower creations, yet will still be content to obey animal instincts, without putting forth efforts to experience the joy of goodness, purity, self-mastery, and faith that spring from compliance to moral rules. How tragic it is when man, made a "little lower than the angels and crowned with glory and honour," will content himself to grovel on the animal plane. Truly, serious thinking prompts one to agree that he should be sent back to nature's mint and reissued as a counterfeit on humanity's baser metal.

"Cheer up your hearts," admonished the ancient prophet, "and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves."

"This love of liberty which God has planted in us," said Abraham Lincoln, "constitutes the bulwark of our liberty and independence. It is not our form in battlements, or bristling seacoasts, or in our Navy. Our defense is in the spirit which prizes liberty as the heritage of all men in all lands everywhere. Destroy this spirit, and we have planted the seeds of despotism at our own doors."

The opposite of freedom is bondage, servility, restraint, conditions that inhibit mentality, stifle the spirit and crush manhood. To coerce, to compel, to bring the individual into servitude is the Communist plan for the human family.

Aside from resisting such oppression from without, each individual carries within himself the responsibility of living nobly or ignobly. Daily every normal person is faced with the choice of submission to what Paul designated the "works of the flesh," or of reaching upward for the fruits of the spirit, which are "love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law."

Conditions in the world today seem to indicate that human beings as a group are living not very far above the animal plane. Cunning, deception, thieving, lying, cruelty, brutality, warring conflicts are still all too common even among Christian nations.

But, thank Heaven, throughout the ages there have been men, true spiritual leaders, who understood that these natural instincts must be controlled and subdued before men as peoples can dwell together in harmony.

Peerless among these great ones stands Jesus of Nazareth, whose birth was heralded by Heavenly Hosts, and who, during His brief mortal existence, proved that spiritual attainments are possible during man's mortal existence. Whatever may be the divergent views regarding His atonement, people generally acknowledge Him as the one perfect Man.

To pay Him tribute, however, merely as the most perfect character is not enough. Faith in His divinity is the most important need of the world—a faith that determines a man's religion, or, as Carlyle says, his "skepticism or no religion." Such a faith is more than a mere feeling. It is power that moves to action, and should be in human life the most basic of all motivating forces.

Accept it or reject it as you will, the destiny of nations is involved in the all-important question, "What think ye of Christ?" and in whether the world will receive Him as the Son of God.

If men ever reject the fact that Christ is our Lord and Savior; that His mission is to redeem man from the sordid life of selfish indulgence and sin, and lift him into a realm of self-sacrifice, generosity, beauty and love shown only by Him; if the majority of nations fail to recognize Him as "the only name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved"; if doubting men reject the possibility of obtaining that spiritual assurance of Christ's divinity disclosed by Thomas when he reverently exclaimed: "My Lord, and My God"; if the acts of men generally be in accordance with such rejection rather than in accordance with their acceptance of Him as the One Divine, then this world will continue to be torn by contention, made miserable by hideous warfare and ignominiously wrecked on the shoals of materialism, selfish indulgence and disbelief.

Without Jesus of Nazareth, the Crucified Christ, the Risen Lord, the beastly traits of the jungle will hold the human family in bondage.

Of all festivals held throughout Christendom, Christmas is most nearly universally celebrated. There is something intrinsic about it which appeals to everyone, from the prattling, toddling infant to the old philosopher walking in the sunset of life. It is the one season of the year when selfishness is subordinated, when the desire to give exceeds the desire to get. Kindness, forgiveness, forbearance, love—these are among the simple virtues which make this holiday season so delightful.

The obligation and duty rest upon the Church of Jesus Christ to proclaim the truth that the Babe of Bethlehem, the Man of Galilee, the Resurrected Christ, is truly the Way, the Truth and the Life: that He is in very deed the Savior of mankind.

When He came as a lowly babe there was no room in the inn. Today, every heart and every home should bid Him welcome. If such were true, selfishness, jealousy, enmity, and all other things which bring unhappiness would be replaced by kindness, willing service and good will. If we can do away with strife and suspicion for a day, why not rise above them continually! Christ came to give us peace and life eternal. Let us accept His gift with thankfulness and show our gratitude by following the paths that lead to peace.

First, then, let each individual admit into his own heart the true spirit of Christmas, and then have it radiate throughout his home. A thousand such homes would make a truly Christian city, and a thousand such cities, a truly Christian nation.

Abroad and even in our beloved country pernicious efforts and sinister schemes are cunningly and stealthily being fostered to deprive man of his personal liberty and have him revert to the life of the jungle. With faith in the revealed word of God, let all true believers in individual freedom cherish the spiritual ideals of the Christ, and ever strive to make real the dream that some day many nations will unite not for war, but for peace and the establishing of the Kingdom of God.

O Living Christ, who still Dost all our burdens share, Come now and dwell within the hearts Of all men everywhere. (John Oxenham)
