David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Marriage

IN ALL the problems and perplexities of human existence, Jesus Christ is the one safe guide to whom we can go for guidance and comfort. Mark's account of Jesus' answer to the Pharisees on divorce sets forth the Savior's attitude toward this vital question. (Mark 10:2-9)

A careful study of this text, and other references that he made to marriage and divorce, leave little doubt that Jesus set forth the lofty ideal that marriage is of divine origin and that the marriage bond should be held sacred.

This lofty ideal of marriage is confirmed by modern revelation and is recorded in the D&C 49:15-17.

In the light of scripture, ancient and modern, we are justified in concluding that Christ's ideal pertaining to marriage is the unbroken home, and conditions that cause divorce are violations of His divine teachings. Some of these are:

Unfaithfulness on the part of either the husband or wife, or both, habitual drunkenness, physical violence, long imprisonment that disgraces the wife and family, the union of an innocent girl to a reprobate—in these and perhaps other cases there may be circumstances which make the continuance of the marriage state a greater evil than divorce. But these are extreme cases—they are the mistakes, the calamities in the realm of marriage. If we could remove them I would say there never should be a divorce. It is Christ's ideal that home and marriage should be perpetual—eternal.

The number of broken marriages can be reduced if couples realize even before they approach the altar that marriage is a state of mutual service, a state of giving as well as of receiving, and that each must give of himself or herself to the utmost.

To look upon marriage as a mere contract that may be entered into at pleasure in response to a romantic whim, or for selfish purposes, and severed at the first difficulty or misunderstanding that may arise, is an evil meriting severe condemnation, especially in cases wherein children are made to suffer because of such separation.

Scientists say that civilization is to be measured at different stages largely by the development of the home. Historically, they tell us about practices of different forms of marriage among early peoples and races. Most of them are united in the conclusion that the family stands forth as the highest form of associated life. It is the natural unit of all future civic development, for in the home we find content.

I know of no other place where happiness abides more surely than in the home. Some man has said, "Home filled with contentment is one of the highest hopes of this life." It is possible to make home a bit of heaven. Indeed, I picture heaven as a continuation of the ideal home.
