David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Missionaries

GUIDING PRINCIPLES

AT A special meeting held about five months ago with groups of elders, three leading principles were set forth, the adopting of which seemed essential to the proper advancement of the work of the Lord. These were Responsibility, Unity, and Activity. All three of these virtues are applicable alike to missionaries and to the local Church membership.

Upon no other group of men in the world rests greater responsibility than upon the elders of the Church. In the full meaning of the term, they are priests of the Most High. It is their privilege to receive spiritual enlightenment and blessings; it is their duty to give these to their fellow man. Most apparent, therefore, is their responsibility as divinely authorized representatives.

With this was associated the responsibility of keeping themselves "pure and unspotted from the sins of the world." Emphasized also was the duty to disseminate Gospel literature. In a word, the elders' responsibility was stated as threefold, viz., duty to God, duty to themselves and their loved ones, and duty to the Church.

Unity was made especially applicable to the local branches, and to individual members. The necessity of co-operative effort was emphasized, and the urgent need under existing circumstances for every member to become a missionary.

The steadying influence of responsibility, the strength of unity, and the inevitable growth of well-directed activity are leavening elements . . . .

In activity lies the only road to success in Church as well as in secular affairs. Not only that, but a testimony of the Gospel is dependent upon activity manifest and willingness shown to do God's will. "He that will do the will of the Father shall know of this doctrine."

A MESSAGE FROM MOTHER

ONE of the Elders who arrived in Liverpool last Saturday morning carried in his pocket a gift from a mother in Utah to her missionary boy in Germany. Accompanying the packet was this simple note:

Quinn: Keep sweet and clean. Mother

A simple message of six monosyllables; but what a fund of information, refutation and admonition it contains!

The message tells of a mother whose heart is yearning for the companionship and love of a boy for whose success and happiness she would, if necessary, sacrifice every comfort and need. She probably wrote the message in one of the rooms in which he had oftentimes kissed her, and in which other times, no doubt, as is frequently the case with boys, he had caused her pain. The message is to no one, it is for no one, but her boy. It conveys the innermost desire of a loving mother for a son of whom to be ever justly proud will give her supreme joy. She doesn't wish him fame; she doesn't wish him wealth—she wishes him only to "keep" what in her mind he has always been—"sweet and clean."

It is not probable when writing that she thought with Swift that the quality—sweetness—is one of the two noblest things in life. When sending her love across the sea, she was not in a mood to philosophize. All her mother-heart felt was that her boy should be in manhood what he has been in youth—unstained, untainted. The word sweet undoubtedly connoted in her mind all the tenderness awakened in her soul when she nursed a bundle of sweetness through babyhood. She heard again his merry laugh as in boyhood, and saw him grow in purity and strength to manhood—still her boy, even when he passed out of his "teens"; for every true mother is like her who said of her two sons in their twenties: "You will always be my boys; I cannot call you men." It was in such light that this mother thought of her boy; so we can easily understand why she wrote "keep sweet and clean": instead of "try to be sweet and clean." In one word she said: "Keep your sweet smile; don't get sour and gloomy. Keep your sweet disposition; sullenness and anger only drive the sunshine out of your life." In brief, she would have him keep always that

Something sweet Which follows youth with flying feet.

And what story does the word "clean" tell? Did her mind's eye picture a rosy-cheeked baby in laces and ribbons immaculately dressed for the christening; or a laughing, robust lad with hands, face, neck and ears actually free from the marks of wholesome play? No, we think not. She was looking only at his soul. In her eyes her laddie is as pure as the falling snowflake, unstained by any gross sin. Weaknesses he has shown a-plenty, and errors he has often made; but he has not besmeared his young life with that sin which always brings sorrow into other lives besides the one who is chiefly guilty of it. Physically clean he has always been, and physically clean she knows he will always be. Morally clean also, he has always been; and morally clean he must ever be. Her boy is a perfect type of energetic youth, conserving strength and vitality for the responsibilities of manhood, fatherhood and true leadership among men. Unknowingly, however, she knew or rather felt that such cleanness

Is only a negative virtue Until it is tried by fire; And the soul that is worth the honor of earth, Is the soul that resists desire.

She saw her boy purified and strengthened by trials overcome and by temptations mastered. She pictured him returning home with an honorable release bearing evidence to what his clear eye and radiant countenance would so manifestly declare—that he had kept himself pure and spotless from the sins of the world—that he had kept "sweet and clean."

Such is but part of the story of that mother's message. It is the message of fifty thousand Latter-day Saint mothers to a hundred thousand boys. It is an important part of the message of the Gospel of Peace.

THE PREPARATION OF MISSIONARIES

TO render service for two or three years in the mission field is a blessing to anyone so privileged. It is recognized as such by tens of thousands of parents throughout the Church who appreciate the value of such labor to their sons and daughters, in whom this experience awakens an appreciation of home and of the Gospel. Parents know, also, that missionary activity brings into the plane of consciousness a knowledge of the truth of the Gospel which the young men have perhaps felt but not expressed.

It is well for us to have in mind not so much the benefits to these representatives as their preparation and fitness to carry on the responsibilities entailed in that call. In choosing a missionary it is well to keep in mind these questions: Is he worthy to represent the Church? Has he sufficient will power to resist temptation? Has he kept himself clean while he has been home, and by that standard proved himself capable of resisting possible temptation in the field? Has he taken active part in Church organizations in his ward and stake? Does he at least glimpse what the Church has to offer the world? Has he, through prayer or other experience, felt God's nearness to him so that he can approach the Lord as he would his earthly father?

You may say such requirements are too high. No! they are not, because opportunities for just such attainments of efficiency are right here in the Church. Having had teaching and experience in the quorums, to say nothing of the auxiliaries, young men are prepared to represent the Church as missionaries, provided they have led a clean life.

Let the idea be emphasized throughout the entire Church that when a young man enlists under the missionary banner it means that he is superior in every way—in character, in faith, and in a desire to serve the Lord.

UNREPORTED MISSIONARIES

GENERALLY speaking, there are three classes of missionaries in the Church:

1) Men and women in organized wards who are called by the General Authorities of the Church to leave their vocations and to devote two, three, or more years to the preaching of the Gospel in one of the established missions of the world.

2) Men and women outside the organized stakes who are called and set apart by a president of a mission to labor with the regular missionaries. These, too, leave their daily work, pay their own expenses, and serve in every respect just as faithfully as any others in the field.

3) Local missionaries—men and women who retain their employment but who make spare time and devote it to missionary work in their own stake, ward, district or branch.

The labors of all included in these groups are carefully noted and recorded—meetings attended, conversations held, number of tracts distributed and books sold, are summarized and each one is given credit for every hour spent and for every accomplishment made.

But there is a fourth group of missionaries whose names do not appear in the missionary roster, whose hours of service are not counted and whose beneficent efforts are not reported; yet they are found in every district—frequently in several branches in a district—in the world:

They are the missionary hosts and hostesses—men and women who are ministers indeed, who in denying themselves for the comfort and happiness of others are true servants of the Christ. As their Master of old, they "go about doing good."

The labors of these missionaries are unreported, but not unrecorded. In the hearts of the missionaries away from home the kind generous acts of these benefactors find everlasting lodgment. True, too often the appreciation goes unexpressed, but the effects of the kind deeds live on nevertheless. "Our echoes roll from soul to soul and grow forever and forever."

These unreported missionaries are designated variously, "mission mothers," and "missionary homes," being the most familiar used. Every missionary who may chance to read these lines will have awakened in his or her heart a memory of some dear soul, or fond family, who has spent not weeks or months, but years in this noble service of love and of self-sacrificing devotion.

I met them in Scotland on my first mission and have since met them in every mission I have visited in the world, whether on continents or on the islands of the sea.

God bless the unreported missionaries the world over whose self-denial and generous devotion to the work contribute so much to the advancement of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

MISSIONARY WORK

SAID the Savior to his apostles: "Go ye therefore and teach all nations . . . ." (Matt. 28:18)

Its importance and significance, its magnitude, may be glimpsed when I tell you that the total number of missionaries assigned by the First Presidency last Tuesday has reached 5001. Besides these, there are approximately 1200 or 1500 more missionaries assigned by mission presidents, a number of whom are devoting all of their time, and others working part time, making a total of 6500 missionaries in the world today. The number is exclusive of the 2900 missionaries laboring in the stakes of Zion. That makes approximately ten thousand.

In monetary terms, applying it only to the five thousand plus, there is being spent $275,000 every month or $3,300,000 per year. Missionary expenses will average about fifty-five dollars a month including the cost from home to their fields of labor.

Though the Church is young in years and comparatively small in numbers, there are today, including the great mission on Temple Square, forty-six organized missions in Europe, the United States, Canada, Mexico, South America, the Pacific Isles, Japan, and China. In these missions there are 1470 branches; if we include independent Sunday Schools, there are 1780. That is exclusive of wards and the branches in organized stakes.

The forty-six men who preside over these missions are chosen generally from the rank and file of the Church. They are businessmen, contractors, ranchers, college professors, lawyers, physicians and surgeons, dentists, and members of other professions. When the call comes to any such, no matter what his responsibilities or circumstances, seldom if ever does he offer an excuse, but, as Samuel of old, replies: "Speak, thy servant heareth," even though such acceptance means a financial sacrifice and sometimes the loss of political preferment.

The missionaries, generally, are young men and women, ranging from twenty to thirty years, with a sprinkling among them of more experienced men and women.

The direct responsibility of preaching the Gospel rests upon the Priesthood of the Church—not upon the women, though the efficiency of the latter in cottage meetings, in Primaries, and Sunday Schools and in other phases of missionary work is of the highest order, and their willingness, even eagerness, to labor is not excelled by that of the young men.

Who are these youths chosen to represent the Church? They, too, as their mission presidents, come from the rank and file. They are farmers, artisans, factory workers, bank clerks, secretaries in business firms and individuals in other vocations. Some who are married leave their wives and their children, who help to support them in their work. All of them look forward to the time, after their return when they, with congenial, loving companions may build happy homes.

Each pays his or her own expenses, in most cases, of course, with the assistance of parents. True Christianity is love in action. There is no better way to manifest love for God than to show an unselfish love for your fellow men. This is the spirit of missionary work. These men go out in the spirit of love seeking nothing from any nation to which they are sent—no personal acclaim, no monetary acquisition. Two or three years ago, many of these missionaries were just out of the army. Not a few had saved their government allowance to pay their expenses in the mission field if and when they should be called

In this fact, we get a glimpse of the helpful influence of the missionary system upon the youth. Every deacon, teacher, and priest, every elder in the Church understands that to be worthy to be a representative of the Church of Christ, he must be temperate in his habits and morally clean.

These young men are instructed that they go out as representatives of the Church, and that a representative of any organization—economic or religious—must possess at least one outstanding quality, and that is Trustworthiness. He was right who said, "To be trusted is a greater compliment than to be loved." And whom do these missionaries represent? First, they represent their parents, carrying the responsibility of keeping their good name unsullied. Second, they represent the Church, specifically the ward in which they live. And third, they represent the Lord Jesus Christ, whose servants they are. These ambassadors, for such they are, represent these three groups and carry in that representation one of the greatest responsibilities of their lives.
