David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Monument

THE MEANING OF "THIS IS THE PLACE"

WE ASSEMBLE here today to unveil and dedicate one of the great monuments of the world. In some respects it is most unique and outstanding. It is a monument designated by a sentence: "This is the Place."

Every sentence or phrase serves two purposes: it denotes a certain thing; it also connotes, sometimes, many things. Abraham Lincoln, for example, denotes a long, tall, angular individual, but his name connotes the preservation of the Union and other historical events that are cherished by every true citizen of the United States. Let us consider for a moment or two what the phrase "This is the Place" connotes.

A hundred years ago today the great leader, President Brigham Young, looked over this valley and said: "This is the right place. Drive on." What did he have in mind when he said: "This is the Place"?

By reading the reports of his sermons we find that he had in mind, first, the prophetic utterance of the man whom he loved, the Prophet Joseph, who said the Saints would go to the West, build cities, and become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains.

Secondly, he had in mind that here they would find a place of refuge and peace.

Thirdly, he had in mind that from this center there would radiate to all the world a message of truth, insofar as it would be possible for that little band and those who followed them to declare that truth to the world, to establish brotherhood, peace, and above all, faith in God, our Father.

Fourthly, he had in mind to establish in this place worship, industry, education, and mutual service.

Regarding the importance of education President Young said on one occasion soon after they entered the valley:

First build your fort and protect yourselves from depredations. As soon as you have built your log house, let a sufficient number of rooms be appropriated for schools, furnished by the best teachers, and give every child among you an opportunity of continuing his education anew and see that he attends to it. That individual who has an opportunity to educate his children and does not, is not worthy to have children. Teach your children the principles of the kingdom that they may grow in righteousness.

Fulfillment of prophecy—a place of refuge and peace—a center from which would radiate the message of truth—a place wherein to establish true worship, industry, education, and service—these are some of the thoughts connoted in the mind of Brigham Young when, a century ago, he said: "This is the Place!"
