David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Mother

MOTHER'S INFLUENCE

EVEN after mother is gone her influence remains with us. You boys and girls today have the privilege of putting your arms around your mother and saying, "I love you." Some of us cannot do that because mother has been gone many years, but her influence has always remained. Some day you, too, may have to say good-by to mother, and then all that you will have will be the memory—memory of the kindnesses that you have shown her, memory also of the neglect that you might have inadvertently or in a moment of thoughtlessness manifested. The fewer of these memories of forgetfulness or of neglect you have the happier you will be.

Now is the time to fill your life with incidents and treasured associations that will last you through life when you think of your angel mother. It is not only on Mother's Day, but on every day that you show your tribute and your love for mother.

I wish to call your attention to two incidents that pay the highest tribute that can be paid to motherhood. One was by the Light of the World, the Son of the Virgin Mary. All through life He had proved his obedience to her, and his respect. She had nursed Him. We do not know much about His home life, but we know she loved Him, taught Him obedience, taught Him true religion, obedience particularly to His Father, our God.

At 12 years of age a Jewish boy assumed his majority, just as we do at 21. It so happened that at 12 He went with His parents to Jerusalem to the Temple, and He remained behind the company, and was asking and answering questions with the priests and the teachers and the guides in the temple, and the mother and father had gone a day's journey before they missed Him.

When they came back to look for Him, they found Him in the temple, and expressed surprise, but He said, "Wist ye not that I must be about My Father's business?" He was twelve, but He recognized His relationship to His earthly parents and went with them.

Then we know nothing about Him, except that His mother treasured all the prophecies and things about Him in her heart. But we learn that He was with them at the wedding in Cana of Galilee, and, what would prove to be a very great disappointment to the bride and bridegroom and others at that wedding feast, the refreshments ran low—became exhausted, in fact, and the mother went to her son, now grown, and said: "They have no wine." She had confidence in Him. She knew that the power was in His hands. Then, the first miracle as recorded was performed, and the happiness of the entire group saved.

Then we hear little about Him as related to His mother until the final scenes of his life. He was a young man now, nearly 33 years of age, and the mother cherished in her heart a prophecy that had been made by Simeon when He was a little babe blessed in the temple.

Have you seen the artist's picture of that? The mother is bending over a crib containing a little babe, and she is looking forward in the future, recalling what Simeon said, that "a sword would pierce His side." What a responsibility, what a cross to carry, but with that prophecy she also knew that all the world would be blessed and made happy, and saved and exalted through her child.

Well, the occasion was nearing when that prophecy would be fulfilled, and it was on that occasion that this one great tribute to motherhood occurred. Her son was on the cross, and the sword about to pierce His side. Mother stood there. The love of his Apostles was not sufficient to hold them all there. Some had left him — all in fact, excepting one by whose side the mother stood, and Jesus, our Lord, gave the one supreme tribute as an example to all mankind, to all sons everywhere, as He turned and said to John, "Son, behold thy mother. Mother, behold thy son." The last thought, almost the last word, was with his mother.

The second great tribute to motherhood occurred when the President of the United States in the year 1914, President Woodrow Wilson, asked that the American flag be put out on every government building on the second Sunday of May every year, thus setting aside that day as Mother's Day.

Those two great events in the history of mankind stand out as lessons to all the world of the importance of motherhood. Truly great men everywhere recognize their dependence upon the love and influence of their mothers.

George Washington said: "I attribute all my success in life to the moral, intellectual, and physical education which I have received from my mother."

You remember Abraham Lincoln's words: "All that I am or hope to be I owe to my angel mother."

Benjamin West, the great painter, said: "A kiss from my mother made me a painter."

Thomas Edison, the creator of thousands of miracles, laid his success at the foot of his mother and expressed it as follows: "My mother was the making of me. She was so true, so sure of me, that I felt I had someone to live for, someone I must not disappoint."

General Grant wrote to his mother every week.

President Garfield took his aged mother to the platform at his inauguration and after taking the oath of office, turned and kissed her.

On the other hand it is every mother's duty, and should be every mother's aspiration and supreme joy, to make it possible for her children to pay her the tribute that you and I, in the words of the Prince, can pay to our mothers this day:

She of whom you speak, My mother, looks as whole as some serene Creation minted in the golden moods Of sovereign artists; not a thought, a touch But pure as lines of green that streak the first white Of the snowdrop's inner leaves.

God bless our mothers. They make us and mold us!
