David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Music

WE do not have any thoughts that cannot be expressed either in words or gestures, but there are feelings in the human breast which cannot be expressed in any language or words; so we must provide ourselves with other mediums of expression; for instance, music, art, architecture — the wonderful arts which do not belong to any nation, but which speak the language of the soul. Music is international. Although the words may be Latin or Italian or German or English, music is always understood by the soul. Music is a divine art. And the people who love music are not a bad people. But there is in music that which appeals also to the baser emotions of man. Music can, as with love, be drawn down into the gutter; but the music which these children sang this morning is the music which lifts us up and brings us to a nobler and better sphere, and I am glad that I belong to a church that from the beginning has held this divine art as an ideal.

In one of our revelations, the Lord has said that the song of the righteous is a prayer to our Father in heaven; and I am reminded that just before the mob broke into Carthage jail, just before the bullet pierced the heart of Hyrum the Patriarch, the beautiful hymn of Montgomery's had echoed through those barricaded halls. Music in praise of Christ and in thanksgiving was the last impression on the spirit of Joseph Smith and of his brother, Hyrum.

I say to you, develop this art of divine melody further and better. Try so to live that good music will fill your hearts.

The most wonderful story that was ever given to the world was proclaimed by an angel, accompanied by a choir. I believe that it is not only the most glorious story, but also the most beautiful and sweetest story that was ever related. What did the choirs sing when Christ had His glorious birth? What message did they bring to the world which has resounded throughout the world for 2000 years and should find a place in the hearts of those who love the truth? First, every person should give the honor to the Father in heaven — give glory to God who was personified in the birth of the Savior at Bethlehem, who lives to glorify the Father, the Creator of all. Second, peace, not passion, not even happiness — peace, the greatest blessing which a man can receive. Third, good will toward men. Oh, how large is this thought! Oh, how few are there who really welcome these three principles!

May God soon usher in the day when this message shall belong to every nation. Peace be with all men and women who have placed themselves in a position to preach this message, and some day may we all be worthy to hear this heavenly choir again, not as a message to be preached, but as a message which has filled the whole world, the context of which is "Peace on earth, good will to men."
