David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* New Year

THE NEW YEAR

IN A few days, another year, laden with good deeds and bad, will have dropped into the eternal past! It will have gone forever! Everybody, even the woman who will not acknowledge the fact, is a year older. All are older, and under the stern teacher, Experience, all should be one year wiser. With the past aeons behind it, then, how wise this old world should be! How many more years will pass before the lessons of life are all learned! For the aggregate of the world and humanity, only the Infinite can answer; for each individual, earth's school will close in a few short years!

At the end of each year, many are inclined, as the business man, to "take stock" and thereby judge as accurately as possible as to whether the twelve passing months have recorded "success" or "failure." Gains there have been, but perhaps losses also.

Taken all in all, we are pleased to assure Church members that the Old Year takes its place in the unretraceable past carrying with it records of gallant service rendered to humanity by individuals and organizations in the Church. We assure them also that in somebody's life every good deed will live; many thousands of tender services rendered are unrecorded either in books or even in the minds of fellow workers. Yet they will live in human hearts and in the future blossom into other good deeds.

May each indication of progress during the year that has passed prove an encouragement and an inspiration to us to strive for greater achievements in the year that now comes laden with glorious opportunities!

HAPPY NEW YEAR

DURING the next few weeks "Happy New Year" will be, perhaps, the most frequently repeated phrase in the English language. Every time that it is spoken sincerely it will throw a ray of sunshine into some life. Often it will brighten the spark of hope, and give new zest to him whose spirit was darkened. It will carry with it the message that the Old Year, with its failings, faults, and failures, had passed forever, and that a New Year comes laden with fresh opportunities and rich promises of success.

With hopes thus renewed, and ambition stirred, we find ourselves making resolutions. Some of them, it is true, are weak, frail things, that struggle feebly for existence, and then die, as if prematurely born. Others are strong, vigorous and clean-cut, destined to become potent factors in our lives.

Few of us stop to consider how closely related these resolutions are to the happiness that we anticipate the New Year will bring us. The secret of happiness lies within each of us, side by side with our resolutions and desires. It never comes from without. It cannot be stolen; it cannot be purchased, for it is above price. It is true, wealth and friends will make it the brighter when it is already shining within, but when it is not in the heart, all outward contributions are like paint and powder on the sallow cheek, the mere semblance of the thing desired.

One source of happiness springs from the realization of having accomplished something worth while; misery, from the realization of having failed. How, then, can one be happy who sincerely makes a resolution and then ignobly fails to keep it? The accomplishing of a fixed determination in the quest for truth and nobility of soul always produces happiness. Failure and vacillation always bring corresponding unhappiness. One is like the godly sorrow that worketh repentance to salvation; the other, like the sorrow of the world that worketh death.

Too many are not willing to pay the price of a happy New Year. They drift along aimlessly, hoping that peace and comfort will come to them as does the sunshine on a summer day. They forget that rain, hail, snow, and the biting frosts of winter come in the same way. He who would possess happiness must pay the price of effort. "It is one of the laws of life that each acquisition has its cost." A muscle can be developed only by expending muscular energy. Intellectual advancement can be obtained only by mental activity. Spiritual growth comes only by spiritual endeavor. And happiness is realized only through righteous desires and worthy accomplishments. What sublime peace, what infinite power must have filled Christ's soul when, toward the close of His earthly mission He could say, "I have overcome the world"! Oh! how great the distance between the heights of His sublimity and the depths of the degraded soul, drifting in the slime and filth of indulgence, blindly thinking, if he thinks at all, that happiness is allied with physical gratifications.

True happiness is found in living the Christ life on Monday as well as on Sunday. He who is virtuous only at intervals proves that his pretended virtue is but a sham. Such a person lacks sincerity, the foundation of a true character, without which happiness is impossible. He who seeks for happiness alone seldom finds it, but he who lives, that is, who loses himself to give happiness to others, finds that a double portion has come to himself.

THE OLD YEAR AND THE NEW

ON the night of December thirty-first, many merry "watching parties" and millions of individuals saw the Old Year fade into the past forever. Fade is the proper word; for most of us permitted him to become absorbed "in the being of the eternal silence" as unburdened as the morning mist absorbed in the sunshine. And yet each might have thrust some things upon him, which in the aggregate would have made him a heavily-laden traveler into the land of Forgetfulness.

First, he might have carried packages of regrets and feelings of remorse that have cankered our souls because of failures during the year. The failures themselves we shall remember, and from them gain wisdom; but the discouragement and gloom that followed them should be thrust with the year into the past forever. There is true philosophy in the lines:

'Tain't no use to sit and whine When the fish ain't on your line; Bait your hook an' keep a-tryin'—Keep a-goin'!

Next, the Old Year should bear great bundles of hate. What right has man to obstruct the New Year's progress with such huge and almost insurmountable obstacles! Nations distrusting nations; creeds despising creeds; men reviling men; women scandalizing women — all produce the misery that inevitably follows:

The ruling principle of Hate, Which for its pleasure doth create The things it may annihilate.

Why not thrust it all into the past, and with the Old Year, let it die?

Other things, akin to hate, which might also pass out of our lives are harsh words and unkind deeds. These have wounded many a heart during the past twelve months, and have caused deep pangs of sorrow. Friendly feeling and promising love they have blighted as bitter frosts the rose buds. Why not let the Old Year carry these soul-oppressing things into oblivion? This we should do, for our own good; for every cruel word and unkind deed is a boomerang that returns to bruise our own natures.

To have all these things banished from the lives of men is to expect too much of the world; even to suggest it brands one as a dreamer; but how happy this New Year would be if every professing Christian had even desired to burden the Old Year with the "works of the flesh." (Eph. 5:1-21)

The mission of the Church is to assist mankind to overcome evil, and to cherish the good. It teaches that repentance is an eternal principle of salvation; and the thrusting of our weaknesses and sins upon the Old Year, to be carried into the never-returning past is but the practical application of this sublime principle.

May the New Year be rich in blessings of love, joy and peace; and when his annual course shall have ended, may there be less worry, enmity, selfishness and sin to burden the passing year. The New Year, then, will be prosperous and happy, because we help to make it so.
