David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Outings

A CHURCH OUTING

DURING an afternoon members and friends of the Stock-holm branch of the Church enjoyed an outing in Haga Park, one of the environs that makes the capital of Sweden one of the most beautiful cities in the world.

A pleasing feature, besides the excellency of the singing, was the choice of the songs sung. No wonder the crowd stood for an hour in rapture! "The groves were God's first temples"; and in that primeval temple, choruses of praise and thanksgiving were rendered with a meaning and spirit seldom, if ever, heard in that park.

In the forest, twilight had deepened; yet through the trees on our left we could see the western sky still glorious in the reflected rays of the setting sun; and through the trees on our right, we beheld the brightness of a clear full moon. The crimson and purple of the west, the peaceful moonlight, more promising than real, gladdened the scene just as the choir, beneath stately pine and birch, sang:

Deep sink the shadows, twilight is falling, Daylight is gone, the night winds are whispering. Soon will the stars from the heavens shed their light And shine forth in glory from out our Father's house.

Only those who were present can appreciate the beauty, the grandeur, the solemnity of that scene in Haga Park! The setting was perfect; the spirit of the occasion ideal. We shall remember it not only for its beauty and inspiration, but also because the choir, and the combination of glories in forest and sky illustrated to the thoughtful observer distinct features for which the Church of Christ has always stood, and for which it must ever stand, viz.:

These and kindred thoughts inspired all present with feelings best expressed by Emerson as follows: "In the woods is perpetual youth. Within these plantations of God a decorum and sanctity reign, a perennial festival is dressed, and the guest sees not how he should tire of them in a thousand years. In the woods we return to reason and faith." In those woods that evening, hearts came closer to one another, and nearer in harmony with God.
