David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Parents

PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY

THERE is something in the depths of the human soul which revolts against neglectful parenthood.

There seems to be a growing tendency to shift parental responsibility from the home to outside influences such as the school and the church. Important as these outward influences are, they never can take the place of the influence of the mother and the father. Constant training, constant vigilance, companionship, being watchmen of our own children, are necessary in order to keep our homes intact.

The fact cannot be too strongly emphasized that the real source of security of our nation rests in the well-ordered and properly-conducted home. The character of the child is formed largely during the first twelve years of his life. It is estimated that in that period the child spends sixteen times as many waking hours in the home as in the church. Every child is, to a great degree, what he is because of the ever-constant influence of home environment and the careful or neglectful training of parents.

In teaching children, one should ever keep in mind that "Behavior is caught, not taught." Example is more potent than precept. Parents have the duty to be what they would have their children become and so to conduct their lives as to be able to say to their sons in the words of a poet:

I have no wealth to leave you, and no fame. This must be your inheritance: my name . . . I have tried to make my name synonymous In all men's minds, with things the most worth while; With strength to do the right, though none might see me; With grit to meet disaster with a smile; With loyalty to those with claims upon me; With justice equally toward foe and friend; With honor, truth, integrity, square dealing— "My word my bond." Now, as I reach the end, Too well I know that I have failed in efforts Where I have wanted greatly to succeed; Too oft I've seen my dreams, bright in the forming, Prove naught but vain imaginings, indeed. But this I do believe: when I have traveled Life's twisting road, and worked out Life's great plan,— When I have gone beyond life's praise or blaming— It will be said of me, "He was a man." And so, because of this, I feel no shame When I bequeath to you, my son, my name.

Would you have a strong and virile nation, keep your homes pure; would you reduce delinquency and crime, lessen the number of broken homes. It is time that civilized peoples realized that prevention is more profitable than punishment, and that the home is the incubator either of children of high character or of criminals. Home building, therefore, should be the paramount purpose of parents and of the nation.
