David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Peace

FUNDAMENTALS FOR A BETTER WORLD

EVER since man was given dominion over the world the inhabitants of the earth have sensed the need of betterment, and leaders have sought to better conditions. Men have ever been prone, however, to look upon their particular generation as probably the worst in history, and prospects ahead as most discouraging. For example, note the following:

It is a gloomy moment in history, Not for many years, not in the lifetime of most men who read this, has there been so much grave and deep apprehension. Never has the future seemed so incalculable as at this present time.

That was written nearly one hundred years ago! (From Harper's Weekly, 1857). In every age of the world's history thinking people have been dissatisfied with their current social and economic conditions, and have sought for remedial changes.

Our present age is no exception. Humanity is passing through one of its most crucial experiences. We are in the midst of a revolution both of thought and mode of life. Beliefs of parents are questioned, old ideals are in the discard. Communism, socialism, totalitarianism are giving birth to new conceptions that strike relentlessly at beliefs and teachings that were accepted a decade ago as fundamental and unassailable.

Moral and religious skepticism is too generally apparent, and political chicanery, fraud, and civic unrighteousness all too common.

Democracy, as exemplified in the United States and in Great Britain and her dominions, has successfully withstood the battling horrors of two world wars, and now after only a few years since the end of World War II, we are standing again on the brink of a third devastating conflict.

There are four fundamental institutions upon which our success and happiness depend: first, the home; second, the church; third, the school; fourth, the government.

The foundation and future of our nation depend upon proper home training. In the home we give to our children their physical life and should give them their spiritual enlightenment.

The Church should supplement that training, and instill faith in the hearts of the children who come from those homes.

The main purpose of the school is to develop character, to develop loyalty to the government, loyalty to the home, loyalty to the individual.

It is the duty of the government to protect these three fundamental institutions in the fulfillment of their mission—not to dictate, but to protect and guide.

In naming some essentials of a better world, I call attention, first, to the need of more governments that derive their authority from the consent of the governed. A better world demands a free and educated electorate. However, a better world is dependent not so much upon the kind of government as upon the character of the men who compose the government.

If we would have a better world, it is evident that hatred, jealousy, envy, and selfishness must be replaced by wholesome, kindly thoughts and emotions. Ideals are stimulants to progress. Without them man would degenerate, and civilization would "cream and mantle like a standing pool." Through hope, ideals, and aspirations God inspires men to move upward and onward toward the higher and better life.

Today, the world yearns for peace, the winning of which seems to be more difficult than the winning of the war.

No peace, even though temporarily obtained, will be permanent unless it is built upon the solid foundation of eternal principles.

The first of these the Lord gave to Moses on Mount Sinai—"Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God." Consider what that means. When we sincerely accept God as our Father and make Him the center of our being, we become conscious of a new aim in life. No longer is the chief end of daily life merely to nourish and to pamper the body as all animals do. Spiritual attainment, not physical indulgence, becomes the chief goal. God is not viewed from the standpoint of what we may get from Him, but what we may give to Him. Only in the complete surrender of our inner life may we rise above the selfish, sordid pull of nature. Divine and eternal as an element in the acquisition of peace is Christ's admonition,". . . seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness."

Of equal importance is the acceptance of the Son of God as the Savior of mankind.

Those were not mere words of defiance which Peter uttered as he and John stood prisoners before the high priests. He proclaimed an eternal truth when he said: "For there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12)

I like to associate with that word "saved" the power that man gets in this life to rise above his animal instincts and passions, power to overcome or resist social evils that blight men's and women's souls and shut them out not only from the peace of the world, but also from citizenship in the kingdom of God. Men may yearn for peace, cry for peace, and work for peace, but there will be no peace until they follow the path pointed out by the Living Christ.

A third essential to our peace of mind and eventually to the peace of nations, is to keep confidence in our fellow men. You say, "How can we keep confidence when men are so corrupt?" I answer that even if two or three, or even a score of men prove themselves dishonest and wicked, we are not justified in losing confidence in all men. Most people are honorable and upright and desirous generally to deal considerately and justly with their fellow men.

Even if international leaders of a nation or of five nations disavow their Creator, and even deny the Christ who redeemed them, let us remember that ten times that number of nations still profess to believe in God and in individual freedom.

To these principles—faith in God, acceptance of Christ as the Savior of men, confidence in our fellow men—I shall add a fourth fundamental principle and responsibility: The gift of free agency—a gift second in preciousness only to life itself.

To curtail evil, to spread love and peace, brotherly kindness throughout the world is our paramount duty. If we would face the future, no matter what it may be, with calmness of spirit, with an assurance that God governs in the affairs of men, let us as individuals and as a group live exemplary lives.

Let us see to it that the social evils now rampant in the world that bring such sorrow and degradation to mankind, that spread sorrow and misery throughout the world are reduced to a minimum in our own communities.

PRINCIPLES OF PEACE IN THE POSTWAR PERIOD

AT THE birth of the Babe of Bethlehem songs of praise heralded the Christian Era; in this year of our Lord, 1945, bursting bombs ushered in the Atomic Age. Now as never before humanity faces the choice between peace through the triumph of principles or the possibility of destruction through the misuse of atomic energy.

The booming of fire-belching cannon and the marching of a hundred million soldiers intent on killing their fellow men have practically ceased, but peace on earth is not achieved. Political, economic, and social problems are still unsolved. Strife in the world is rampant. Indonesia, Palestine, India, and other countries are torn with dissension. China is suffering as the result of civil war. In our own United States too many wheels of industry are silent because of mistrust and misunderstanding between labor and capital. Millions in Europe are homeless and more millions without sufficient clothing, bedding and fuel to meet the rigors of winter.

Manifestly, though the signing of the terms of surrender ended armed conflict, it still left unsolved the heralded message "and on earth peace." It is evident that nations must seek some other means than war if they would save themselves from want and destruction.

The recent struggle for freedom and the principles heralded at the birth of Christ bring to our attention three fundamental ideals or principles, the application of which is indispensable to the peace and happiness of the human family. Concisely stated they are, first, the recognition of the constant operation of universal law; second, the acceptance of the existence of a Divine Intelligence; third, good will and brotherhood.

Essential to a permanent, lasting peace either in the individual or the nation is a recognition of the existence of ever-operating laws in the universe. In other words, as expressed by one inspired:

There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated, and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated.

Hitler's ignominous failure in his defiance of Christ and of the Ten Commandments, which he called "The Curse of Sinai," is but another verification of the fact that neither individuals nor nations can with impunity sin against moral law. Retribution follows the violation of it as inevitably as compensation follows compliance thereto. Though it appears that only force rules the world today, eventually righteousness will triumph.

Another fundamental principle mentioned is "Good Will Among Men."

Good will is an individual attribute, and persons who would promote it should realize that it manifests itself only toward those who prove themselves trustworthy. Instead of condemning too vehemently international and group suspicions, enmities, and greed, let us first eliminate these enemies of peace from our own lives, from our own homes, our own neighborhoods; then, men, "seeing our good works," will supplant their suspicion with confidence. Deceit, chicanery, and fraud in ordinary business affairs are breeders of distrust, destroyers of brotherliness and good will. For example, the mechanic or garage employee who exploits the stranger or passing tourist, the hotel guest who defaces costly furniture with lighted cigarettes, the merchant who makes excessive profit when opportunity presents itself; the clerk in store or bank or railway station who cunningly gives out short change—any one who in daily intercourse seeks to take advantage of another is an enemy of good will and peace.

The spirit of brotherhood prompts service, not conquest; co-operation, not exploitation; it involves fair dealing, not fraud and chicanery. It increases in man a greater appreciation of Christ's value of the individual soul. In short, it makes for a better world; and that, in essence, is the ideal for which your son and a hundred thousand other sons have given their lives in the recent world war. From their silent graves now dotting many parts of the globe comes the demand that we, as they, give our all to continue the struggle for the triumph of principles; that we continue to hold aloft the banner of freedom and righteousness for which they died.

The world has entered upon the Atomic Age. The happiness, nay the very existence, of the race requires that men make it a Spiritual Age, in which the most potent power yet discovered by science will be harnessed, controlled, and made to contribute to the promotion of prosperity and peace.

THE LIGHT THAT SHINES IN DARKNESS

Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you; for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth.

THAT solicitous admonition given by the Savior of men is as pertinent today as when it was first expressed. Men and nations, having refused to walk in the light, now as Jesus said, stumble in darkness and know not whither they go. Motivated for centuries largely by selfish interests, the human race, judging from present world conditions, is still dangerously near the jungle where primitive passions dominate and govern.

Men today in far too great an extent are not only spending their time with things which have no permanent value, but ruthlessly destroying much that they have built throughout the centuries. War is making the earth a shambles. Churches, palaces, cottages, hospitals in many parts of the globe lie in ruins as if shaken by a terrible earthquake. As accompaniment to this destruction there is a pall of night which seems to be enveloping nations as an impenetrable fog—a darkness that springs from Hate; for, "He that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes."

During this very hour while we reverently worship the God of Heaven, millions of men lie wounded, bleeding, maimed, many disabled for life by the hands of their fellow men. Other millions sleep in death, many in unknown graves, some in no graves, their bodies trampled by savage feet stumbling forward toward a coveted and selfish goal; not only men but women—mothers lying lifeless clasping their babes even in death.

Why this world-wide holocaust? Why this mad orgy of death? Because man is acting contrary to eternal principles of Right!

No one can doubt that the seeds of this war found nourishment in soil of hatred and dishonor, which are the antithesis of Christ's teachings. The serious effect of all this is far-reaching. Men's confidence in political forms of government is shaken. In uncertainty they begin to question the promised security of well-tried and fundamental principles. They see the discoveries and inventions of science prostituted as a means of human destruction. Old beliefs and ideals are toppling, and as a drowning man seizes a floating substance, men and women grasp at any new idea or theory that is thrown as a bait in this sea of confusion.

Of the ultimate victory for freedom, we must not doubt, nor harbor either discouragement or despair. As after every night, even in the darkness, rises the morning star, so now in the midst of the blackness of international hatred and bloody conflict, men may behold a Light heralding a new day, if they will but look through the eyes of reason and common sense.

Statesmen, men of science, thinking men in all nations, laymen everywhere sense the need of something definite to which to look forward, some clear beacon that will guide the stranded nations to a safe harbor of permanent peace. As practical steps toward that goal they say:

(1) Mete out just punishment to villains and murderers;

(2) Make restoration of sovereign rights to those who have been deprived of them by force;

(3) Secure equal enjoyment by all nations of world trade and materials needed for prosperity;

(4) Establish improved labor standards, economic advancement, and social security for all;

(5) Declare a peace assuring safety and tranquility the world over;

(6) Grant freedom of the sea to all;

(7) Exact promise of abandonment by all nations of the use of force, and of disarmament of aggressive nations pending the establishment of general security.

These and other expressed aims are worthy ideals and point to the fact that generally in men's hearts there is a desire to treat fairly their fellow men.

In all such seeking, however, there is one idea indispensable to the establishment of a permanent peace which too many men and some nations have obliterated from their minds entirely, but which now should be reburnished until it shines as the unclouded noonday sun. I call it an idea, having in mind the fact that "There is more dynamite in an idea than in many bombs." It is as old as the Lord's first message to man—men in the past have entertained it for a time, have dallied with it, then without attempting to make it a reality have permitted it to drop below the plane of consciousness, and even to sink into the abyss of unbelief. This idea so frequently mentioned but so seldom practised, connotes things which, if lost, cause civilization itself to be lost. It connotes the right to live, to be treated decently, to be kindly spoken to, to enjoy home, to love, and to be loved. It connotes strength to defend the right — sympathy for those who, striving, have failed. It connotes justice and mercy. It turns the eye and the heart from beastly passions to noble aspirations.

It is Christ's plan of love and service summarized in the two great commandments:

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thyself.

For two thousand years and even more, nations have ignored, and, in many instances, repudiated fundamental principles of the gospel. Even in so-called Christian lands men have spurned the teachings as being impractical. The result is that the earth has literally been drenched with blood.

I have referred to the present-day carnage, even to think of which makes everyone gloomy and sick at heart, to emphasize, if possible, the need of a drastic change in men's dealings with one another. Never has there been a time in the history of the world when a change for the better was so imperative. Now, if ever, as the scripture promises, "A nation should be born in a day"—a nation of men and women with changed hearts and changed attitudes.

Since rejection of Christ's teachings has resulted in disaster and useless bloodshed, with only intermittent periods of respite and progress, why in the name of reason should people not be willing to substitute for selfish aggrandizement Christ's principle of brotherly consideration? As a first step, for example, they should make truly applicable the simple injunction of putting one's self in the other fellow's place, the surest of all means of eliminating the bitterness that characterizes misunderstandings.

No thinking person can say truthfully that the application of this one simple act if practiced among individuals and nations would not bring about a better world!

Equally effective and applicable are His teachings regarding the value and sacredness of human life, the virtue of forgiveness, the necessity of fair dealing; His condemnation of the sin of hypocrisy, and of covetousness; His teachings regarding the saving power of love, and of the immortality of the soul. His doctrine of arbitration as a means of settling difficulties and quarrels if applied by warring nations would in itself do away with war.

If America is the "melting pot," the gospel of Jesus Christ is the crucible in which hate, envy, and greed are consumed, and good will, kindness, and love remain as inner aspirations by which man truly lives and builds.

The constitution of this government was written by men who accepted Jesus Christ as the Savior of mankind. Let men and women in these United States, then, continue to keep their eyes centered upon Him who ever shines as a Light to all the world.

THE PRINCE OF PEACE

TODAY, as indeed throughout the centuries past, individuals, organized groups and nations are yearning for peace. Even in those countries in which the state in rigid dictatorship assumes supreme control over the lives of its citizens, there is almost a universal cry from the hearts of millions for liberation and subsequent freedom from apprehension and fear, as witnessed by hundreds of thousands of signatures to an appeal for peace presented by leaders of orthodox churches behind the Iron Curtain. How vain is such an appeal when their political leaders declare themselves to be anti-Christ and "consider it impossible and impermissible for a young Communist member to believe in God and also religious rights." Under such conditions we can but re-echo the words of Patrick Henry that "man may cry, `Peace, Peace,'—but there is no peace."

For nearly 2,000 years the professed followers of Jesus Christ have connoted, with His birth, the heavenly announcement of "Peace on earth, and good will toward men." Indeed, ever since man took his place upon the earth, peace has been among his noblest quests. Associated with this quest, he has yearned for individual freedom—freedom to speak and to write his thoughts; freedom to work without restrictions or dictation; freedom to pray without molestation; freedom to build a home, into which dictators or usurpers could not enter illegally—priceless heritages these, and indispensable conditions to the attainment of peace. But, as heretofore, most men and nations ever blindly and stubbornly refuse to accept the eternal plan that leads to it.

Wars continue because suspicion, distrust, jealousy, enmity, bigotry and greed, enemies of peace, are still rampant in the hearts of men; and, sorrowfully, as a result we see exemplified in the world the fulfillment of the prediction that a time will come when "brother shall deliver up the brother to death."

Two thousand years ago Jesus Christ comforted His disciples with saying, which, if you listen, you can hear to your own comfort today: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might find peace." "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you."

In the beginning of the Christian era, as Jesus looked down through the centuries to come, He knew that peace would be dependent upon the slow but never-failing process of changing each individual's mental and spiritual attitude; that the customs and habits of the world would be determined by the innermost thoughts and soul convictions of many individuals who compose groups, states or nations. If, therefore, we would change the world, we must first change people's thoughts. Only to the degree that men desire peace and brotherhood and are willing to follow the paths that lead to this blessed condition will the world become a better place in which to live. Only by adherence to fundamental principles of righteousness can peace come, either to individuals or to nations.

The mission of the Church is to establish peace—peace in individual hearts, peace and harmony in homes; cessation of war and discord among nations.

May this celebration of the birth of the Babe of Bethlehem find more millions of honest hearts than ever before sincerely echoing the song of the heavenly host, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men."

PEACE AND HAPPINESS

HAPPINESS is the end of our existence. This happiness comes most effectively through service to our fellow men.

But there is no happiness without peace. The President of the United States, his Cabinet, Congress, the Senate, the House of Representatives, the Judiciary, are all seeking peace in the world. Nations are longing for it. Mothers and fathers, grandmothers and grandfathers who have children and grandchildren in the armed forces are praying daily that we might have peace.

Peace is the message that came when the Savior was born a Babe in Bethlehem. It was heralded by the angel choir, singing, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:14)

"Peace," He said to His disciples toward the close of His ministry—"These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33)

After His resurrection, when the doors were closed and the ten disciples were in session, as He greeted them His first salutation was, "Peace be unto you." (Ibid., 20-21) And eight days later, when the eleven were there, the same salutation, "Peace." (Ibid., 20:26)

Peace cannot be found in external things. Peace comes from within. "There is no peace except by the triumph of principles," said the wise Emerson. There is no peace when one's conscience is seared or when one is conscious of having committed some untoward act. Peace springs from righteousness in the soul, from upright living. Hence let us begin at home, first with each individual. If you want peace, yours is the responsibility to obtain it. May our homes become warm nests where children may be protected and grow into noble men and women; where love may find privacy, old age response, prayer an altar, and the nation a sure source of strength and perpetuity.

SOME THOUGHTS ON PERSONAL PEACE

THERE is an old, old story told of a man from another planet who was permitted to visit the earth. From an eminence he looked down upon the bustling cities of the world. Millions of men, like ants, were busy building palaces of pleasure and other things that would not last; chasing will-o'-the-wisps; and seeking financial bubbles that burst before their eyes. As he left to go back, he said, "All these people are spending their time in building just bird's nests; no wonder they fail and are ashamed."

The peace of Christ does not come by seeking the superficial things of life. Since time began, men have kept the world in turmoil with their useless strivings, their bickerings, and their contentions. Jesus said to his disciples: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth, give I unto you." (John 14:27) Thus the Son of man gave to His disciples and to mankind the "first of all human blessings." But it was a bequest conditioned upon obedience to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

No man is at peace with himself or his God who is untrue to his better self, who transgresses the law of right either in dealing with himself by indulging in passion, in appetite, yielding to temptations against his accusing conscience, or in dealing with his fellow men, being untrue to their trust. Peace does not come to the transgressor of law; peace comes by obedience to law, and it is that message which Jesus would have us proclaim among men.

If we would have peace as individuals, we must supplant enmity with forbearance, which means to refrain from the hasty condemnation of others. We shall have power to do this if we really cherish in our hearts the ideals of Christ, who said:

". . . if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;

"Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." (Matt. 5:23-24)

Note the Savior did not say if you have ought against him, but if you find that another has aught against you. How many of us are ready to come up to that standard? If we are, we shall find peace. Many of us, however, instead of following this admonition, nurse our ill will until it grows to hatred; then this hatred expresses itself in faultfinding and even slander, "whose whisper over the world's diameter as level as a cannon to its mouth, transports its poison shot." Backbiting, faultfinding are weeds of discord and thrive best in superficial minds, as fungus grows best on weakened plants.

"Bear ye one another's burdens," but do not add to those burdens by gossiping about your neighbors or by spreading slander.

If the world would be at peace, it must supplant the rule of force by the rule of love. The scriptures tell us that in the beginning Satan proffered to force all men into subjection. By compulsion he would save every person, and for so doing he asked that the honor and the glory that are the Lord's should be his.

There is an example of dictatorship supreme!

In contrast to this, Christ's plan was to give men their free agency.

A man may act as his conscience dictates so long as he does not infringe upon the rights of others. That is the spirit of true democracy, and all government. The perfect peace comes to the individual who has a testimony of the truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The way to peace for individuals and nations is to have " . . . the kingdom of God . . . within you." (Luke 17:21)
