David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Pioneers

THE PIONEERS

IT IS fitting that we contemplate what we owe to the Pioneers, whose entrance into Salt Lake City we shall celebrate on the Twenty-Fourth of July.

One hundred and eight years ago today a band of pioneers was camped near Fort Bridger. Brother Samuel Brannan had come from California for the purpose of persuading President Brigham Young not to stop in the Salt Lake Valley, but to go on to San Francisco. He was unsuccessful.

Mr. Jim Bridger had said to President Young that this was an unproductive valley, that there was frost every month in the year, and had offered a thousand dollars for the first ear of corn that might be raised.

One of the most interesting incidents of that entire journey from Fort Bridger to Salt Lake Valley happened when Porter Rockwell left the company at the request of Brigham Young to find the trail followed by the ill-fated Donner Party. He had not gone far before he saw some smoke coming from a fire. Imagine his surprise! The only thought that would come to him, of course, was that there were some Indians. He approached and was surprised to find one man sitting by that fire. It was Miles Goodyear, who had a claim on the Weber River in Weber County and was on his way with a band of horses to sell to some of the military posts in Wyoming.

Goodyear was as much surprised to meet a white man on a horse as Porter Rockwell was to find a man alone in that place. And here is the greeting: Miles looked up, saw the stranger, and said, "Howdy, stranger. Light 'n set." That was the welcome—"Dismount and take your seat." Goodyear was surprised to learn of the party of Pioneers who were on their way. He thought, "Here is a good opportunity for me to sell my holdings." So he agreed to show Porter Rockwell the way down through Weber Canyon. Even before they reached what we now call "Devil's Gate" Porter Rockwell said, "Hell, Goodyear, the boss would never come this way," and so they turned from Weber Canyon and took the route that led them over the now-famous trail over Little Mountain and down into this valley.

One hundred eight years ago! No corn could be raised in this Valley! No crops! And the man who had been in California and had noted its glorious climate, urged the President and his band of 143 men, three women, and two children to go on to that sunny clime.

That encampment suggests a picture worthy of the skill of the sovereign artist—a band of fewer than 150 men, facing a 900-mile-trek over an unresponsive, defiant desert and plain, and at the end of that wearisome trail, what?—a barren valley on the shores of the great Inland Sea—a part of the Rocky Mountain territory for which United States Senator McDuffin said he would not, for agricultural purposes, "give a pinch of snuff."

Behind them, scattered from Winter Quarters to the British Isles, moving toward what to them was an unknown, undesignated place, 40,000 people with faith in their hearts, and confidence in their leaders, were preparing to follow the wagon trail westward. Try to imagine the magnitude of the responsibility carried by President Young and his associate leaders.

Six months after the first advance company had entered the Great Basin, there were over 2,000 people in and around Great Salt Lake City. One year later, in May, 1848, President Young, having returned to Winter Quarters, led across the plains another company consisting of 600 wagons and approximately 2,000 more people.

In the spring of 1848, the people planted about 5,000 acres, principally in wheat. Suppose the hordes of crickets that blackened the sky had destroyed that crop! It was the principal, if not the only means of subsistence for the people of the Valley, and for those thousands wearily wending their way westward. It is conceivable that there might have been a tragedy second only to that which overtook the ill-fated Donner Party. The Seagull Monument tells the story, the significance and spirituality of which we should never forget. As it was, the harvest was insufficient to supply the wants of the populace. Food was rationed. People dug sego roots, cooked weeds and even thistles for subsistence.

The ideals which these pioneers fostered and upheld, even under the most adverse conditions, are as applicable today as they were then.

I name first, their faith and reverence. I know people thought them uncouth. I know their language was not always refined. But in their hearts was a faith and a reverence for God which the world needs today more than anything else.

A second virtue is thrift and economy. They condemned idleness and wastefulness as not being in accordance with the rules of heaven. They recognized the need of mutual aid between capital and labor, and not only taught, but practiced a spirit of co-operation between them.

Another quality exemplified by the pioneers and one of the most applicable to happiness and peace, is the little, simple virtue of self-control. If practiced in the home neither husband nor wife would ever say anything in the hear of temper that would wound the feelings of the other. In the work-a-day world, in the trials of everyday life we get nervous, responsibilities begin to weigh upon us, we lose our temper, and we speak harshly in loud terms to the other—the worst producer of disharmony, vexation of spirit and separation, rift between hearts, that we have in our society.

Another vital element applicable today is the pioneers' attitude toward slander. A man or a person who revels in slander or gossip is mediocre or lower. Whether by chance he has prominence in social circles, political circles, or in the Church, he lacks nobility of soul.

Finally, the noblest ideal of these honored pioneers, and the noblest ideal in the Church today, is the ideal of service. Before they started out on the trail each day, they had their prayers either in the wagon or around the circle. Every family in every wagon had its prayers. The second thing which they had to do was to see that their muskets were properly loaded. The driver would carry his musket across his knees with the firelock ready; those who walked at the side of their teams carried the musket on the arm, in preparation for any eventuality. The third instruction was, "Let every man be as considerate and as interested in his neighbor's cattle as in his own." They helped one another in adversity, shared with the hungry the last loaf of bread, gave of their time and means for the upbuilding of the community and on not a few occasions offered their lives for the truth. Service you have rendered mankind, you take with you.

The best way to honor the memory of our pioneers on the 24th of July, and on every other day of our lives, is not merely by words, but by emulating their deeds.

EMIGRATION CANYON

ON the morning when the pioneers entered this valley the Great Salt Lake, a shimmering jewel in an unadorned setting, remnant of an ancient sea, reflected the dancing rays of light that leaped over the Wasatch mountains. Like the valley that fringed its briny shores, it was little known by the outside world. The Catholic Father Escalante and his brave companions had undoubtedly heard of it in what might have seemed legendary tales. That was in 1776, the year of the Declaration of Independence. But Escalante did not venture sufficiently far north to prove the accuracy of the tales about the inland sea of salt. He contented himself with a view of Utah Valley and its fresh water lake.

James Bridger, Peter Skene Ogden, Etienne Provost, and other hunters and trappers had trodden the trackless waste of Salt Lake Valley, and had tasted the briny liquid of the lake; but on the morning we are commemorating, not a human habitation broke the monotony of the sagebrush expanse, except perhaps an Indian wickiup, or the fort of Peter Skene Ogden on the banks of the Weber River.

On the morning of July 23, 1847, there was a company of nine men moving from the mouth of a canyon they had designated as a gorge—now Emigration Canyon—toward a stream later to be known as City Creek. These men had entered the valley the day before. We can imagine their slumbers having been disturbed through the night of the 22nd by the howl of the coyote, or the death cry of a captured rabbit; but this morning they awoke to glimpse once again the Promised Land — the parched valley and the great salt sea that lay stretched before them. Arid and uninviting though it was, to these home seekers the Great Basin seemed the promised land; for had not their leader rejected the allurement of the fertile valleys, the luxuriantly wooded hills, and the salubrious climate of the Pacific Coast near the Golden Gate? And had he not told them to turn to the right after they entered the valley and prepare to plant seeds at the north of the mouth of the canyon?

Two of this group, Orson Pratt and Erastus Snow, were the first of the pioneer party to enter Salt Lake Valley. This they did on the morning of July 21st.

On July 22, Orson Pratt and George Albert Smith, leaving seven others to cut brush and make a passage through the canyon, entered the valley and spent the entire day in exploration. Returning they found their wagons encamped in the valley, about five miles from where they left the canyon.

It was this party of nine that traveled from the banks of Mill Creek to the south branch of City Creek on the morning of July 23, the third group to enter the Great Basin.

Perhaps few, if any, of the great leaders of the world carried more responsibility than did the leader of this pioneer band, President Brigham Young, who, on that morning, lay sick of fever. This first band of pioneers consisted of 143 men, 3 women, and 2 children, 73 wagons, 93 horses, 52 mules, 66 oxen, 19 cows, 17 dogs, and a few chickens. Think what it would mean to provide for such an outfit for even a week, to say nothing of three months.

Eighty-nine years ago this morning there were 40,000 Mormons scattered from the British Isles to the mouth of Emigration Canyon; 13,993 in Great Britain were preparing to emigrate to America. They had confidence in their leaders that the latter would establish a haven of rest for them, a Zion in which they would worship their God in peace.

Nauvoo was a deserted city, desecrated by uninformed, misinformed, embittered enemies of the Church.

A detachment of the Mormon Battalion was at Pueblo, and the main body of the Battalion were making their way from California to meet the body of the Church in the West.

Six thousand refugees were encamped on "a high plateau" overlooking the Missouri River. Here they had found only a temporary abode. The site was known as Winter Quarters, now called Florence, Nebraska, about six miles from the city of Omaha.

On the shoulders of President Brigham Young and his associates of the Twelve rested the responsibility of finding a home for all these scattered people.

On that same day — July 23, 1847 — Brigham Young and the main body of pioneers ascended and crossed over the Big Mountain. From the foot of Little Mountain on July 24, they came through Emigration Canyon out into the valley of the Great Salt Lake. About two o'clock in the afternoon he and all the rear wagons of the Pioneer company arrived at the City Creek encampment.

At that time they faced a barren uninhabited waste, covered only with sagebrush, an occasional bunch of wheat grass, spouting hot springs, greasewood, century-old, unbroken sun-baked sod that defied them; but in their hearts was a faith triumphant, a faith that had "nourished in them confidence, hope, love, and a sentiment of the infinite value of existence." They were poor in worldly possessions but rich in character, practiced wisdom, and a divine assurance that through industry and the blessings of Providence they would here build a Zion to their God.

Today we drive over paved highways, leading to a city of comfortable homes, of towering business blocks, of churches, schools, and transportation arteries leading to every great center of the world.

Rich in material accomplishment let us ever cherish that integrity and faith triumphant which inspired the pioneers.

PIONEER WOMEN

YOU will find few of the names of pioneer women inscribed on monuments erected to the brave. Some are not even known beyond their family circles; not a few lie in unmarked graves out on the plains; but the burdens they bore uncomplainingly, the contributions they made to the settlement of the arid West, the virtues they exemplified in the midst of trials and almost super-human endurance entitle them to an honored place among the heroines of the world.

We confess that during this Centennial we have not laid much emphasis upon the part that women played in the settlement of this Western Empire. In this we are but following the general practice of men throughout the ages. Women bear the burdens of the household, carry most of the responsibility of rearing a family, inspire their husbands and sons to achieve success; and while the latter are being given the applause of public acclaim, the wives and mothers who really merit recognition and commendation remain smilingly content in unheralded achievement.

The pioneer woman was equal to every emergency. Her courage in crises when she faced threatened death equaled, and, in some cases, exceeded that of her husband. She was loyal to her loved ones, to her Church, and to God. She endured untold hardships uncomplainingly. She was unselfish, brave, and fulfilled, under most adverse conditions, the responsibilities of motherhood — woman's noblest calling.

Nearly all women are by nature sensitive and dainty. They admire beautiful things. They like to dress becomingly. They admire china and silverware. They enjoy decorating their rooms and making homes livable and attractive. They appreciate an occasional gift of jewelry, of a piece of Royal Doulton or of Dresden. The pioneer woman and her associates who entered Salt Lake Valley one hundred years ago enjoyed none of these luxuries. They had to be content, and were content, with the mere necessities.

One of the most tragically heroic epochs in Church history, one in which she exemplified the dauntless faith and divine leadership of the men at the head of the Church, and the super-human, sublime patience and resourcefulness of the women, is the period following the expulsion of the saints from Nauvoo, and the building of Winter Quarters on the banks of the Missouri.

It is difficult for us who attempt to pay a feeble tribute to these pioneers one hundred years later, even to imagine, for example, what those shelterless mothers endured during the month of February, 1846, as they passed through the throes of confinement on the banks of the Sugar Creek when nine babies were born. You mothers can understand this better than we men. The world will do well to pause and think what it was that inspired the women to endure uncomplainingly such trials.

In that month, women, driven from their comfortable homes in Nauvoo, left their land, which many of them could not sell, abandoned household furniture, treasured pictures and relics they had accumulated, left the old clock ticking a gloomy farewell, taking nothing which they could do without, crossed the Mississippi River to begin a trackless journey, and to endure the hardships incident to camping in the open air on muddy ground, under inclement, often stormy skies, with inadequate provisions and clothing.

Picture this afternoon, if you can — and this is a real incident — a young mother with the care and responsibility of three children — a girl of seven, a boy of five, and a baby boy one and one-half years old, subjected to these adverse conditions. On her and her little children, on February 25th, three inches of snow fell. They had only tents and wagon boxes for shelter. The diaries of that day tell us that this mother and babies, as many others, had to sleep out-of-doors as the wagon boxes were loaded with food and with what few household necessities the refugees could take along.

They reached Mount Pisgah in due time, stayed there until fall, then joined the saints at Winter Quarters and prepared to cross the plains next year.

Now I am going to ask you to consider conditions ten years later. Thousands of women by that time had walked across the plains, your grandmothers and mine among them, and many of them prompted to do that out of consideration for widows who could not come any other way; so they shared the wagon and let the widow ride while they walked.

But ten years later they had instituted or inaugurated the handcart method of crossing the plains. Today, that just seems to me almost incomprehensible, but they fitted out their handcarts at Winter Quarters, loaded each with such household goods and such food as they could, took the cattle and drove them along, and marched across the plains singing that inspiring song: "Come, Come, Ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear, but with joy wend your way."

Wives pulled and pushed handcarts, aiding their husbands, while little children trudged at their sides!

But in that year of 1856 two companies were delayed. They were advised not to attempt the trip. It was too late. One man who had crossed called them together and said: "You had better wait." But the majority voted to attempt it, and he said: "All right, if you are determined to go I will go with you and help you; if necessary, die with you."

One morning a young wife and mother stood by the side of a newly dug grave, the final resting place of her husband and fourteen others who had taken the last step on life's journey. One of those put in that grave had helped to dig it the night before. One of the mother's arms caressed a little boy who was sorrowfully sobbing as he buried his face in the folds of his mother's dress. You and I cannot even imagine the aching sorrow and poignant grief that must have filled that young woman's heart as she and her little son pulled their handcart that day without husband and daddy.

Later, in the month of September, at the close of the day's march, a bride of twelve months gave birth to a baby girl. The records do not say whether the company halted for the mother to recuperate. If they did, it would be only for a day or two, and the young mother would have to trudge along carrying in her arms, or placing it on the handcart, her newborn babe. What a picture for an artist! What an appeal to the skeptical, indifferent world today! What an illustration of heroism and faith!

To womanhood everywhere, and especially to those in the West who prize their heritage, may the memory of the sterling character and heroic deeds of our pioneer mothers be an inspiration to foster and practice in their daily lives, courage, modesty, virtue, loyalty, and faith — outstanding traits of the Utah pioneer women!

"THIS IS THE RIGHT PLACE"

AS Brigham Young and the main body of Pioneers came through Emigration Canyon out into the valley of the Great Salt Lake, they gazed upon a barren landscape so uninviting and desolate that one of the three women in the company, out of sheer disappointment and hopelessness, broke down and wept. Truly to her, and to others of the company, it must have seemed impossible that in such a desert place could be fulfilled the prophecy of their first great leader, Joseph Smith, that the Saints "would become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains."

And yet, in our day, that prophecy has become a reality.

To paraphrase the words of Thomas Carlyle; no one can look however imperfectly upon the aspirations and accomplishments of the men and women who founded this western empire without being profited thereby. They are "flowing light-fountains of native, original insight, of manhood and heroic nobleness; in whose radiance all souls feel that it is well with them."

That which made the Utah Pioneers truly worthy of the homage we pay them, and which will enhance their greatness in future years, is not the mere fact that they endured persecution, suffered privations, subsisted in a wilderness and made a thousand-mile journey across the plains without a death or even a serious mishap — achievements, it is true, worthy the praises of posterity — but what made them truly great was the fact that no matter how intense their suffering or how dark their forebodings, they ever cherished as beacon lights unchanging truths fundamental to human peace and progress.

First and foremost was their unwavering faith in the existence and nearness of God their Father and of His son Jesus Christ. Every day of that toilsome journey was begun by prayerful devotion. Instructions were given that "at five o'clock in the morning the bugle is to be sounded as a signal for every man to arise and attend prayers before he leaves his wagon." To foster reverence is to develop in man his noblest virtue.

To be prepared for any eventuality was a second fundamental requirement. Theirs was physical danger, and "every man must carry his loaded gun or else have it in his wagon where he can seize it at a moment's notice." "Wagons must be kept together and not separate." After arriving in the valley, adobe forts and stockades were built as precautionary measures.

Faith, reverence, frugality, industry, and a willingness to serve their fellow men were ideals taught, and to a remarkable degree practiced, in the daily lives of the Pioneers.

Ours is a rich heritage. The wealth inherited must neither be buried nor squandered, but should be handed down to posterity with a tenfold increase.

The youth today face enemies also — false ideologies and immoral practices "glossed over" and "seasoned with a text." Sound preparation to meet these enemies is as imperative now as when the Pioneers moved toward desert, wild animals and stealthily skulking Indians.

Now, rich in material accomplishment, let us ever cherish that integrity and faith triumphant which inspired the Pioneers when their valiant, God-fearing leader, Brigham Young, said: "This is the right place."
