David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Praise

SPEAK IN PRAISE

ONE of the best ways of building up our home, be it domicile, a state, or a nation, is to speak well of that home, city, state, or nation. Let the tongue be under control, and speak well of the home. I have rejoiced time and again, when visiting the different stakes, to hear our brethren tell about the advantages of some particular town. "Why," they would say, for example, "we are blessed with the purest air, we have the best water that can be found in the world;" and they will enumerate, one after another, the benefits and blessings of that particular locality. I recall now how the brethren in Canada were eager to impress those who were with them with the resources of that country. Why, the advantages were innumerable. For example, one visitor said, "But you haven't the scenery we have in Utah."

"Yes, we have," persisted the stake president. "We have even better scenery than you have in Utah."

"Where?"

"I will show you"; then a ride forty miles from Cardston took us to one of the most beautiful mountain scenes in the world — the Switzerland of America. He felt that there was nothing that could make him feel dissatisfied with his home there. "Even the winds in Canada," he said, "are a blessing to us, because they blow the snow off so the cattle can eat the grass."

This is the point — he could see good in everything. There was contentment — not a spirit of tearing down, finding fault, complaining. I believe it is a good lesson; let us speak well of our home city; let us see the advantages of it.

Let us speak well of those within our Church; let us give good news of our neighbors, good news of our bishops, good news of our stake workers, good news of all whom we meet and into whose company we may chance to be thrown. If we cannot truthfully speak well of them, let us refrain from speaking at all.

Then, say you, would you not speak of evil conditions? Must we not raise our voice in denouncing conditions and men who are bringing evil upon us? Yes, speak of conditions; but it is unnecessary to revile the character of men. We must rise above it. There is a trait in the heart of the world to "pick at" their fellow men. We cannot encourage that tendency. We must not pick out that which will tear down a brother's character, nor the character of the city, the state, or nation.

If we see in a town a condition that endangers the life of our fellow citizens, we meet that condition. If it is a washout, a cave, a hole in the roadway, there is a red lamp placed there at night to keep the travelers from falling into it, and the next day, or as soon as possible, the dangerous condition is removed. That is proper. Now, there are evil conditions in society; there are sunken roads that need to be filled. We shall see these in our towns, and as homecleaners, if you please, as home builders and home improvers, we can remove those sunken places. But let us do it calmly; let us do it determinedly, without vilifying those concerned, without tearing down character.
