David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Prayer

ESSENTIAL VIRTUES IN EFFECTIVE PRAYER

PRAYER is the pulsation of a yearning, loving heart in tune with the Infinite. It is a message of the soul sent directly to a loving Father. The language is not mere words but spirit-vibration.

The first and most fundamental virtue in effective prayer is faith. A belief in God brings peace to the soul. An assurance that God is our Father, into whose presence we can go for comfort and guidance, is a never-failing source of comfort.

Another essential virtue is reverence. This virtue is exemplified in the model prayer given by the Savior in the words "Hallowed be thy name." This principle should be exemplified in classrooms, and particularly in our houses of worship.

The third essential element is sincerity. Prayer is the yearning of the spirit. Sincere praying implies that when we ask for any virtue or blessing we should work for the blessing and cultivate the virtue.

The next essential virtue is loyalty. Why pray for the Kingdom of God to come unless you have in your heart a desire and a willingness to aid in its establishment? Praying for His will to be done and then not trying to live it, gives you a negative answer at once. You would not grant something to a child who showed that attitude towards a request he is making of you. If we pray for the success of some cause or enterprise, manifestly we are in sympathy with it. It is the height of disloyalty to pray for God's will to be done, and then fail to conform our lives to that will.

A final essential virtue is humility. Not the outward, hypocritical pretense of a Uriah Heap, but a humility that springs from the heart, from an absence of self-righteousness. Self-respect is a virtue, but self-conceit is an inhibition. The principle of humility and prayer leads one to feel a need of divine guidance. Self-reliance is a virtue, but with it should go a consciousness of the need of superior help—a consciousness that as you walk firmly in the pathway of duty, there is a possibility of your making a misstep; and with that consciousness is a prayer, a pleading that God will inspire you to avoid that false step.

"Our Father which art in heaven," is an acknowledgment of His existence. He that cometh to God must believe that He is. "Hallowed be thy name," expresses reverence. "Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done," is at once a plea for its establishment on earth, and an implied promise loyally to co-operate in bringing peace on earth, good will to men. "Give us this day our daily bread," is an acknowledgment of our dependence upon God for our very subsistence — at least that we are in need of His help and guidance in all our constant strivings. "Forgive us our debts [or trespasses] as we forgive our debtors [or those who trespass against us]" makes our forgiveness entirely dependent upon the sincerity of our hearts in forgiving others, and upon the extent to which we render forgiveness. We shall get forgiveness in proportion to our forgiveness of those who have offended us. "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil," is the yearning plea of a humble heart for strength and guidance of an acknowledged superior power.

What a glorious world this would be if in our homes, in our business offices, in our classrooms, in all phases of daily life we could feel the presence of God—at least be conscious that we can go to Him, and have Him guide us and keep us throughout the day!

A BOY'S PRAYER

WHEN a very young child in the home of my youth, I was fearful at night. I traced it back to a vivid dream when two Indians came into the yard. I ran to the house for protection, and one of them shot an arrow and hit me in the back. Only a dream, but I felt that blow, and I was very much frightened, for in the dream they entered, one a tall one, and a smaller one, and sneered and frightened mother.

I never got over it. Adding to that were mother's fears, for when father was away with the herd or on some mission, mother would never retire without looking under the bed; so burglars or men who might come in and try to take advantage of mother and the young children, were real to me.

Whatever the conditions, I was very frightened. One night I could not sleep. I was only a boy, and I fancied I heard noises around the house. Mother was away in another room. Thomas E. by my side was sleeping soundly. I could not sleep and I became terribly fearful, and I decided that I would do as my parents had said — to pray.

I did not think I could pray without getting out of bed and kneeling, and that was a terrible test. But I did finally bring myself to get out of bed and kneel and pray to God to protect mother and the family. And a voice as clear to me as mine is to you, said, "Don't be afraid. Nothing will hurt you." Where it came from, what it was, I am not saying. To me it was a direct answer, and there came an assurance that I should never be hurt in bed at night.

THE BLESSINGS OF PRAYER

IWOULD have youth have the trust in God which a little blind girl had in her father. She was sitting on his lap in the train, and a friend sitting by said: "Let me rest you," and he reached over and took the little girl on his lap. The father said to her: "Do you know who is holding you?" "No," she replied, "but you do."

O the trust of that child in her father! She knew she was safe because he knew who was holding her. Just so real should be the trust which our boys and girls have in their Father in heaven. If our young people will have this faith and so approach their Father in heaven, there are at least four great blessings that will come to them here and now.

The first is gratitude. Their souls will be filled with thanksgiving for what God has done for them. They will find themselves rich in favors bestowed. The young man who closes the door behind him, who draws the curtains, and there in silence pleads with God for help, should first pour out his soul in gratitude for health, for friends, for loved ones, for the gospel, and for the manifestations of God's existence.

The second blessing of prayer is guidance. I cannot conceive a young man's going astray or a young girl's going far wrong who will kneel down in the morning and pray. I cannot think that a Latter-day Saint will hold enmity in his heart if he will sincerely, in secret, pray God to remove from his heart all feelings of envy and malice toward any of his fellow men.

The third blessing is confidence. Let us teach the thousands of students who are struggling to get an education that if they want to succeed in their lessons, they should seek their God; that the greatest teacher known to the world stands near to guide them. Once the student feels that he can approach the Lord through prayer, he will receive confidence that he can get his lessons, that he can write his speech, that he can stand up before his fellow students and deliver his message without fear of failure. Confidence comes through sincere prayer.

Finally, he will get inspiration. It is not imagination that we can approach God and can receive light and guidance from Him, that our minds will be enlightened, our souls thrilled by His spirit. Washington sought it; Lincoln received it; Joseph Smith knew it. Inspiration is manifest to all who will but open their eyes to see and their hearts to understand.
