David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Priesthood

DELEGATED AUTHORITY

PRIESTHOOD is inherent in the Godhead. It is authority and power which has its source only in the Eternal Father and His Son Jesus Christ. In seeking the source of the Priesthood we can conceive of no condition beyond God Himself. In Him it centers. From Him it must emanate. Priesthood, therefore, as held by man must ever be delegated authority. There never has been a human being in the world who had the right to arrogate to himself the power and authority of the Priesthood. As an ambassador from any government exercises only that authority which has been given him by his government, so a man who is authorized to represent Deity does so only by virtue of the powers and rights delegated to him. However, when such authority is given, it carries within limitations all the privileges of a "power of attorney," by which one is empowered by another to act in another's stead. All official action performed in accordance with such power of attorney is as binding as if the person himself had performed it.

Priesthood is a "principle of power." To form a mental picture of a principle in its abstract form is difficult if not impossible. We can interpret it only as it is expressed in human action. A principle is that something which is inherent in anything, determining its nature. The very essence of Priesthood is eternal. As it finds expression in life it manifests power. We can conceive of the power of Priesthood as being potentially existent as an impounded reservoir of water. Such power becomes dynamic and productive of good only when the liberated force becomes active in valleys, fields, gardens and happy homes; so the principle of power is manifested only as it becomes active in the lives of men, turning their hearts and desires toward God, and prompting service to their fellow men.

Strictly speaking, Priesthood as delegated power is an individual acquirement. However, by divine decree men who are appointed to serve in particular offices in the Priesthood unite in quorums. Thus this power finds expression through groups as well as in individuals. The quorum is the opportunity for men of like aspirations to know, to love and to aid one another. "To live is not to live for one's self alone."

For a quorum to function, there must be a Church organization. In the history of God's dealing with men individual prophets have held the Holy Priesthood at times when there was no regularly organized Church on the earth, but never under such a condition has there been a quorum of Priesthood organized. The Church, therefore, is the means through which the authority of the Priesthood can be properly exercised and administered. Whenever the full authority of the Priesthood is upon the earth, a Church organization must be maintained. Contrariwise, there can be no true Church without the divine authority of the Holy Priesthood.

MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD

PRIESTHOOD is power and authority inherent in the Godhead. In man it is always delegated authority—it cannot be assumed with efficacy.

Priesthood means service. This is true even in its divine source, as we may infer from the sublime declaration: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Emanating from Deity is the service that leads to the redemption of God's children.

Whenever the Priesthood is delegated to man it is conferred upon him not as a personal distinction, although it becomes such as he honors it, but as authority to represent Deity and an obligation to assist the Lord in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

If Priesthood meant only personal honor, blessing, or individual elevation, there would be no need of groups or quorums. The very existence of such groups established by divine authorization proclaims our dependence upon one another, the indispensable need of mutual help and assistance. We are, by divine right, social beings.

When a citizen of the United States is called to represent his government in a foreign nation either as consul, minister or ambassador, he goes to his post cognizant not only of his responsibility as a representative of a hundred

and ten million people, but also aware of certain duties incumbent upon him as they pertain to the office to which he has been appointed.

So it is with any man called to a position in the Church of Christ. He not only should be cognizant of the power which he holds as a representative of Christ, but he also should see clearly what duties he has to perform in order to discharge the trust imposed in him.
