David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Primary Hospital

THE MOST beautiful encomium ever paid another was expressed by Peter when he said of his Lord: "He went about doing good."

It is a wonderful blessing to heal the afflicted body; it is a greater achievement to heal a broken soul. It is the dominant purpose of the Children's Hospital to render both services. The spiritual aspect of this hospital is just as important as the physical.

We are blessed with scientists, skilled surgeons, and medical doctors who will do their best to render service to the extent of their ability. It remains now to administer spiritual blessings as well as physical restoration to the little children during their weeks, months and sometimes years, of convalescence.

Those who have contributed to the erection of this hospital, I think, have had that in mind just as much as they have the restoring of the wounded body, the broken limb, or the straightening of the crooked bones. We can lose ourselves for the good of others in the spiritual, just as much as we can in the temporal, and that, after all, is the great purpose of life.

Generosity is benevolence in action, and Carlyle says benevolence "is the minister of God." This edifice is the result of true benevolence—one of the most precious of the spiritual attributes of man.

The birthday penny contribution touches every little boy, every little girl, who participates. Childhood is being trained in this fundamental spiritual quality every time February comes and children count their years in pennies for blessing those in need.

A letter from one of the little children here in the hospital reads:

I like this hospital. I gave my pennies on my birthday to the Primary and I am glad all the children give theirs so I can come here and get well with the other children. We do so many nice things here.

May the spiritual significance of this reach to the outermost parts of the world! These contributions come from Canada, Mexico, all over the United States, wherever the Church has a branch. And all little children are welcome who need assistance rendered by this hospital. If they can pay, then contributions are received. If they cannot, the children receive the blessings just the same.

The Primary Hospital is a monument to all who believe in doing gracious deeds to their fellow men, meriting the approval of the Savior, who said, "These deeds shall thy memorial be. Fear not, thou didst them unto me."
