David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Principles

THE PRACTICE OF PRINCIPLES

THE potency and power of a church or a religion are largely determined by the way its adherents introduce into practice the tenets and principles advocated. The discrepancy between the lofty teachings of Jesus Christ and the actions, business dealings, and social life of His professed followers is doing more today to discredit Christianity than any other one thing in the world. It is the discrepancy between pretentions and actions—the discrepancy that Christ condemned when He said: "Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?"

All this but emphasizes the responsibility to right living that everyone assumes when he takes upon himself the name of Christian.

On the other hand, no principle or church should be condemned because of the inability of its adherents, either through weakness or disinclination, to exemplify the principles of the teachings of the church in their lives. Truth is eternal; actions of men are transitory. Sincere seekers after truth must ever learn to distinguish between principles and persons. Recently, some Christian women tourists in Cairo acted in a very unbecoming, not to say reprehensible manner with their "dragomen." Some Mohammedans were heard to say, sneeringly, "There is Christianity. See the Christian women!" Now, the fact is that what the Mohammedans saw was not Christianity at all. It was merely the disgusting actions of weak, brazen women. True Christianity teaches modesty and morality; and to the extent that these tourists violated these principles, they were not followers of the Christ, and consequently did not merit the title, Christian. But the Mohammedans did not distinguish, nor should we expect them to distinguish, between persons and principles.

Some members of the Church fail to distinguish between principles of everlasting truth and the actions of men, and seeing the latter indulge in wrongdoing, have said that their faith in the Gospel has been sorely tested. The most that they should say truthfully is that they have lost confidence in some men who have failed to live consistently with their pretentions. It is well for all of us to remember that the Gospel net gathers in the weak as well as the strong, the small as well as the great, the vacillating as well as the stalwart character; that the manifestations of the principles of truth vary in the lives of these many and diversified types; but that the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ are as eternal and true as God the Father from whom they emanate, and that man will progress and be happy only as he conforms his life to them.
