David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Prodigal

THE PRODIGAL SON

ONE OF the most beautiful, the most impressive, of parables ever spoken by our Lord and Savior is the parable of the Prodigal Son. Most commentators emphasize that beauty by referring to God's love for the penitent, the love of a father for the wayward. Well, I grant you that that is a glorious part of the parable.

But I think it is great not only because of the divine love shown by the father, but also because of its practical presentation of how the father's love was lost, or to put it this way: the presentation of how to fail, and the implication of how to succeed. I do not know of anything in literature which marks the downward path of youth as does that simple parable.

Two boys had the gift of choice as precious as life itself, and one became dissatisfied with his surroundings—we are not told what caused that dissatisfaction—and he chose to leave his father's home. I shall name for you five things which I think contributed to that young man's downfall:

I. Irritation at Restraint

First, irritation at restraint. It is a very common experience in youth, and I am speaking to men and women, perhaps each one of whom can go back in memory and find the time when he or she experienced that. I hope none of you who recalls such an experience will connote with it having said condemnatory words against your father or your mother. I hope you did not even have a thought that condemned them, because if you did it will stay with you through life. But every one of us has had that experience of irritation at restraint in the home. Perhaps parents have asked us to come home too early at night. Perhaps they have asked us not to go to parties unchaperoned. We resent it, because we think we know more than our parents.

This young man felt the same. Matters were not being conducted as he thought they should have been; "give me my portion and I will take care of myself."

And that brings us to the second step toward failure—self-conceit. It is a common thing for students in universities to know more when they are students than they will ever know again, and this young man experienced just what we experienced when we went to the university.

And the third thing leading downward: The young prodigal possessed plenty of means and opportunity to gain favor among his associates—he had wealth, and he could be a hale-fellow-well-met, be praised and complimented and flattered; he spent extravagantly—a vice. A great lesson in life is to learn to spend less than we earn. It is surprising how much success depends upon that little practice, and how quickly failure can come in business, or to an individual who spends more than he earns. I am not referring now to investments—investment in education, investment in property. I am referring to unwise expenditures. Many men of success have had to economize when they were going through school. I read the other day of one man who lived on one meal a day and became one of the great scientists of the world. I have in mind a very dear friend and associate when I was principal of Weber Academy, who was sleeping on a hard board for a bed, doing his own cooking—his meals scantily prepared—and who became a president of one of our leading institutions.

Following extravagance comes intemperance. Being subject to the appetite which intemperance stimulates, a present-day prodigal son was given a false impression of joy and pleasure and success by nicotine and intoxicants. He did not know, as many young men and young women do not know, that cigarets in youth are about as useful in building us a strong body as dynamite would be in building a house.

What is the next step? Lust. He wasted his substance, weakened his character in riotous living. As a result he found himself herding swine. The Savior uses that as the lowest of occupations and the people to whom Jesus spoke considered it just that.

It is so easy to go down. We are facing right at this moment the two influencing things in life—the animal plane, in which all created animals move and satisfy their appetites, gratify their passions, perpetuating their kind; or the spiritual realm, which includes the intellectual, the love of beauty, the love of good literature in which we can find "tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, sermons in stones, and good in everything," in which we can thrill at the beautiful expression in literature describing a sunset.

The morn in russet mantle clad, Walks o'er the dew on yon high misty hill. Now morn, her rosy steps in th' eastern clime Advancing, sow'd the earth with orient pearl.
