David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Progression

ETERNAL PROGRESSION

A MAN'S idea of the significance of the words "eternal progression" will largely determine his philosophy of life. These words connote human immortality. They also imply two fundamental human objectives.

The advancement of science, new discoveries from the dawn of history to the present are the results of the efforts of men who are willing to sacrifice themselves, if necessary, to the cause of truth.

There is Louis Pasteur, for example, the distinguished French chemist and biologist who opposed the theory of spontaneous generation of life and valiantly strove against great odds to demonstrate in his laboratory—and later demonstrated both in laboratory and by public experiments—that the process of fermentation is due to the growth of micro-organisms.

Thomas A. Edison is another brilliant example—one who denying himself personal comforts and promises of ease that wealth might bring, sat at his desk eight hours, ten hours, twelve hours, twenty-four hours, searching for secrets of power that he knew were hidden in the realm of the unknown.

There is Roentgen, and later Millikan with his Utah associate, Dr. Fletcher, bringing from the realm of mystery the X-ray which is now harnessed in the service of man. To these heroes and thousands of others humanity owes a debt of gratitude.

Science has made mighty strides in the realm of invention and discovery. Science has made great advancement since the time when men believed the world to be a flat square, under which were fiery caverns and over which was a crystalline floor of stupendous weight and solidity; the stars above were regarded as many little lights, managed by angels. The astronomy of today declares that "there are thirty or forty billion stars in the Milky Way," and that there are perhaps in the entire universe "thousands of galaxies like our Milky Way."

Today the telescope, the microscope and mathematics combined, reveal the heavens as worlds upon worlds, infinite, incalculable, following unvaryingly their appointed order and unvarying course.

It is not so long, however, from the day when our fathers believed that there was some direct connection between the phases of the moon and the change in the weather, and today when "the only known cause of weather is the variations of the distribution of the sun's heat in the atmosphere."

A greater stride is seen when we contemplate the difference in thought from the time when Dr. Harvey discovered "the circulation of the blood through the body to today when our little 12-year-old child hears the teacher in physiology say as a matter of fact that the blood in your body makes the round trip—capillaries to lungs, and lungs to capillaries in 30 seconds, that all your blood goes through your lungs 2,000 times a day; that there are twenty million times a million red corpuscles, with a total surface of three thousand square yards, that carry loads of oxygen to keep us alive."

I call attention to these things to emphasize the fact that all the stupendous advances are the result of men's losing themselves in the interest of truth.

We must not lose sight of the fact, however, that for what seems to us deprivation and sacrifice on the part of these great leaders of the world, they were more than compensated by the supreme joy that comes from achievement. There is but one greater happiness in the world than that which is expressed by the searcher in the words, "Eureka, I have found it!" At that moment he experiences the one great purpose for which man has been placed on earth.

True joy is a concomitant, not an end; it comes to him who seeks God and truth and finds them.

Advancement of science as a factor in eternal progression depends upon man's attitude in the use of science. Advancement in science might mean retrogression. Henshaw Ward, the author of Exploring the Universe in commenting upon the thought that natural evolution may not necessarily be a progress to what is higher and better, says,

I do not believe that progress can be defined by science. In the new world of tomorrow, men will see that science is just a measurement of facts, and has no magic `Progress' in it. The inventions made by applying science are not in their nature, an addition to our welfare. They are tools. They are neither good nor bad. The kind of work they will do will be determined by the kind of people who employ them.

The truth of this assertion is manifest in the conditions of the world today. Man has conquered earth, sea and air. He sails under the ocean, as on the surface of the water, with a speed that is amazing. We witness the great Pacific spanned in a few hours. Yet we see how these products of man's inventive brain may be turned to his own destruction. The bombs from warring planes drop in the streets, killing innocent women and children. Experiments in the chemical laboratory have put into the hands of man poison gas only to be carried by the wind to the suffering of humanity and the destruction of human life.

The great secret of human happiness lies in progression. Stagnation means death. With man's attitude toward service to his fellow men, with his heart compassioned and free from selfish endeavor, he will march on to the goal that is his—to become master, creator, God.

The doctrine of eternal progression is fundamental in the Church of Christ.

The first great principle that should occupy the attention of mankind, that should be understood by the child and the adult, and which is the main spring of all action, whether people understand it or not, is the principle of improvement. The principle of increase, of exaltation, of adding to that we already possess, is the grand moving principle and cause of the actions of the children of men. No matter what their pursuits are, in what nation they were born, with what people they have been associated, what religion they profess, or what politics they hold, this is the mainspring of the actions of the people, embracing all the powers necessary in performing the duties of life.

Discourses of Brigham Young - 133-34.

There are ten rungs in the ladder of progression:
