David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Religion

FUNDAMENTALS OF A TRUE RELIGION

I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.

THIS abundant life is obtained not merely from spiritual exaltation, but by the application to daily life of the principles that Jesus taught. These principles are few and simple and may, if desired, be applied by every normal person.

The first of these and the foundation upon which a true Christian society is built is a belief in a Supreme Being who lives and loves his children—a belief that gives power and vigor to the soul—an assurance that God can be approached for guidance and that He will manifest Himself to those who seek Him.

A second principle is the acceptance of the truth that life is a gift of God and therefore divine, and that every human being is a child of our Father in Heaven, created a little lower than the angels and crowned with power and great glory.

Third, that the Gospel as taught by Jesus to His apostles and restored in its fullness in this day is a Way of Life, obedience to which will lead men back into the presence of God. So comprehensive are the doctrines of the Gospel that they involve all truth necessary for the social and spiritual advancement of the human race—all things contributive to the happiness of man. Comprehended in this are those practical virtues which contribute to personal integrity. By this I mean good plain everyday honesty, sobriety and respect for other's rights, such as will win the confidence of one's fellows.

The fourth essential or guiding principle may be designated as social consciousness that awakens in each individual the realization that it is his duty to make the world better for his having been in it. Someday intelligent human beings will realize the importance and benefit of living in right relations, one with another.

This condition can be achieved, not alone from mere belief, nor from oratorical exhortations but by the application in business, social and national life of the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

RELIGION AND YOUTH

I SHALL offer four reasons for giving proper religious training to youth:

First, Youth need religion to maintain a proper equilibrium during the formative period of their lives. Youth are impetuous, hasty in formulating conclusions, have a tendency to look upon parents as old-fashioned.

Secondly, Youth should have religion in order to stabilize society.

Thirdly, Youth need religion to satisfy the innate longing of the soul. Man is a spiritual being, and sometime or another every man is possessed with a longing, an irresistible desire to know his relationship to the infinite. There is in man not an instinct but a divinity that strives to push him onward and upward.

Fourthly, Youth need religion to comply properly with the purpose of creation. Inevitably a teacher who denies divine agency in creation, who insists that there is no intelligent purpose in it, impresses the student with the thought that all may be chance. No youth should be so left without a counterbalancing thought. The skeptic teacher should be fair enough to say that even Charles Darwin, when he faced this great question of annihilation, if creation is dominated only by chance, wrote: "It is an intolerable thought that man and all other sentient beings are doomed to complete annihilation, after such long-continued, slow progress."
