David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Responsibility

OUR INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY

Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence.

TWO principles in this admonition stand out: first, to learn, to know what one's duty is; second, to act in all diligence in the performance of that duty.

To know one's duty, to learn the truth, is the task of every man and woman in the world. There is a natural feeling which urges men and women towards truth; it is a responsibility placed upon mankind. The man who knows what his duty is and fails to perform it is not true to himself.

Every time we have opportunity and fail to live up to that truth which is within us, every time we fail to express a good thought, every time we fail to perform a good act, we weaken ourselves and make it more difficult to express that thought or perform that act in the future. Every time we perform a good act, every time we express a noble feeling, we make it easier to perform that act or express that feeling another time.

I am reminded of the story of the woman who "felt" sympathy; she knew how to sympathize with the poor heroine on the stage. This lady sat in her box, comfortable in her furs and fine silks, and as she looked at the performance, she wept in sympathy with the heroine who was suffering imaginary torments; and while that woman was sympathizing with the stage heroine, her own coachman froze to death on the carriage seat outside, because of insufficient clothing.

It is not enough to feel; we must act so that it will benefit somebody. Knowledge of the truth is not enough unless it is expressed.

RESPONSIBILITY TO SELF

I REMEMBER my first impression as I stood on the South Rim of the Great Grand Canyon, with the Colorado River seemingly a winding ribbon down in the depths of that chasm. My dominant impression was that I was not comprehending its greatness, and that was confirmed when I started down the trail leading to the bottom of that great gorge. Then the details and its vastness began to dawn upon me.

So it is as I try to comprehend the greatness of this organization. I think that none of us truly appreciate the value of the Mutual Improvement Association.

I hold in my hand the June Conference program. The caption underneath is, "Be Honest With Yourself."

Being true means loyalty. Loyalty means fidelity. Its synonyms are faithfulness, allegiance, constancy, homage. Its antonyms are treason, treachery, perfidy.

Young men and young women: Yours is not the call to fight the hostile Indians, to build stockades, nor to point the plow for the first time into the sterile, stubborn glebe as our grandparents had to do; but you face problems equally great and stupendous in their effect upon the future welfare of humanity. Yours is the responsibility to send out the lifeline to stranded nations and carry forward the banner of peace, liberty and good will as a guide for baffled nations to follow. It is the youth of today who, taught in the ways of morality and in the strength of spiritual attainment, must stand adamant against the false ideologies that would undermine the tried and tested ideals and truths of the pioneers who worshipped the God of truth.

The leadership that is demanded of youth today is not attained by chance, nor fostered by indulgence. It demands careful preparation—a preparation that should constantly be impregnated by the sweet spirit of four loyalties implied by the caption, "Be Honest With Yourself." The first loyalty is to self; the second to parents. Our debt to our parents is unpayable except in one way, and that is in emulating their ideals and bringing joy to them in their old age, and satisfaction to those who have gone before in seeing that we keep ourselves clean and wholesome.

The third loyalty is country. Goethe said that "The destiny of any nation at any given time depends on the opinions of its young men under five and twenty."

Fourth comes loyalty to God and Truth. Our belief in equality and brotherhood is a Christian heritage. It is the responsibility of the Church to educate its members to realize that no man is unwanted; that every soul is unique and has a life to live made up of momentous chances which will make or mar his own life and the life of the community and mankind in general. To cherish these loyalties, to make popular these ideals, the world needs men and women of unimpeachable character.

The body with its five or more senses, with its appetites and passions, is essential to life and happiness, but in the ultimate analysis, it is only a means to a higher end. When man makes its gratification an end in itself, he frustrates the purpose of life and descends to sensuality.

Spirituality is the consciousness of victory over self, and of communion with the infinite. Spirituality impels one to conquer difficulties and acquire more and more strength. To feel one's faculties unfolding and truth expanding the soul is one of life's sublimest experiences. Being true to self, loyal to high ideals, develops spirituality.

The real test of any religion is the kind of man it makes. Being honest, true, chaste, virtuous, and in doing good to all men, are virtues which contribute to the highest acquisition of the soul. It is the divine in man, the supreme crowning gift, that makes him king of all created things, the one final quality that makes him tower above all other animals.
