David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Resurrection

THE RESURRECTION

THIS day throughout Christendom there has been celebrated the greatest event of all history—the resurrection of Jesus Christ. On the reality of that event in the minds of the apostles the beginning of early Christianity was founded. For over 4,000 years man had looked into the grave and had seen only the end of life. Of all the millions who had entered therein, not one had ever returned. It was, therefore, a new and glorious message that the angel gave to the woman who fearfully and lovingly had approached the sepulchre in which Jesus had been buried:

"Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified; he is risen; he is not here."

If a miracle is a supernatural event, whose antecedent forces are beyond man's finite wisdom, then the resurrection of Jesus Christ is the most stupendous miracle of all time. In it stand revealed the omnipotence of God and the immortality of man.

The resurrection is a miracle, however, only in the sense that it is beyond man's comprehension and understanding. To all who accept it as a fact, it is but a manifestation of a uniform law of life. Because man does not understand the law, he calls it a miracle. Some day man's enlightenment may bring this momentous event out of the dusk of mystery into the light of understanding.

The important question to be answered, however, is not how the resurrection occurred nor how Christ's body could be transformed or transfigured, but, is it a fact that he did take up his body and appear as a glorified resurrected being? Establish this fact and you have established also the immortality of the soul.

That the literal resurrection from the grave was a reality to the disciples who knew Christ intimately is a certainty. In their minds there was absolutely no doubt. They were witnesses of the fact. They knew, because their eyes beheld, their ears heard, their hands felt the corporeal presence of the risen Redeemer.

At Jesus' death, the apostles were stricken with gloom. When he lay dead their hopes all but died. Their intense grief, the story of Thomas, the moral perplexity of Peter, the evident preparation for a permanent burial, combine to illustrate the prevalence of a fear that the redemption of Israel had failed.

Notwithstanding the often repeated assurance of Christ that He would return to them after death, the apostles did not seem fully to comprehend it. At the crucifixion, they were frightened and discouraged. For two and a half years they had been upheld and inspired by Christ's presence. But now He was gone. They were left alone, and they seemed confused, fearful, helpless; only John stood by the cross.

The world would never have been stirred by men with such wavering, doubting, despairing minds as the apostles possessed on the day of the crucifixion.

What was it that suddenly changed these disciples to confident, fearless, heroic preachers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? It was the revelation that Christ had risen from the grave. His promises had been kept, His Messianic mission fulfilled . . .

"On the evidence of these unprejudiced, unexpectant, incredulous witnesses, faith in the Resurrection has its impregnable foundation."

Let us listen again to the testimony of these eyewitnesses, whose honesty is not questioned even by skeptical criticism. One of the first to put his testimony in writing was Marcus, whose original Jewish name was John. He was a cousin of Barnabus. There is no record to show that he joined the Church while Christ was living. There is reason to believe that he was a convert of Peter's, who affectionately refers to him as "Marcus, my son." (1 Pet. 5-13) His mother was a believer, and with her the apostles lodged at least soon after the resurrection, if not before, and it is not improbable that Jesus himself was in her house on the night of the betrayal. Mark, then, was old enough to know and to have personal acquaintance with the men who were eyewitnesses of the resurrection. It is highly probable that he was the young man who rushed to the Garden of Gethsemane with only a loin cloth wrapped about his naked body. Certain it is that he was closely associated with Peter, from whom he heard at the time, not years after, all the details surrounding Jesus' death, burial, and coming-forth from the tomb. His authorship of the second Gospel has never been disputed by the Christian churches, and even the scathing modern, negative criticism is disposed to regard him as the author of at least the main part of the present gospel.

Mark does not himself recount any appearance of the risen Lord; but he testifies that the angel at the tomb announced the resurrection, and promised that the Lord would meet His disciples. From Mark we hear the glorious proclamation of the first empty tomb in all the world. For the first time in the history of man the words "Here lies" were replaced by the divine message "He is risen." No one can doubt that Mark was convinced in his soul of the reality of the empty tomb. To him the Resurrection was not mythical, not problematical, not questionable — it was real; and the appearance of his Lord and Master among men was a fact established in his mind beyond the shadow of doubt. To the proclaiming of this truth he devoted his life and, if tradition can be relied upon, he sealed his testimony with his blood.

Another who records the testimony of eyewitnesses was Luke, a Gentile, or, as some think, a proselyte of Antioch in Syria, where he followed the profession of physician. (Col. 4-14) Even some of his most severe modern critics have placed him in the first rank as an historian, and his personal contact with early apostles makes his statements of inestimable value.

In Acts, chapter 11, verse 28, Luke implies that he was present when the Prophet Agabus delivered his famous prophecy before the Church of Antioch. It is believed that before he joined Paul at Troas (Acts 16:10) he was a convert to the Christian faith, and in all probability already a missionary. His significant expression, "had called us to preach the gospel unto them," implies that his conversion did not begin when he joined Paul on the latter's second missionary journey.

What he writes was the result of personal inquiry and investigation, and was drawn from all available sources. Particularly he interviewed and recorded the declarations of those "who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word." He avers that he "accurately traced all things from the very first," so that he might "write them in order." This means that Luke obtained the testimony of these "eyewitnesses" directly from themselves, and not from previous narratives. According to all trustworthy testimony, we have the Gospel of Luke as it came from his hand. (Read Luke 24).

Luke is also the author of the "Acts of the Apostles." His authorship is now admitted even by some who were leaders in doubting it. During the last half century, modern criticism has subjected to the severest scrutiny every ancient document that purports to contain any witness of the resurrected Christ. As a result many have been thrown aside as spurious, including the "Acts of John," "Acts of Andrew," and "Acts of Peter," but the "Acts of the Apostles" has emerged from the criticism with its authenticity established. Statements and historical references within the book, doubted at one time as to their truth and reliability, have been proved to be accurate.

With equal assurance as to their accuracy, we can accept his statements and witness in regard to the testimony of Peter and Paul and other apostles regarding the resurrection, "to whom also Christ showed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God." Who can doubt Luke's absolute confidence in the reality of the resurrection! (See Acts 1:21, 22; Acts 2:22-24, 32)

It is true that neither Mark nor Luke testifies to have personally seen the risen Lord, and therefore some urge that their recorded testimonies cannot be taken as first-hand evidence. The fact that they do not so testify (and that they yet are convinced that others did see Him) shows how incontrovertible was the evidence among the apostles and other disciples that the resurrection was a reality.

Let us now consider a document that does give the personal testimony of an eyewitness to an appearance of Jesus after his death and burial. This personal witness also corroborates the testimony not only of the two men I have quoted, but of others also. I refer to Paul, whose Jewish name was Saul, a Jew of Tarsus, educated at the feet of Gamaliel, a strict Pharisee. Before his conversion Paul was a bitter persecutor of all who believed in Jesus of Nazareth as having risen from the dead.

Later Paul gives direct evidence in his letter to the Corinthian Saints. (I Cor. ch. 1) Nobody questions Paul's authorship of this document. Its genuineness has been attested. In that immortal chapter, he anchors the faith of the saints to the resurrection of Christ as an historic fact, "shows how all essential it is to the Christian hope, and then proceeds by reasoning and analogy to brush aside certain naturalistic objections to the great doctrine." (Read Paul's direct testimony of Christ's appearances.)

So impressive and conclusive is the evidence that sincere and upright men declare: "The resurrection of Jesus Christ is a certainty. If any fact, not merely of Christianity, but of history, stands on an impregnable foundation, this does." The direct evidence of this may be stated as follows: (1) The sudden and marvelous transformation in the spirit and work of the disciples; (2) the practically universal belief of the early church as recorded in the Gospels; (3) the direct testimony of Paul, all present conclusive evidence.

It would be interesting this Easter night to know just how many who call themselves Christians and who have attended Christian churches today, truly and sincerely believe in the literal resurrection of their Lord.

The Church stands with Peter, with Paul, with James, and with all the other apostles who accepted the resurrection not only as being literally true but as the consummation of Christ's divine mission on earth. Other great religious leaders among the nations of the world since history began have taught virtue and temperance, self-mastery, and service, obedience to righteousness and duty; some have taught a belief in one supreme ruler and in a hereafter, but only Christ broke the seal of the grave and revealed death as the door to immortality and eternal life.

Since Christ lived after death, so shall all men, each one taking that place in the next world for which he is best fitted. Since love is as eternal as life, the message of the resurrection is the most comforting, the most glorious ever given to man; for when death takes a loved one from us, we can look with assurance into the open grave and say, "He is not here; he is risen."

THE COMMEMORATION OF THE RESURRECTION

"FOR I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." (Job. 19:25) Too many today are like the men on Mars' Hill two thousand years ago who erected an altar to "The Unknown God," but who knew little or nothing about him. We read that on his way to the Areopagus, Paul had beheld magnificent statues erected to various gods which the Greeks worshipped—to Mars, the god of war; Aphrodite, the goddess of love; Bacchus, the god of wine; and towering above them all, the Pallas-Athene, the goddess of wisdom, the protectress of Athens—these and many others.

Here frequently gathered philosophers and judges, the ablest thinkers, the wisest sages of the ancient world, considering and discoursing on the mysteries of life and the destiny of the human race.

In the midst of all this worldly wisdom there stood a lonely little brown-eyed man who challenged much of their philosophy as false and their worship of images as gross error—the only man in that great city of intellectuals who knew by actual experience that a man may pass through the portals of death and live—the only man in Athens who could clearly sense the difference between the formality of idolatry, and the heartfelt worship of the only true and living God. By the Epicureans and Stoics with whom he had conversed and argued, Paul had been called a babbler, a setter-forth of strange gods; "And they took him, and brought him unto Aeropagus, saying, May we know what this strange doctrine whereof thou speakest is?"

"Ye men of Athens," said Paul, "I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious. For, as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription: 'To the Unknown God.' Whom, therefore, ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you."

As Paul discoursed eloquently on the personality of God, the philosophers listened curiously though attentively until he testified that God had raised Jesus from the dead.

When they heard of the resurrection, some mocked and all but a few turned away, leaving him who had declared the truth even more lonely than ever.

Today, as on Mars' Hill, when we speak of the resurrection of the dead, there are some who mock and others who doubt and turn away. Today, as then, too many men and women have other gods to which they give more thought than to the resurrected Lord—the god of pleasure, the god of wealth, the god of indulgence, the god of political power, the god of popularity, the god of race superiority—as varied and numerous as were the gods in ancient Athens and Rome.

Thoughts that most frequently occupy the mind determine a man's course of action. It is therefore a blessing to the world that there are occasions such as Easter which, as warning semaphores, say to mankind: "In your mad rush for pleasure, wealth, and fame, pause and think what is of most value in life."

When men heed this warning and search the innermost recesses of their hearts, they find that the most important question of their lives relates to the subject of immortality.

The event we celebrate today connotes the fundamental principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. In general these are:

I. The Fatherhood of God.

No man can accept the resurrection and be consistent in his belief without accepting also the existence of a personal God. Through the resurrection Christ conquered death and became an immortal soul. "My Lord and my God" was not merely an idle exclamation of Thomas when he beheld his risen Lord. The Being before him was his God. Once we accept Christ as divine it is easy to visualize His Father as being just as personal as He; for, said Jesus, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father."

Inseparable with the idea of a divine personal being is the acceptance of Him as the creator of the world. True Christianity does not look upon the universe as the result of mere interaction of matter and motion, of law and force, but, on the contrary, it regards all creation as the product of a Divine Intelligence "who made the world and all things therein."

II. Sonship of Jesus Christ

The Gospel teaches that Christ is the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. No true follower is satisfied to accept him merely as a great reformer, the ideal teacher, or even as the One Perfect Man. The man of Galilee is, not figuratively, but literally, the Son of the living God.

III. The Immortality of the Human Soul.

Belief in the resurrection connotes also the immortality of man. Jesus passed through all the experiences of mortality just as you and I. He knew happiness, He experienced pain. He rejoiced as well as sorrowed with others. He knew friendship. He experienced also the sadness that comes through traitors and false accusers. He died a mortal death even as every other mortal. Since His spirit lived after death, so shall yours and mine.

IV. The Brotherhood of Man.

One of the two great, general principles to which all other principles are subsidiary is this: "Love your neighbor as yourself," and correlated with it the promise: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me."

The Gospel, "bids the strong bear the burdens of the weak, and to use the advantages given them by their larger opportunities in the interest of the common good, that the whole level of humanity may be lifted and the path of spiritual attainment be opened to the weakest and most ignorant," as well as to the strong and intelligent.

V. The Standards of Life

Finally, since Jesus was the one perfect man who ever lived, as He, in rising from the dead, conquered death, and is now Lord of the earth, how utterly weak, how extremely foolish is he who would willfully reject Christ's way of life, especially in the light of the fact that such rejection leads only to unhappiness, misery, and even to death.

The Savior condemned hypocrisy and praised sincerity of purpose. Keep your heart pure and your actions will be in accord therewith. Social sins—lying, stealing, dishonest dealing, fornication, and the like are first committed in thought. Jesus taught that an unsullied character is the noblest aim of life.

No man can sincerely resolve to apply in his daily life the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth without sensing a change in his own nature. The phrase "born again" has a deeper significance than many people attach to it. This changed feeling may be indescribable, but it is real. Happy the person who has truly sensed the uplifting transforming power that comes from this nearness to the Savior, this kinship to the living Christ.

Easter is a sacred day, a day of thanksgiving and divine worship. It is not a day just for rejoicing because of the opening of springtime, not merely an opportunity to display beautiful hats and fine clothing—it is an occasion for the expression of gratitude to God for having sent His Only Begotten Son into the world, to be "the way, the truth, the life," to declare the eternal truth that "Whosoever believeth in Him should not perish but have everlasting life."

The message of the resurrection, therefore, is the most comforting, the most glorious ever given to man, for when death takes a loved one from us, our sorrowing hearts are assuaged by the hope and the divine assurance expressed in the words: "He is not here; he is risen." Because our Redeemer lives so shall we.

When Christians throughout the world have this faith coursing in their blood, when they feel a loyalty in their hearts to the resurrected Christ and to the principles connoted thereby, mankind will have taken the first great step toward the perpetual peace for which we daily are praying.
