David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Retribution

THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION

THERE is eternally operative in the moral world a law of compensation and retribution—compensation commensurate with conformity to law; retribution in actual degree to the extent of disobedience.

In this sense, the word "law" has a deeper significance than a rule or dictum prescribed by authority for human action. It means rather "a uniform order of sequence" as operative and unvarying as the law of the inclined plane, or of the law of falling bodies.

Thoughts are the seeds of acts, and precede them. Mere compliance with the word of the Lord without a corresponding inward desire will avail but little. Indeed, such outward actions and pretending phrases may disclose hypocrisy, a sin that Jesus most vehemently condemned. The Savior's constant desire and effort were to implant in the mind right thoughts, pure motives, noble ideals, knowing full well that right words and actions would inevitably follow. He taught, and modern physiology and psychology confirm, that hate and jealousy and other evil passions destroy a man's physical vigor and efficiency. What a man continually thinks about determines his actions in times of opportunity and strees. A man's reaction to his appetites and impulses when they are aroused gives the measure of that man's character. In these reactions are revealed the man's power to govern or his forced servility to yield.

No sin, however secret, can escape retribution. True, you may lie and not be detected; you may violate virtue without its being known by any who would scandalize you; yet you cannot escape the judgment that follows such transgression. The lie is lodged in the recesses of your mind, an impairment of your character that will be reflected sometime, somehow in your countenance or bearing. Your moral turpitude, though only you, your accomplice, and God may ever know it, will canker your soul.

Health, happiness, peace of mind, character come through self-restraint. Character springs from the depths of the soul. You tell me what you think about when you do not have to think, and I'll tell you what you are.
