David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Reverence

FUNDAMENTAL VIRTUE IN RELIGION

IN AGRA, INDIA, on the banks of the Jumna River, stands the most beautiful mausoleum in the world. It is the Taj, better known as the Taj Mahal. It is built of pure white marble, inlaid with precious stones. It was built by Shah Jahan, for his empress, Mumtaz-i-Mahal. No traveler, however crude or uncouth, can even approach this spotless edifice without sensing a feeling of quiet and respect. Involuntarily he moves noiselessly, and if he speaks at all, he speaks in subdued tones. Boisterous action or loud talking would be as incongruous here as at the bier of a departed loved one.

I have made this reference to the Taj that we might sense the meaning of reverence; for it is easier to feel what reverence is than to define it. Whatever awakens reverence in the human heart possesses something which "checks the haughtiness of the arrogant, silences the petulance of pride and self-conceit, stills the noise and giddy mirth of the young, and communicates to all around the sobriety of mien and aspect."

Reverence is profound respect mingled with love. It is "a complex emotion made up of mingled feelings of the soul." Carlyle says it is "the highest of human feelings."

If reverence is the highest, then irreverence is the lowest state in which a man can live in the world. Be that as it may, it is nevertheless true that an irreverent man has a crudeness about him that is repellent. He is cynical, often sneering, and always iconoclastic.

Reverence embraces regard, deference, honor, and esteem. Without some degree of it, therefore, there would be no courtesy, no gentility, no consideration of others' feelings, or of others' rights. It is the fundamental virtue in religion.

Reverence, as charity, begins at home. In early childhood children should be trained to be respectful, deferential, reverent—respectful to one another, to strangers and visitors—deferential to the aged and infirm—reverential to things sacred, to parents and parental love. There are would-be Solomons who belittle such training, claiming that children should not be corrected or restrained in any way, but permitted to run and carouse as their impulses prompt. These same teachers, however, do not hesitate to give specific instructions regarding the care of the children's bodies. They fail to explain wherein lies the difference in the effect upon a child's nature when parents insist that he brush his teeth, and take his bath, and wash his ears and neck, and when parents insist that he conform to courteous and moral commands of the household. No true psychologist will say that a child should grow up without a consciousness that in the home and in the presence of others there are bounds and limitations to his activities, desires, and tantrums. "Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it," is an admonition full of sound philosophy.

Three influences in home life awaken reverence in children and contribute to its development in their souls. These are gentle guidance, courtesy shown by parents to each other and to children, and prayer, in which children participate.

Churches are dedicated and set apart as houses of worship. This means, of course, that all who enter do so, or at lease pretend to do so, with an intent to get nearer the presence of the Lord than they can in the street or amidst the worries of a workaday life. In other words, we go to the Lord's house to meet Him and to commune with Him in spirit. Such a meeting place, then, should, first of all, be fitting and appropriate in all respects, whether God is considered as the invited guest, or the worshippers as His guests.

Whether the place of meeting is a humble chapel or a "poem in architecture" built of white marble and inlaid with precious stones makes little or no difference in our approach and attitude toward the Infinite Presence. To know He is there should be sufficient to impel us to conduct ourselves as ladies and gentlemen.

By example and precept, children should be impressed with the inappropriateness of confusion and disorder in a worshipping congregation. They should be impressed in childhood, and have it emphasized in their minds in youth, that it is disrespectful to talk or even to whisper during a sermon, and that it is the height of rudeness to leave a worshipping assembly before dismissal.

One of the most pronounced outbursts of Jesus' indignation was caused by the desecration of the Lord's temple. As he overturned the tables of the money-changers, and ordered out those who were bartering and trading in the holy sanctuary, he gave a warning admonition that has come down through the centuries: "Make not my Father's house an house of merchandise." Making and spending money even in conversation, faultfinding, and particularly gossiping about neighbors in a house of worship are essentially violations of this command given nearly two thousand years ago.

If there were more reverence in human hearts, there would be less room for sin and sorrow, and increased capacity for joy and gladness. To make more cherished, more adaptable, more attractive, this gem among brilliant virtues is a project worthy of the most united and prayerful efforts of every officer, every parent, and every member of the Church.

REVERENCE FOR DEITY

WE enter a chapel to worship the Lord. We want to partake of His spirit, and by partaking of His spirit we build up our own spiritual strength. In the prayer given to us by the Lord our Savior, the first sentence contains these words, "Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name." The word "hallowed" alone is associated with the spirit of reverence, and reverence is one of the holiest attributes of the soul. Love is the highest attribute. Sympathy for each other is another, but I believe I would put reverence next to love.

No man is truly great who does not have reverence for Deity and for things sacred. Byron was a great poet, but he was not so great as Wordsworth. These were two great English poets. If you study their lives, the difference in the greatness, you will find, lies in the fact that Byron lacked reverence. Wordsworth loved the Lord and was sympathetic with human beings. That was one of the virtues which made President Lincoln great. His spirit of reverence was illustrated when he left his home town to assume the presidency of the United States. He was then in Springfield, Illinois, and as he was about to board the train to leave that little town where he had spent so many years of his life, he turned to the townspeople who had come to say good-bye to him, stood a few moments in silence, had difficulty in controlling his feelings, then in a trembling voice said: "My friends, no one not in my situation can appreciate my feeling of sadness at this parting. To this place and to the kindness of these people I owe everything. Here I have lived for a quarter of a century, and have passed from a young man to an old man. I now leave, not knowing when or whether I shall ever return, with a task before me greater than that which rested on Washington. Without the assistance of that Divine Being that ever attended him I cannot succeed. But with that assistance, I cannot fail. Trusting in Him who can go with me and remain with you, and be everywhere for good, let us confidently hope that all will yet be well. To His care commending you, as I hope in your prayers you will commend me, I bid you an affectionate farewell."

Reverence for God and sacred things is the chief characteristic of a great soul. Little men may succeed, but without reverence they can never be great.

REVERENCE AND SELF-CONTROL

IT HAS been written that the whole purpose of life might be summed up in these words: "To subdue matter that we might realize the ideal." I might paraphrase it and say, "The whole purpose of life is to bring under subjection the animal passions, proclivities and tendencies, that we might realize the companionship, always, of God's Holy Spirit." I think that is the ideal. One chief purpose of life is to overcome evil tendencies, to govern our appetites, to control our passions—anger, hatred, jealousy, immorality.

The principle of self-control lies at the basis of reverence; it is one of the fundamental purposes of life. The lesson of self-control should begin in childhood, in the home. Little children should have a sense of freedom to do as they wish up to a certain point. Beyond that point they cannot go, and that is when that freedom interferes with the rights, comfort or convenience of another member of the family.

In the classrooms children should be taught, should be free to discuss, free to speak, free to participate in classwork, but no member of the class has the right to distract another student by jostling or making light and frivolous remarks. Good order in the classroom is essential to instill into the hearts and lives of young men and young women the principle of self-control. They want to talk and they want to whisper, but they cannot do it because it will disturb somebody else. Disorder injures the child who makes it. He should learn that when he is in society there are certain things which he cannot do with impunity. He cannot trespass upon the rights of his associates.

Let children learn this lesson in youth; otherwise, when they get out in society and try to trespass against the law, they will feel the restraining hand and probably suffer punishment.
