David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Sacrament

THE SACRAMENT

THE partaking of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is one of the most sacred ordinances of the Church of Christ. Associated with it are principles fundamental in character-building and essential to man's advancement and exaltation in the Kingdom of God. Too few communicants attach to this simple though sublime rite the importance and significance that it merits. Unfortunately, the form of worship is frequently an outward compliance without the true soul-acknowledgment of its deep spiritual significance.

When churchmen's acts do not conform to their pretensions, non-churchmen accuse them of hypocrisy, one of the gross sins condemned most vehemently by the Savior. It is very easy to go to Church, to sing hallelujah and to cry, "Lord, Lord!" but it is not so easy to do that which the Lord requires.

Members of the Church should strive very earnestly to reflect in their daily conduct those ideals which on Sunday they profess to cherish.

In the partaking of the Sacrament, there is danger of people's permitting formality to supersede spirituality. When such is the case, the ordinance may prove to be a curse instead of a blessing.

The blessing of the bread which is offered in behalf of everyone who partakes of the Sacrament reveals clearly the relation that one assumes to the Lord and the obligations each one takes upon himself. Reverence and the sacredness of a promise are the first two principles therein emphasized.

The address, "O God, the Eternal Father," is an acknowledgment on the part of the congregation that the Lord is present; at least that His spirit is in possible communication with the spirit of each one who sincerely seeks Him. Charles Lamb once said, "If Shakespeare were to come into this room, we should all rise up to meet him; but if Christ were to come into it, we should all fall upon our knees." This reverent attitude should be maintained during the administration of the Sacrament. Though the congregation does not kneel, it should maintain perfect order. Everyone present should think of the virtues of the Christ life, for the Sacrament is "blessed and sanctified" that each may partake of it "in remembrance" of the Son of God.

There are few things in life more sacred than one's word of honor. Truthfulness, honesty, are fundamental virtues, without which it is impossible to build a noble character. Charles E. Jefferson aptly says:

All virtues are important, but some are more essential than others. There are virtues whose absence leaves the character ragged and marred, and there are others whose absence leaves the soul a hollow shell.

The man who disregards a promise, who treats lightly and with contempt his word of honor, has a soul that is but "a hollow shell."

All who partake of the Sacrament, witness, that is, give evidence of, or attest before "God, the Eternal Father," that they are willing to do certain things. Surely that which is witnessed before God is of such a nature that it never should be broken. In this solemn presence, therefore, every partaker of the Sacrament gives evidence of his willingnss to assume three very great obligations, the first of which, and to which he becomes bound in sacred honor, is:

To take upon himself the name of the Son.

To be called worthy of His name is to become a son of God, to be numbered one in the Brotherhood of Christ.

Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself as he is pure.

The second is:

That he will always remember Him.

To remember is to have consciously before the mind that which is known.

Everybody present should think of the virtues of the Christ, for the promise, then, is that at all times he will bear in mind with gratitude and reverence Him whose life was the epitome of purity, kindness, love. Under all conditions, he is to eschew evil, and to cherish virtue, and to supplant hatred with compassion and benevolence.

The third obligation is:

To keep His commandments.

Were we to particularize, the commandments of God might be designated as many. Indeed, they touch every phase of man's being. But Jesus, Himself, summed them all up as follows: "Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength; And thy neighbor as thyself."

This is what every man who partakes of the Sacrament expresses a willingness to do!

The all-comprehending reward named as the result of compliance with the three obligations assumed, is the guiding and inspirational companionship of God's Holy Spirit. This is to the spirit of man what the sunshine is to the material world. It is the light that leads to eternal life. The operation of the law of cause and effect is as constant in the spiritual realm as it is in the physical world, and the keeping of each promise made in relation to the Sacrament brings its resultant blessing, as sure as the sun brings light.

Order, reverence, attestation in divine presence to enter the fold of Christ; to keep His virtues and His life ever in mind; to love the Lord whole-heartedly; and to labor even at the sacrifice of self for the brotherhood of the human family—these and all kindred virtues are associated with the partaking of the Lord's Supper.

Help us, O God! to realize The great atoning sacrifice, The gift of Thy beloved Son, The Prince of Life, the Holy One.

ADMINISTERING THE SACRAMENT

QUESTIONS have been asked about the proper method of administering the sacrament. Their varying nature indicates that a few suggestions will be helpful to those who have the responsibility of attending to this important and sacred ordinance.

A Renewal of Covenant.

It should be ever born in mind that all those who partake of the sacrament witness before God the Eternal Father—

First: That they are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ;

Second: That they will always remember Him; and

Third: That they will keep His commandments.

The result of keeping these covenants is the constant companionship and guidance of God's Holy Spirit.

Solemn promises these; and they comprehend man's duty to himself, to his family, to his neighbor and to his God. He who partakes of the sacrament worthily and sincerely is truly an acceptable follower of the Son of God.

Details to be observed before meeting begins.

Before the meeting begins there should be provided—

First: A table sufficiently large to hold conveniently all the vessels;

Second: Clean white linen covering both the table and the vessels;

Third: A sufficient number of plates for the bread, and of cups for the water—sanitary sacrament sets are preferable.

The Elders officiating should come with clean hands and pure hearts. Elders and Priests should note the full significance of these terms.

The Blessing

One of the Priests (or Elders), kneeling in the presence of the congregation, repeats in a clear and distinct voice the blessing on the bread (or on the water) as it is given by revelation.

This should be given word perfect . . . However, if an "and" be substituted for a "that" or if a word should happen to be omitted, it is not necessary to repeat the blessing; but no phrase should be omitted. As the one praying is voice for the congregation, the latter should join in saying Amen.

Order

The solemnity of the occasion demands that even before the blessing on the bread, such order and quiet should prevail as will give evidence of the fact that each one present is giving attention to the significance of the covenant he is about to make.

It should never be necessary for the one appointed to be voice to say, "If you will now give attention, we will ask the blessing, etc." Such a remark is entirely inappropriate and superfluous.

Who should pass the sacrament

It is the special duty of members of the lesser Priesthood to pass the sacrament to the congregation; although, of course, those holding the Melchizedek Priesthood have the right also.

When individual vessels are used, each communicant should drink the contents of his cup before replacing it in the tray. When a cup is replaced half full, another may take it thinking it had not been touched.

After all the vessels have been replaced upon the table, they should again be covered by the tablecloth.

These suggestions regarding details are offered simply that the least sign of confusion or of disorder may be avoided when the Saints meet to partake of the sacrament "in remembrance of the Lord Jesus." Nothing should occur that will detract from the solemnity of the occasion.

"For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he comes."
