David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Salvation

THE ULTIMATE GOAL

SALVATION is the boon for which every man in the world is working. Though all men seek salvation, there are many different kinds — or rather many different ways adopted by men to get saved, for our ideas of salvation are so different.

Indeed, not only men, the rational creatures on the earth, are seeking salvation, but in all forms of life there is manifest this desire. Even in the physical world, the plant world, there is a blind reaching out for life — for salvation. There is a struggle against death. The little blade of grass that shoots through the ground responsive to the warmth of the sunlight and the moisture in the ground, strives to save itself, and there is no thought, no care whether another blade of grass near it is killed. The weed in the lawn is likewise striving. The life of the lawn is nothing to the weed; and the life of the weed is but death to the grass. There is a struggle for life, an upward climbing.

In the animal world there is manifest that same desire to be saved — physically. The little robin that leaves its nest to seek food for the salvation of its young might before night be seized by the hawk, which, itself, is seeking the salvation of life. The hawk has no thought for the life of the little robin, no care for the death of the starving young ones. The instinct of self-preservation drives the bird to seek that which will give it power to respond to the environment in which it has been thrown.

Man is seeking that same salvation. He too must respond to the environment of the world, and he seeks not death, not power to refuse to respond to the air, to the food, to the sunlight, to the love of his fellow beings, but he seeks life; he seeks salvation — physical salvation. All men, then, in some way or other have in their hearts a desire for salvation in its broadest sense, for "salvation" means deliverance or preservation from impending evil or destruction. This, all life seeks.

Is it not strange that here in the midst of life there is nothing that brings so forcibly before us the value of life as the contemplation of death? All the world, the physical world, wherever life is manifest, is seeking deliverance, is groping upward, struggling for existence, salvation; but too often man's anxiety, his prayer, his supplication, does not reach higher than the salvation sought by the animal world; for he who seeks only the salvation of the body seeks no more than do the animals, no more even than do the plants—it is only a blind instinct reaching out, in obedience to the first law of nature: self-preservation.

But it is not alone physical salvation which should concern men and women created in the image of God — rational beings who know that there is a life higher than the physical life; that there is a body more precious, more eternal, than this physical body; that this body for which all nature seems to seek salvation is nothing but the house in which dwells the spirit of man. It is the salvation of the soul that should concern men and women, all the children of our Father.

In a religious sense, salvation means the redemption of man from the bondage of sin, from the liability of eternal death, and the conferring on him of everlasting life — the redemption of man from the bondage of sin and exemption from eternal death.

There will come a time when life, physically speaking, will die, which means that we shall not respond to our environment. We are told that at one time man lived free from any thought of death, in an environment that was eternal, and that by the very nature of his being he could respond to his environment eternally.

There is something within man which is eternal. Christ has opened the way for physical redemption, redemption from death, but it is by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the plan of salvation that man will save his soul eternally. To every person must come that feeling of repentance, a realization of a higher life and a desire to live that life. This the individual must do for himself: Christ would not do that for him. This is the individual's work; he must do that within himself — that faith-prompting, that longing of his spirit within, must be obeyed by each individual. Be true within when that impulse comes. Cannot we rise above that which is mean, that which is sordid, that which drags us down and makes us earthly and ravenous, and envious of one another? Cannot we rise above that? The spirit of the world, by nature, is one of selfishness, and prompts us to seek our own welfare. The spirit of the gospel is the Christ spirit, the spirit of love, which prompts us to seek each other's welfare. It prompts love, long-suffering, peace, forbearance — these are the fruits of the spirit manifested by those who are true to the gospel and the Church.

SALVATION—HERE AND NOW

THE Latter-day Saints are truly a people who aid one another in the productive life, a life that tends towards the salvation of the human being. By that salvation I do not mean just a place in the hereafter where all our cares and worries may cease, but a salvation that applies to the individual, to the family and to society here and now.

Through the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the perfect organization of the Church, we are aiding one another spiritually by taking advantage of the many opportunities for service in the Church. We are fostering brotherhood by activity and association in priesthood quorums, in auxiliary associations and in our social gatherings and ward reunions. We are aiding the young people in securing wholesome pleasures, by giving them sweet and wholesome enjoyment under the direction of the priesthood, as it serves particularly in the Mutual Improvement Associations of the Church as well as in other organizations and in the amusements under the direction of the authorities of the ward. The Church is aiding in temporal matters and a practical benefit is resulting to the people today through the united efforts of the membership of the Church.

In such ways, and many others, the Church fosters the practical things of life.

SALVATION IN THIS LIFE

THERE are tens of thousands of groups working in the Church in various parts of the world—all laboring in the spirit of the Christ to make better and happier the home conditions and social environment in communities in which they live.

Is it not true salvation to improve one's health—to make sweeter and more wholesome one's physical being? Is it not true salvation to make home life comfortable, cheerful, happy, and more God-like? Is it not conducive to the establishing of the Kingdom of God upon earth to have such homes uniting to make a community, and a number of communities, free from poverty, contention, godlessness, and immorality?

Such is one phase of the great missionary work of the Church of Jesus Christ: to transform the lives of men and women; to make permanent the home, and to permeate each home with the spirit of contentment and peace; to have members of such homes devote the resources of body and mind to the upbuilding of the Kingdom of God, "which is not a mystical, but a real kingdom"; that thus they may become in very deed "a body of people dominated by ideals of productivity, which is mutual service."

Truly, the Gospel is "the power of God unto Salvation," here in this world as well as in the Kingdom of the hereafter.

SALVATION—"WHAT CAN I DO?"

PAUL'S admonition given over nineteen centuries ago (Philip. 2:12-15) is applicable to us today.

Sometimes when we think how little we can do, we almost despair of attempting to do anything. But there are a few simple but fundamental things which everyone can do.

One of these is for each individual to work out his own salvation.

The Church does not accept the doctrine that a mere murmured belief in Jesus Christ is all that is essential. A man may say he believes, but if he does nothing to make that belief or faith a moving power to do, to accomplish, to produce soul growth, his protestation will avail him little.

To work out one's salvation is not to sit idly by, dreaming and yearning for God miraculously to thrust bounteous blessings into our laps. It is to perform daily, hourly, momentarily, if necessary, the immediate task or duty at hand, and to continue happily in such performance as the years come and go, leaving the fruits of such labors either to self or to others, to be bestowed as a just and beneficent Father may determine.

I believe in individualism as opposed to paternalism. In saying this I recognize the fact that a man's duties to himself and to his fellow men are indissolubly connected. Jesus taught that if a man is true to his own highest interests he cannot fail to discharge his obligations to his neighbors. Conversely, he taught that if a man is faithful to the interests of his fellow men, he cannot be faithless to his own.

The doctrine of individual initiative and individual effort should be more urgently taught and more earnestly put into effect. Too many of us fail to take advantage of opportunities near at hand. We justify inactivity by nursing the important thought that success cannot be obtained without influence, money, social or political "pull." But what one man throws away as useless, another man seizes as the best means of victory at hand.

In thus emphasizing individual effort, I am not unmindful of the necessity of co-operation—"There is a destiny which makes us brothers; none goes his way alone; all that we send into the lives of others comes back into our own." (Edward Markham, "A Creed").

A single, struggling individual may be stalled with his heavy load even as he begins to climb the hill before him. To reach the top unaided is an impossibility. With a little help from fellow associates, he makes the grade and goes on his way in gratitude and rejoicing.

Liberty, freedom of speech, self-government, work, thrift, initiative, self-effort, faith in God, and particularly faith in the efficacy of the Gospel of Jesus Christ are constantly facing a bombardment from the ranks of error, and too many men cry, "What can we do?"

This we can do:

First: By self-effort do what there is all around us to be done—in the home, in the neighborhood, in the church, in our communities.

Second: By proclaiming, and, what is even more effective, by living the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: "Wherefore, my beloved, . . . work out your own salvation . . ."
