David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Self-control

WHAT achievements have been made in the last century! On our recent tour of nine European countries, we rode down the valley of the Rhine and saw farmers, men and women, out gathering hay because a storm threatened, and carrying that hay on men's backs to the barn. We were told that the canvas-like bag in which they put the hay weighed approximately 200 pounds. A little farther down the river a cow was hitched to the cart, and some of these bags were put on the cart—a little more modern.

Returning home, I went up on the farm. Hay was cut, raked, baled, and put in the barn by modern machinery; oats poured into the bin without even being sacked. It had not been touched by hand but was threshed in the field, emptied into the wagons and then elevated into the bin.

I wonder if all these inventions during the past century have contributed to an increase in character, in honesty, in upright living, in a more sacred and reverent devotion to Christ and His Gospel. I wonder whether the character of the men who are profiting by these wonderful inventions is any stronger and better than the character of the man who carried that hay on his back.

Are the men any better than the tall, handsome, up-standing young Swiss, who graciously stood by his cow and cart to let my son take his photograph, a young man in whom I thought I saw reflected the pride of the Swiss, the love of freedom and independence. I do not know that the problem is basically theological; we can have a study of theology without having character, without having religion. It "involves a spiritual renaissance and improvement of human character."

That is one reason why you built this church edifice, because you believe in the spiritual development of man, because you believe that that is the first and paramount purpose of life.

That we must make a living is clearly manifest on every side. We are placed here to deal with the earth and earthly problems. Multiply; replenish; subdue; have dominion over the earth—these were the original commands given to man. It is a virtue to provide for loved ones; it is a necessity to preserve life. Too many people make this the sole purpose of life; but that is only a means—it is not an end in itself. Subdue and conquer, yes!—that we might realize the ideal.

Even from our scanty knowledge and power of analysis, let us consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. Down deep in the soil the lily sends its roots, seeking sustenance from the earth, not as an end; from that sustenance received, there comes through the earth a little plant, weak at first, but it grows into a stock.

All that sustenance is being produced for one purpose, that that lily might bloom in the sunshine and reproduce its kind. So we, with our tentacles, our roots, which we call hands and muscles and brain, bring our sustenance from the earth—not as an end, but that the spirit might so live that it may bask in the sunshine of the Holy Spirit.

Most of our troubles in trying to subdue nature and to subdue our appetites come within the question of limitation. All evils may be classified into three groups, the first designated by those of which Paul says, "Let him that stole steal no more." Exclude them from life entirely—stealing, lying, sinning sexually, murder—all those sins which should never be committed constitute this class. In the second group are jealousy, hatred, envy, animosity. That is where your control comes. Suppress that anger! Suppress that jealousy, that envy! They are all injurious to the spirit. In the third group we find nearly all our difficulties, those things which are virtues up to a certain point, and beyond that point become vices. For instance, appetite is a God-given quality. Blessed are they who have a good appetite. But to gormandize is injurious. Drink—you drink something which begins to create an appetite for itself, and you injure yourself. Your appetite becomes depraved, corrupt, and it becomes an enemy to you. Our passions are virtues to perpetuate life. Prostitute them and you have the vilest of sins! So the whole lesson is one of subduing, not just physical matter, that you might realize the ideal, but subduing your own passions and appetites, and conquering them.

After all, it is what is within the man that counts! "What will a man give in exchange for his soul?" Man may gain the whole world, but if he loses his own soul, what has he?
