David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Seminaries

SEMINARIES AND INSTITUTES

IN a general sense the term seminary means "A place of education, used commonly as a special school, as of theology or pedagogics." In our Church it designates a place in which theology and religion are offered junior high and high school students as an additional and supplementary study to the courses given in the public school curriculum. The same organization offered to college students is called an Institute. The seminary and the institute have been established and are maintained by the Church for the sole purpose of giving true religious instruction as revealed in the Standard Works and as interpreted by the General Presiding Authorities of the Church. The Bible is one of these Standard Works. The state school authorities, distinguishing between religious training and doctrines peculiar to any particular church, grant the students credit for courses given in the Seminary and the Institute, classed as Bible literature, ethics, moral training, etc. In those courses for which no credit is given, and for which none is asked, full freedom may be had in preaching and discussing principles, doctrines, and beliefs characteristic of the restored Gospel.

Spirituality defined

Spirituality is the highest acquisition of the soul, "the divine in man—the supreme crowning gift that makes him king of all created things." It is the consciousness of victory over self, and of communion with the infinite. To acquire more and more power, to feel one's faculties unfolding, and one's soul in harmony with God and with the Infinite—that is spirituality. It is that alone which really gives one the best in life.

Spirituality is best manifested in doing, not in dreaming. "Rapturous day dreams, flights of heavenly fancy, longing to see the invisible, are not so impressive as the plain doing of duty."

"Every noble impulse, every unselfish expression of love, every brave suffering for the right; every surrender of self to something higher than self; every loyalty to an ideal; every unselfish devotion to principle; every helpfulness to humanity; every act of self-control; every fine courage of the soul, undefeated by pretense or policy, but by being, doing, and living of good for the very good's sake—that is spiritual."

Two elements in Seminary as an Entity.

The Seminary and the Institute, as an organized entity, is made up of inanimate things and personalities. Buildings, desks, chairs, maps, charts, constitute the inanimate; and teacher and student, the personalities.

Importance of Attractive Surroundings.

In the promotion of spiritual growth inanimate things are least important. Indeed there was a time in the history of man's education when they were even less important factors than they are now—when the great outdoors, and particularly the forests, "God's first temples," were the only school buildings and places of worship. Today, however, they are factors, and we must recognize them as such.

In a sense the Seminary is a suburb to a larger institution, and to succeed in drawing the students, it must be made comfortable and attractive. It need not be expensive or elaborate, but it must be clean, properly heated, properly ventilated, and must be pervaded with a spirit and atmosphere that will make both teacher and student feel as did the apostles on the Mount of Transfiguration when they said, "It is good for us to be here." A student's memory of his religious instruction should not connote a dingy, unattractive classroom. Make the room light and cheerful. Let there be an adequate supply of fresh air, with due attention to the proper and uniform temperature.

Attitude of Students

Another element, and more important, contributive to spiritual growth, is the mental attitude of the students themselves. It is fundamental for a student to realize that his success in the Seminary depends upon himself. If he has enrolled because his parents have so requested, he should be commended. Duty is a high incentive to active and "obedience is better than sacrifice." If he has enrolled because of the influence of a playmate, he is equally welcome, and his playmate given meritorious praise. But, whatever the outward influence be that led him to the Seminary, it must ever remain an exterior factor to the moral and spiritual growth of the student himself. The source of the spring of spirituality lies in the mind, the spirit itself.

The very first step, therefore, toward the growth of spirituality in a student is the realization that the ultimate purpose of life is the perfecting of the individual; that the purpose of our Father in heaven is to make men and women like himself, and that even the Lord could not do this without making men free. Man can choose the highest good or choose the lower good and fall short of what he was intended to be. "There are heights in man, as there are depths in him that reach the lowest hell." Let the student understand that the capacity to make a wrong choice is essential to progress in a world like ours, but the making of the choice determines advancement or retardation. "Individual progress is not so much a matter of external arrangements as it is of internal attitudes, bodily changes and releasing of super-human love and power in the lives of men."

Man is growth by law and not a creation by artifice, and cause and effect are as absolute and undeviating in the hidden realm of thought as in the world of visible and material things. A noble and godlike character is not a thing of favor or chance, but is a natural result of continued effort in right thinking, the effect of long-cherished association with god-like thoughts. An ignoble and bestial character by the same process is the result of the continued harboring of groveling thoughts.

The Teacher

The most important contributive factor of the three elements named is the teacher. In no other position, either in state or church schools, is the success of an institution so dependent upon the ability, personality, and spirituality of one person as in the Seminary. In a school faculty of ten or twelve or more members, the influence of a poor teacher or even that of two or three inferior teachers, may be largely counteracted by the efficiency of the others who are more influential, but in the Seminary, one teacher carries the responsibility of inspiring, or of discouraging or of leaving indifferent the members of his class.

It is the teacher's duty and responsibility to awaken a love for the truth in the hearts of the students; to give a just sense of duty; to open the eyes of the soul to the great purpose of life.
