David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Service

SERVICE TO FELLOW MEN

IT is difficult, if not quite impossible, for one to say of anything, with absolute certainty, "This is the best," or "This is the worst." If one so expresses one's self, another person with greater intelligence and more experience may say with much more accuracy that something else is best, or some other thing the worst. It is, therefore, the better part of wisdom not to dogmatize, nor to speak with too much assurance of things about which there may be a divergence of opinion, and upon which one person's judgment will be as weighty as another's. It is somewhat presumptuous, therefore, to point out specifically the noblest calling in life; for as soon as it is named, someone may prove conclusively that we have used the superlative degree inadvisedly.

However, whatever its name, it is evident that man's noblest work must be impregnated with the greatest of all forces, Love. Furthermore, this power must be directed not for selfish purposes, nor to achieve personal ends. Though self-preservation is the first law of nature, a calling that has in view only the preservation of self cannot be called noble, a term that excludes all sordidness and includes greatness of mind and generosity of soul.

The noblest calling in life, then, must be one in which the attribute of love will manifest itself not for self, but for others. It must be that calling which most nearly emulates true motherhood, the mightiest of all forces in human society. Indeed, if motherhood were not a "distinct and individual creation," we could pause here and have all true men agree that it is the noblest, purest calling in life; and that which makes motherhood sacred is the Christ-like element of giving her life for another. "A father may turn his back on his child, brothers and sisters may become inveterate enemies, husbands may desert their wives, wives their husbands, but a mother's love endures through all."

The element, then, that makes true motherhood divine must also permeate that call or vocation which may be distinguished by the term noblest. The most worthy calling in life, therefore, is that in which man can best serve his fellow man. It isn't preaching; it isn't teaching; it isn't medicine; it isn't engineering, nor any other vocation common among men. Each of these, though offering opportunities for service, may be followed by men actuated by the most selfish and sordid of motives.

The noblest aim in life is to strive to live to make other lives better and happier. Browning sounds the keynote in Paracelsus, when he says: "There is an answer to the passionate longings of the heart for fulness, and I knew it. And the answer is this: Live in all things outside yourself by love and you will have joy. That is the life of God; it ought to be our life. In Him it is accomplished and perfect; but in all created things, it is a lesson learned slowly against difficulty."
