David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Joseph Smith

THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH—THE SOURCE OF HIS GREATNESS

In Hebrews, we read:

He that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. (Heb. 11:6)

In this scripture lies the secret of Joseph Smith's emergence from obscurity to world-wide renown. His belief in God was absolute; his faith in divine guidance unwavering. By actual experience he proved the following to be true:

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. (James 1:5, 6)

Joseph Smith read that promise at a time when the small community in which he lived was greatly agitated by religious revivals wherein each of the prevailing sects of Christianity in the neighborhood was heralding its reasons for claiming to be the true Church, and vociferously condemning the beliefs of others.

The young man was conscientiously seeking to know which of the churches was right. Manifestly, inasmuch as they disagreed on points of scripture, some were undoubtedly preaching doctrines not in harmony with Holy Writ.

It was while in a state of soul yearning and mental perplexity that he read the assuring words of James which I have just quoted. The young Joseph later wrote:

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart * * * Knowing that if any person needed wisdom of God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I should never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible. (From the Writings of Joseph Smith, chap. 2, paragraph 2.)

Accordingly, with implicit faith, the lad retired to a quiet grove, and prayerfully sought the Lord. In answer to his prayer, there appeared two heavenly Personages, "whose brightness and glory," he writes, "defy all description." One, pointing to the other, said: "This is My Beloved Son. Hear him!" In passing, it is significant to note that the first person to whom Joseph confided this glorious vision was his mother. Later, as he disclosed his experience to neighbors and associates, the effect upon them varied from acceptance to skepticism and bitter prejudice.

The announcement of the appearing of two distinct Personages in the Godhead, startling to many as it was, proved to Joseph that God "is the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever"; that Heaven is no more sealed today than it was when, on the banks of the river Jordan, John the Baptist heard the voice of the Father say: "This is My Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased"; or when, on the Mount of Transfiguration, the disciples Peter, James and John heard a voice saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him."

This first visitation was followed by other heavenly manifestations pertaining, first, to ancient plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated; second, to the restoration of the Priesthood; and, third, to the organization of the Church, April 6, 1830. I refer to these incidents not only to emphasize the true source of Joseph Smith's greatness, but also to point out the divine origin of the Church.

"Great men taken up in any way," writes Thomas Carlyle, "are profitable company. We cannot look however imperfectly upon a great man without gaining something by him." Great men have the ability to see clearly into the heart of things. They discern truth. They think independently. They act nobly. They influence strong men to follow them. Small men sneer at them, ridicule them, persecute them, but the critics die and are forgotten, and the great man lives on forever.

Some of Joseph Smith's contemporaries sneered at him; others admired him; his followers revered him.

For example, the editor of the New York Herald—Mr. James G. Bennett—one of the independent thinkers of his day, was one of many who visited the Prophet personally, who recognized his greatness, and sent correspondents to Nauvoo, Illinois, to observe the progress of the Church. One of these correspondents wrote, under date of Feb. 19, 1842, as follows:

Joseph Smith, the President of the Church, Prophet, Seer, and Revelator . . . is a man of highest order of talents, and great independence of character, firm in his integrity, and devoted to his religion . . . As a public speaker, he is bold, powerful and convincing; . . . as a leader, wise and prudent, yet fearless; as a military commander, brave and determined; and as a citizen, worthy, affable, and kind—bland in his manners, and of noble bearing. His amiable lady, too, is a woman of superior intellect and exemplary piety—in every respect suited to her situation in society, as the wife of one of the most accomplished and powerful chiefs of the age. (Sat., March 19, 1842, vol. 6, no. 20, page 205 of the Weekly Herald, dispatch appearing as "The City of Nauvoo," February 19, A.D. 1842.)

No one unbiased in his judgment can study the life of this religious leader without being impressed with the fact that he possessed in a rich degree the qualities of true greatness, the source of which is found in a desire to know God's will, and in a determination, when it is found, to follow it.

Joseph Smith's span of life extended from December 23, 1805, to June 27, 1844—thirty-eight years and six months. During that period even before he was twenty-five years of age, he translated the Book of Mormon by divine guidance; published the Doctrine and Covenants; translated the Pearl of Great Price; rose from a day laborer on the stubbornly yielding farms of New England to be mayor of the largest city in Illinois, when Chicago was but a village; organized the School of the Prophets; founded a university; and organized the Church, which, in completeness, in organization and in helpfulness to its members, commands the admiration even of the hypercritical and prejudiced—a Church bringing spiritual comfort and inspiration today to over a million and a quarter adherents on five continents and the Islands of the Seas. A careful study of its organization discloses the fact that as its prototype—the original Church as established by Jesus and His apostles—(1) it embodies all the virtues of a strong central government, with every provision necessary to safeguard the right and progress of the individual. (2) In its quorums and auxiliaries, it offers a system of education general in scope and free in application—the safety valve, indeed the very heart and strength of a self-governing group. (3) In its ecclesiastical groupings—stakes—wards—quorums—auxiliaries, etc.—it enhances efficiency and progress; because every local unit attends to its own affairs, yet each is so closely united with the central government that modes of procedure proved useful and beneficial to the local group can be adopted without unnecessary delay for the good of the entire membership.

Thus is the Church by means of its complete organization most efficient in supplying fundamental needs contributive to personal happiness, social harmony and peace. I refer to such needs as brotherhood—education—amicable adjustment of misunderstandings—provision for social and economic requirements, and, above all, spiritual growth.

Asked, on one occasion, how he governed the Church so effectively, the Prophet replied:

"I teach them correct principles and they govern themselves."

An insight into the secret of that government may be glimpsed by noting the wisdom in the following sublime instruction, having in mind that force never wins the human heart:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned:

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy. (D&C 121:41-43)

Joseph Smith's concept and presentation of God's eternal plan for the happiness and salvation of His children may be summed up in the all-inclusive declaration: "This is my work and my glory" saith the Lord, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Pearl of Great Price—Moses 1:39)

It is by service to others that we most nearly emulate the life of the Savior of Mankind, who said:

He that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. (Matt. 10:39)

And:

Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. (Matt. 25:40)

Joseph Smith proved that he possessed this virtue to a high degree when he expressed in his own words, not spoken for publication, but as an overflow of his true feelings:

"If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of no value to me."

Among the last words that brought solace to his heart just before his martyrdom were:

"These deeds shall thy memorial be; Fear not thou didst them unto me."

The Prophet's life and the Church which under God he restored stand as new evidence of Christ as the Son of God:

This is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! (D&C 76:22)

At this season when the Christian world is celebrating the birth of the Babe of Bethlehem, it is fitting that we keep in mind the fact that the mission of the Church is to prepare the way for the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth, "which is not a mystical but a real kingdom," wherein "peace on earth and good will among men" shall prevail. The living Christ is its head; His plan, mankind's anchor; the Gospel the surest, safest guide for the individual and for nations.
