David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Spirituality

THE SPIRITUAL REALM

THERE is something higher than the animal life; namely, the spiritual realm where there is love, the divinest attribute of the human soul. There are also sympathy, kindness and other attributes.

Free Agency

The first step in rising to that successful and happy life is the realization of the blessing of free agency, the power of choice, given to every individual with his life by the Creator.

One scientist, recognizing it, said that when God gave to the individual the power of choice, He conferred upon him part of His divinity. You and I have that divine principle within us, and here you may determine that the forces operating in the world today, Communism particularly, are perils denying the right of individuals to choose. Individual freedom is denied by the Communists, and they will fail. They will flourish for a time, but they will never succeed because the Russian people themselves have that divine gift, and that is why Stalin had to kill three million of them when he tried to make them come under his Agricultural Co-operative, denying them the right of free agency to make their own living, to cultivate their own farms.

Judgment in using your free agency is the first step toward the spiritual objective.

Recognition of Spirit

A second step upward is the consciousness that man is spirit, the offspring of Deity. That is a sermon in itself, but it is beautiful, and each one of you at some time or other has sensed that there is something within which rises above your natural self. I think that consciousness which comes to each one and drives him to his knees to ask for help, is one evidence—not absolute—but is one evidence of the divinity within us.

So I name a consciousness that man is divine as the second step, sensing that you are not going to pollute that spirit or stain it by groveling with the physical. Any animal can have the pleasure of passion, perpetuation. If you pause to think, you will know that there is nothing worthy of pride in indulging in gambling, drinking, prostitution. There is a difference between pleasure and happiness, as you know.

Self-Mastery

The third step into that realm of spirituality is self-mastery. Oh, what a glorious principle if applied in the home, in society, in our Church! If something goes wrong, how foolish, how ungentlemanly, how undignified to get angry, to utter profane words; how easy to find fault with a wife who happens to do something which displeases you. How much better if you refrain from saying that which comes to your mind. Just refrain for 30 minutes, and thus avoid making a wound for a lifetime.

How much better or stronger that boy who refrains from condemning his father, who masters his appetite, his passion, his anger in the home. What a great principle is self-control! If we could apply it throughout the nations today, we could get peace among men.

Aspiration

The fourth step I shall name is aspiration—not to be content to remain where you are, but to rise and see the glories of the world around you—the scientist, the philanthropist, just merely the nature lover, aspiring to know more of this glorious world.

Have you ever read Helen Keller's comment on a girl who had just taken a walk in the woods, who in answer to Helen's question, "What did you see?" replied, "Oh, nothing much."

"Nothing much?" Helen exclaimed. "To walk through the woods and see `nothing much,' when I, without eyes, touch the bark of a birch, feel its smoothness, and hear the quiver of a bird in song," and then she tells what she would like to see if she could have her sight just for three days. Read it, and you will know what I mean by aspiration, to rise in intelligence, to rise in knowledge, to expand your power to see.

Service

Finally, the top round in the realm of spirituality is service, as opposed to selfishness in the animal world. In a book, The Idea of God, the author says:

What was the secret of Christianity? The new interpretation of life by which it conquered the world? The answer is in a sense commonplace. And here it is: It was the lesson of self-sacrifice of life for others, precisely through which nevertheless, the fullest and innermost realization of the self was to be attained. In the Pauline phrase, "dying to live." In the words of Jesus, "losing one's self to find it." This conception of the meaning of life embodied in the figure of one who spoke of himself as being among men as one of the servants, one who served—this was the victory which overcame the world.

The Lord has revealed in this day the plan of salvation, which is nothing more nor less than the way to the spiritual realm in character worthy of entrance into His Kingdom. It offers to the world peace, but it requires the mastery of the animal appetites and passions, and service to our fellow men.

Supposing that today were your last day on earth, The last mile of the journey you've trod; After all of your struggles, how much are you worth, How much can you take home to God? Don't count as possessions your silver and gold, Tomorrow you leave these behind, And all that is yours to have and to hold Is the service you've rendered mankind.

SPIRITUAL HEALTH

I PICTURE the Church as a mighty oak, against which little boys throw mud, covering the bark and sometimes injuring the leaves; they even use their penknives in an effort to chop down the tree. At worst, they only riddle a few leaves and besmear the bark. In a few days the mud is all gone; the rains have washed it off. The life of the oak has pushed out new bark and leaves; and the mud which defaced only the outward part is all gone. Why? Because the life of the oak was untouched, and it had the power within it to throw off those excrescences thrown upon it by thoughtless boys, or malicious youths. So it is with the Church—calumny cannot hurt it, if it is pure within.

Bodily ailments deprive us of the full exercise of our faculties and privileges and sometimes of life itself. It is necessary, therefore, to take great care of the body. But great as is the peril of physical decay, greater, far greater, is the peril of spiritual decay.

A man cannot enjoy true growth so long as he harbors dishonest sentiment. Dishonesty is a spiritual disease. The man who steals is inviting into his soul that which will prevent him from growing to the perfect stature of Christ. Let us then, as individuals, grow from within; be men of God, pure within, repentant. No matter where we are, no matter what people may think of us, we know what our inner life makes us, what God knows we are. If our character is true, the mud thrown upon us will at some time fall off.

SPIRITUAL PEACE

These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world. (John 16:33)

THAT is the principal reason why the Church was organized—to make life sweet today, to give contentment to the heart today, to bring salvation today.

You have erected this building that you might find that peace, that you might find happiness, that your children will find it today in the home. The Prophet Joseph Smith said that happiness is the object and design of our existence. You will find no happiness if you cannot have peace. Is there a person sitting in this audience now whose soul is turbulent, full of worry, anxiety? Replace that with a spirit of contentment, with a spirit of resignation. How different that feeling from worry because of the unfaithfulness of a man, or because of the indifference of a boy, a son! Life's greatest blessing is peace!

Some of us look forward to a time in the future—salvation and exaltation in the world to come—but today is part of eternity. What we are today will determine largely what we experience and what we are tomorrow, and will help to determine our position in the world to come.

The spirit of peace is made up of two elements: The first is contentment—to be content with what we are and what we have. Contentment springs from within ourselves. It springs from our thoughts. Outward circumstances will be contributive to it, but it is our attitude toward those exterior things which will determine our contentment, and yet contentment alone is not sufficient. Somebody has said: "Show me a perfectly contented man and I will show you a useless one." So there must be some other element with contentment, some other virtue. What is it? Progress. Contentment and progress contribute to peace. If we are no better tomorrow than we are today, we are not very useful; we are untrue to ourselves and to our loved ones and to society. So, we want to experience two things: contentment and progress—progress intellectually, progress physically, but above all, progress spiritually; and the cognizance that we grow contributes to peace. Growth is an element in all life. Stop progressing and you retrogress. You cannot remain stationary.

What do we do today, and on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and on each day of the week? Progressive men work. There are those who look upon work as a burden, who are trying to cut down hours and to shirk. No shirker will ever have contentment. He may think he will have, but he will never get it. The satisfaction of having built this rostrum, for example, making it ideal for the place it occupies in this building, gives the workman satisfaction. He can look upon his work and feel content.

"By the sweat of thy brow shalt thou earn thy bread,"—an eternal edict—is a blessing. The workman who goes forth in the morning to his automobile shop, animated with a desire to do his very best, should feel happy in that work. Work in the Church, not idleness, develops spirituality. Is it ward teaching? Then be a good teacher. Is it singing in the choir? Then do your best. Is it guiding the deacons? Then teach those boys, and guide them and see the inspiration, and see new thoughts and new ambitions rise in their souls. Work in the Church is one of the greatest blessings that can come to a man or a woman. No matter how simple the service seems it brings you closer to God.

There is a further element in that blessing of today which the Gospel offers. It is recreation. It is play. Today I stood at the head of your stadium and was thrilled, as I pictured in my mind the young people and the older people enjoying themselves, and I have the same feeling as I visualize the young people participating in enjoyments afforded by this adjoining recreation hall, a place where young girls may be happy in agreeable companionship, where young men may have proper training in courtesy and consideration for womanhood—learning to be gentlemen, and all in all enjoying play and recreation in proper and uplifting influence.

Besides work and recreation as contributing factors to contentment and progress, I name a third: love and friendship.

After your day's work when you lay aside your tools, when you shut off the tractor, or put your automobile in the garage, what is the sweetest thing in life? To go home in the environment of heaven, to be met by children, to listen to the music of their voices, to hear from the wife the happenings of the little children during the day — it is better than anything you can get in the picture show or on the theater stage. If you will listen you will find joy—and, if there is harmony and peace in the home, you may experience a bit of the peace heaven may bring.

But, if there be bickering, faultfinding, grumbling, jealousy, suspicion, then you have disappointment, perhaps misery.

A fourth and final contributive factor to peace in daily life is worship. There will be no pure contentment without our recognizing that we are the offspring of an Eternal Being. I want to know that "Man is spirit," and that "the elements are eternal and spirit and elements inseparately connected receive a fullness of joy." Before I can feel perfectly content I must have a sense of harmony with my Father. I want to commune with Him, and I want to feel that He will help me to overcome those difficulties that I meet daily.

Then through inspiration I hear His admonition to seek learning out of the best books, to study by faith; I hear His voice saying, "Serve others." "For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me." (Matt. 25:35-36)

These deeds shall thy memorial be; Fear not, thou didst them unto me.

Bring young men and young women to realize that only in the path of virtue, only in the path of obedience, only in the path of losing self for the good of others, only in the path of worship and reverence to God, our Eternal Father, may we find happiness today.
