David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Success

SUCCESS FORMULAS

FACING the future, we might well exclaim with King Henry the Fourth: "Oh, heavens, that one might read the book of fate, and see the revolution of the times."

Even while the joys of youthful prime gladden your hearts and brighten your hopes with anticipated success, there rests upon your shoulders the weight of coming responsibility. Yours is the challenge to succeed. Into your hands and into the hands of a million other youths will be placed the banner of civilization.

Mingled with the joys of graduation are feelings that civilized society faces perplexities and perils, vaster in scope and more challenging than ever before. Our great country, for example, in its leadership among the nations of the world is facing problems, the solutions of which may determine even the continuance of the present order of things in the world—problems world-shaking in their ultimate solution, whatever the solution may be.

If you would be happy, if you are to reach the goal of success in the distance, your first duty is to be true to yourself—loyal to the best that is in you, not to the basest. Begin life with a purpose, and let that purpose be a noble one. Loyalty is one of the noblest attributes of the soul. It means being faithful and true; it means fidelity to a superior; it means fidelity to duty, fidelity to love, fidelity to a cause or a principle.

It is not easy to be true to self. I know I am coming in contact with the problem of free will, but I do not hesitate to say that a man, the offspring of Deity with the gift of free agency, can control his mind, can choose what seems the best, no matter how attractive the opposite force may be. There is a crying need today to have this truth heralded throughout the land, that youth especially may appreciate and hold the freedom of the individual sacred as did our Revolutionary fathers.

Next I would advise loyalty to your future companion. When harmony, mutual consideration and trust pass out of the home, hell enters in. In building a home together a husband and wife share happiness. The husband is happiest when his wife, his sweetheart, is happy. She is happiest when he succeeds. They are both happiest when the children succeed. After all, in rearing and loving a family lies supreme happiness. Anything else must take second place in value to those boys and girls who make happy our homes.

Finally, loyalty to God and to your fellow men: If you would attain that far-off goal successfully, you will ever keep in mind the fact that God rules in the universe, and you will pay him proper reverence. Express to Him gratitude for this glorious world, for your life in it, for your citizenship in this great Republic, for the liberty vouchsafed by the Constitution. Invoke His guidance and help in whatever you undertake to do. Reach out to Him and you will find His help, His guiding influence.

God give us sense—the divine sense of Life's new needs, To pledge our souls with nobler, loftier life, To win the world to his fair sanctities, To bind the nations in a Pact of Peace, And free the soul of Life for finer loyalties. (Oxenham)
