David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Sunday School

JOY IN THE SUNDAY SCHOOL

I COMMEND the General Sunday School Union Board for emphasizing joy in the life of Sunday School officers, teachers, and children. Joy is sweeter than pleasure. Joy is an emotion excited with the acquisition or expectation of good. Pleasure is a state of gratification of the sense or mind and may be sensuous. It may be self-indulgence. It is nearly always transitory. Joy and happiness are permanent. Joy is pleasure not to be repented of.

Children are entitled to joy. When you are in the presence of youth you cannot help exclaiming with the poet:

How beautiful is youth! how bright it gleams With its illusions, aspirations, dreams! Book of Beginnings, Story without End, Each maid a heroine, and each man a friend! (Longfellow)

The world is passing through troublous times. Young people today think of nothing but themselves. They have no reverence for parents or old age. They are impatient of all restraint. They talk as if they alone knew everything. As for girls, they are forward, immodest, and unwomanly in speech, behavior, and dress.

When was that written?—In the year 1274 A.D., 671 years ago!

Every generation seems to worry about its young people. Then these young folk grow up and worry about their children.

I have confidence in youth, therefore hope for the ultimate betterment of the human family. I base my trust in young people because, abiding in every normal human being's soul is a hidden impulse or longing to be somebody worth while, to accomplish some good thing. Winston Churchill once said: "There is a treasure, if you can find it, in the heart of every man."

It is natural for children to play, to seek pleasure. They are by right inheritors of joy. They should obtain this inheritance in their homes. If not, then by all means let them experience it in the Church.

True joy for teacher and for student is found in five achievements:

1) In giving increased regard and reverence for the Sunday School organization. Sunday School is for everybody, particularly for the children and youth. No young man or young woman will feel that Sunday School is a "sissy" organization if opening exercises are reverently conducted; if they can sense the spirit of true worship; if they sense a control and not a laxity in discipline. When you prepare a meal for your guests, you make thorough preparation. Remember that greater preparation is necessary for your guests in Sunday School, at the table of the Lord.

2) The second achievement is the joy of having in the class all who should be enrolled—the joy of finding the indifferent.

3) The third achievement is the joy of winning confidence. To have the confidence of a little child is one of the greatest responsibilities and blessings in the world. A teacher who holds this confidence and respect has the greatest opportunity in the world to shape a child's life.

4) The fourth achievement is the joy of awakening a love for truth. Have you ever told a child a story and watched his or her eyes and the yearning for more? Well, the joy of Sunday School service comes from the realization of the great opportunity to train the mind, to encourage worthy habits, and to foster noble traits of character inculcated by wise parental teaching and example.

5) The fifth achievement is the joy of character building. This leads us to the paramount duty, and to the real and supreme joy of Sunday School work. Wise parents and leading educators in the nation today realize that good citizenship can be obtained only through character development. The sincere teacher realizes that here is an opportunity to inculcate the virtues that contribute to the building of true womanhood and manhood.

No one can successfully controvert the fact that upon the teacher rests much of the responsibility of lifting society to this high ideal. "All who have meditated on the art of governing mankind," says Aristotle, "have been convinced that the fate of empires depends upon the education of youth."

THE WORTH OF A GOOD SUNDAY SCHOOL TO THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE COMMUNITY

IVISUALIZE every Sunday School as a living light center. The Savior's admonition to let your light shine is preceded by the statement that men do not "light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light to all that are in the house." Jesus is referring specifically to individuals and takes for granted the fact that every person radiates an influence.

The fact is that no person can avoid letting his light shine. The radiation of one's character is constant. All should realize this, and to a degree at least sense the responsibility it entails. One writer says that every moment of life each person is "changing to a degree the life of the whole world."

Because this radiation of a man's character may be for evil as well as for good, Jesus emphasized the necessity of letting his light so shine that men may see your good works.

A man who is dishonest cannot teach honesty; one who is intemperate cannot teach temperance; one who has not a testimony of the truth of the Gospel will radiate doubt instead of a testimony into the hearts of his students.

This principle is true of the Sunday School. Every school exerts an influence in the community of which it is a part. It is a light, the dimness or brightness of which depends upon the efficiency with which it performs its function. The function of the Sunday School is to foster religious education.

There is not a home in the Church, not an individual that may not and should not come within the radiance of one or more of these great light centers. But the dimness or brightness—in other words, the worth—of each school upon the boys and girls and upon the community depends—

These two efficiency-determining elements are fostered by successful class work—and successful class work is dependent upon personality, preparation, presentation and prayer.

The light that radiates from such a classroom, and from a school made up of many such classrooms, enlightens the pathway of many a youth, and though "he might slip and fall, he shall not bind his soul with clay."
