David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Teaching

TEACHER PREPARATION

"We Believe in Being True"

AMONG the best summaries of ethical principles in literature is that found in the Thirteenth Article of Faith, the first part of which reads: "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men." I desire to take that second principle—"being true"—and associate it with the theme of this teachers' convention.

Every teacher should be true to himself. Every teacher should be true to his pupils. First, in preparation of lessons: No teacher ever should attempt to teach that which he does not believe. It is unfair to himself, unfair to those whom he is teaching, unfair to his church, unfair to his fellow men.

The first step in preparation is self-introspection. Whatever the lesson is, the first duty is to look within and see whether you believe what you are going to teach. I do not mean merely the facts of some incident. Incidents, whether they are taken from the Bible, Book of Mormon, or from actual life are but the means of teaching eternal, unchanging truths. The teacher should see to it that he believes that truth. He should not teach if he does not believe. If he does so, he is untrue to himself and to the church he is representing.

We are having some difficulty because teachers seem to take delight in telling what they do not believe about certain principles of the Gospel. Is your lesson prepared? Then look within and see if you believe. Choose that phase of it which you do believe and which you know is true.

If, for example, you are teaching a lesson on prayer, do not assume the attitude of the soldier who, when he went to the war, believed prayer is an "effrontery to the Most High." If you feel that it is, your attempt to teach the positive blessings of prayer will be futile. On the other hand, if you have learned that there is efficacy in prayer then you will give it in such a way that the students will feel it. Note the convincing power of the same soldier's testimony when he became converted to the efficacy of prayer.

From a boy, prayer always struck me as being a presumption, a piece of impudent effrontery to address the Allwise. One day, when earth and sky seemed mixed up in the gruelling we got from the enemy guns, I felt my senses reel for the moment. I kept repeating, "My God, let me keep my head for my men's sake." That prayer was answered, and the tangible result of the prayer is the decoration which I now wear but which I feel ought to be deposited in some church. However, when I look at the bit of ribbon, it reminds me of my prayer.

Believe what you are teaching. Do not repeat any part of your lesson that you do not believe.

The next step is being true to the boys and girls whom you are teaching. You must let them feel your comradeship. Speak to them along the street; invite them to your homes. How they believe in you! How boys and girls notice when they think you are slighting them! If they seem cold and indifferent toward you, seek for the reason. You know there are problems right here in this group. Some of us have an idea somebody else is too reserved, too proud. But when we come in contact with him we find that he is not officious, that it is we who have been reserved. Children are often misjudged. In one of the wards just before Christmas a boy was creating no little disturbance. He persisted in reaching out for the teacher's glove. She would tell him to stop, but he would do it surreptitiously. She felt she had not reached that boy in the lesson at all. He had insisted upon playing. Before the next Sunday it was Christmas; she was surprised when her class gave her a pair of gloves. This incorrigible was the one who presented her with the gift. He said: "That is what I was doing last Sunday when I was pulling your gloves, trying to find out what size you wore."

The third point is to be well prepared. Use the things around you. Show the example of the great Teacher who sat with His disciples and looked down on the farmers putting in their spring grain. He said, "Some seed fell on good ground, some on stony ground." There was the lesson of life. The well water is another example. The woman came to quench her thirst. She was carrying water to her house. The well water sprang up in eternal life. You gather in experiences and then you illustrate each point. I think that is a lesson to every teacher—you who have a lesson to prepare—not a speech, but a message.

We all need new methods. There are many ways of presenting lessons. There are incorrect ways. New ways will come to you if you will only prepare and study.

CONFIDENCE BETWEEN TEACHER AND PUPIL

LET us consider the element of confidence as a source of inspiration to students and teachers. One of the highest aims of education is to develop resources in the child that will contribute to his well-being as long as life endures. True education awakens the desire, first to achieve mastery over weak and selfish indulgences; second, to develop greater manhood and beautiful womanhood; third, to implant within the soul at least the promise of a friend or of a companion who later may be fit for husband or wife, for an exemplary father or a loving, intelligent mother; fourth, to prepare one to face life with courage, to meet disaster with fortitude and to face death without fear. To accomplish these true aims the teacher must first win the confidence of the child. Confidence, says Milton, imparts a wonderful inspiration to its possessor.

It is possible for a teacher to win just such trust. To shatter such confidence when once won is little short of criminal. Confidence is won first by living an exemplary life. This often means self-denial, but the teacher who willingly forgoes personal pleasure and convenience for the benefit, comfort or encouragement of another approaches the sublime principle of spiritual growth enunciated by the Savior when he said, "He that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." But remember, the corollary is also true—he who will not deny himself for the benefit and encouragement of another shall lose his influence as well as his own spiritual strength.

Let confidence, then, be established between teacher and students, and preparation on the part of the conscientious teacher will follow as surely as sunshine follows the dawn. Thus the teacher becomes inspired that she might inspire those who trust her.

What this desired confidence of the child is to the teacher, so should the teacher's confidence and trust be in God. Feel the consciousness that He is near us and the assurance of His help and guidance. Seek Him in all your efforts to succeed, call upon Him in adversity and you will find Him a comfort, a guide and an inspiration.

THE TEACHER AS A GUIDE IN THE SEARCH FOR LIFE'S GREATEST TREASURE

OF all who yield an influence in society, parents excepted, the teacher has the greatest opportunity to direct the lives of the young. The religious teacher has the added privilege of inspiring children and youth to seek the most precious of all gifts. This most valuable of all possessions is named by Jesus in one of His parables as follows:

The kingdom of Heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls:

Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

A person who has the desire and the ability to give to one in need is doubly fortunate. A gift thus bestowed is like mercy—"It is twice blest; it blesseth him that gives and him that takes." "I wish I had a million," said a man recently: "I would take joy in giving it to make needy persons happy." Such a wish has been expressed by many. They haven't the million, so of course they conclude they are among those who cannot contribute to the happiness of others.

There are teachers who have expressed the same wish, who have felt regretful and discouraged because they had nothing to give, when they held within their grasp the pearl of great price, to purchase which the merchant man sold all that he had. They already possess what Patrick Henry said is more valuable than all the world—a firm belief in, perhaps a knowledge of, the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

To lead a child to desire the approbation of the Lord, to cherish truth, to get a proper perspective of the true aims and purposes of life—this is an ideal worthy of the noblest instructor in the land. "Teaching the individual to love the good for the sake of the good; to be virtuous in action because so in heart; to love and serve God supremely, not from fear but from delight in His perfect character," is true education.

A child grows as a tree from within, outward; this is true of his moral and spiritual nature, as well as of his physical nature. His character is formed in the mind. Spirituality has its source in the spirit itself. A noble character seldom if ever comes by chance, but is the result of continued effort in right thinking, "the effect of long-cherished association with god-like thoughts." An ignoble and bestial character by the same process is the result of continued harboring of groveling thoughts.

Upon the proper education of youth, therefore, depends the moral and spiritual atmosphere of the community, and the safety and perpetuity of the nation.

It is the teacher's opportunity to inspire youth to obtain the richest treasure in the world—a noble character through compliance with ethical and moral precepts. Teachers in the Church have a greater opportunity; viz., the leading of youth into the realm of spirituality through obedience to the standards and teachings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Properly speaking the teacher should be but an ally to parents in training the mind, in developing worthy habits, in fostering noble traits of character inculcated by wise parental teaching and example; but in practice the customs and demands of society today are such that the teacher, instead of being an ally, is really the foster parent in training the child in the art of living. If that were all, the teacher's responsibility would be great enough. But it is not all. Often he faces the even greater task of counteracting false teachings and improper training of unwise, irresponsible parents. In the light of such self-evident facts, it must be apparent to every thinking mind how mighty is the responsibility of the teacher, upon the effectiveness of whose teaching hangs even the destiny of nations.

To inspire pupils to follow the example of the merchant man to find the "pearl of great price," the teacher should strive earnestly and prayerfully for four fundamental qualities:

(1) The gift of discernment. The teacher must know whom she teaches, to be able to discern, to a degree at least, the mentality and capability of the members of her class. She should be able to read the facial expressions and be responsive to the mental and spiritual attitude of those whom she is teaching. The Great Teacher had this power of discernment in perfection. He could read the hidden thoughts and interpret the very feelings of the persons whom He taught. In the acquisition of this power the sincere teacher may approach Him only partially. Too few teachers develop this gift, even to a necessary degree; notwithstanding, every teacher has the responsibility of determining how best to approach the members of the class in order to make appeals that will be lasting.

(2) The desire to help. This qualification springs really from a willingness to do good, to serve one's fellow man. Peter, the Chief Apostle, sensing the force of this spiritual quality said: "Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind."

(3) The knowledge of how to prepare a lesson intelligently. The teacher who knows her facts wins the confidence and respect of her pupils. It is surprising how quickly the child detects whether the teacher knows or does not know what she is attempting to teach. Pretense is an enemy to a teacher's success and influence. "Ye shall know the truth," said the Savior; "and the truth shall make you free." This remarkable saying, of course, has a broader application than is here given it, but the fact remains that if the teacher knows what she is teaching, she is freer and less inhibited in her thoughts and expressions, and more composed in her attitude and demeanor.

(4) The strength and fortitude to exemplify in life the truths taught. A teacher must believe and live the truths she attempts to teach. It is not what she says but what she is that influences childhood. The sinful king in Hamlet said when he attempted to pray: "My words fly up, my thoughts remain below: Words without thoughts never to heaven go." So it is in teaching—words without feeling and thought and proper example never influence a child to live righteously. "What you are," said Emerson in substance, "thunders so loudly in my ears, I cannot hear what you say."

Example is far more effective than percept. It is as futile to attempt to teach honesty, and to act dishonestly before a child, as to attempt to heat water in a sieve. It is what the teacher is at heart that will influence the child. Paraphrased we can say "Not everyone that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter the Kingdom of the child, but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." No teacher can feel enmity in her heart toward the officials of the Church without the children's sensing that enmity. They will be conscious of the radiation not from what she says or from what she refrains from saying, but from what she really feels. The teacher who does not believe in tithing and offerings, but who attempts to teach tithes and offerings is untrue to herself and false to her class. A teacher who does not abhor swearing and unclean thoughts cannot radiate reverence for Deity and pure living in the minds of the children. A spring cannot rise higher than its source.

Leading youth to know God, to have faith in His laws, to have confidence in His Fatherhood, to find solace and peace in His love—this is the greatest privilege, the most sublime opportunity offered to those who are entrusted to act as teachers and guides.

THE TEACHER'S RESPONSIBILITY

OF what infinite value to the community are guides and trainers of youth who carve and shape the moral atmosphere in which the people live. Flowers shed beauty and fragrance for a brief time, then fade and die and are gone forever; but children who, through instruction from noble teachers, become imbued with eternal principles of truth, radiate an influence for good, which, like their own souls, will live forever.

Parenthood is the greatest responsibility. Teaching is next. On the proper education of youth depend the permanency and purity of home, the safety of the nation. The parent gives the child an opportunity to live. The teacher enables the child to live well. The parent who gives life and teaches his child to live abundantly is a true parent-teacher.

It is the teacher's responsibility to awaken in the child a love for truth, a desire to seek happiness in life through righteous living. Now, teachers, to achieve this power and usefulness, it should be every teacher's ideal to appear before his or her class with:

First, a pleasing personality. Those boys and girls look at you; they see your hair, the color of your eyes; they note your dress, but particularly note your countenance. They can read the day's disasters in your face, and it influences them.

Second, thorough preparation. That is your responsibility. They soon detect whether you have a message. If he gets from you one thought, one new thought, he will always remember you. It does not take many stories; it is not the time you occupy which is important; it is the interest in planting that thought which he will keep forever. He might not acknowledge it in that class, but it is there and will be a strength to him in years to come. Never think of going before your class without giving previous thought and prayer to that lesson.

And third, if you go before them with a prayerful heart, God will not forsake you. He never has. You may not know that you have done good, but in the words of Portia: "How far that little candle throws his beams! So shines a good deed in a naughty world."

Another thought about responsibility. You teachers have seen many times, as I have, that wonderful painting of Jesus in the Temple, talking, asking and answering questions before the wise men in the Temple. I want you to picture that countenance now in your mind. Have you ever seen a more beautiful youth, radiant in inspiration, handsome in features, straight, upright, radiating divine intelligence? I think every growing boy should be able to see that picture. Will you please now take your brush and paint, and on the canvas reproduce that countenance of Jesus! You hesitate! You say you cannot do it. Of course we cannot. The responsibility is too great; it requires too much art. We are not qualified to do it. Well! To take the artist's brush and canvas to reproduce that picture of perfect youth is not a much greater task than you and I take when we start to mold a living child.

The responsibility of the teacher does not end in his duty to teach positively. He enters the realm of what-not-to-do, as well as the realm of what-to-do. In the garden of the human soul, as well as in the fields of human endeavor, there are thorns and thistles along with flowers and useful plants. Deserving of condemnation is she or he who would crush in a boy's mind a flower of truth, and sow in its stead the seed of error!

Leading youth to know God, to have faith in His laws, to have confidence in His Fatherhood, and to find solace and peace in His love—this is the greatest privilege, the most sublime opportunity offered the true educator.

THE POTENCY OF PERSONAL INFLUENCE

THERE are various elements in teaching which influence children and often tend largely to direct their thinking and acting throughout life. Those which are generally considered of prime importance are the lessons, and the scripture quotations memorized, the influence of the general assembly with the impressive opening exercises—the singing, the praying, and particularly the quiet, reverential attitude of the group during the administration of the sacrament. All these leave their indelible mark upon the susceptible mind of each budding child. I would not say a word that would minimize their importance.

But as I look in retrospect upon three-score-and-ten years' association with Sunday School work, I am inclined to believe that that which is most potent in shaping a boy's life is personal influence.

Every person to a greater or less degree affects the lives of those with whom he associates. There is a radiation from each individual character. People are more or less susceptible to this radiation. If we could interpret it rightly and fully as did Jesus, the Great Teacher, we could arrive at a just estimate of those whom we meet. This radiation comes not from what the person pretends to be but from what he is really and intrinsically.

Children are instinctively susceptible to this radiation. They do not—of course they cannot—analyze it. They merely sense it. Fortunate the boys and girls who have as their teacher a sincere soul who is honestly and deeply interested in their welfare. Children are more impressed with such a one because of what he is than by what he says.

When teachers more fully sense the potency of this vital element in the guidance of youth, and will seek the companionship of their pupils, particularly the indifferent ones, outside the classroom, there will be fewer absentees from Sunday School, and fewer failures along the path of morality and faith.

It was this personal contact and the sincerity he radiated which contributed most to Robert Raikes' success with the unwashed, uncombed, ragged, untutored "wild asses' colts" whom he picked up in the streets of Gloucester one hundred and sixty-nine years ago. One of Mr. Raikes' first problems, as it is the problem of every teacher, was to make the urchins behave properly. To accomplish this he was not above taking the defiant boys home to their parents, if he thought it necessary, and ordering the latter to give them a "birching" for their rude, unruly conduct. Then, Robert Raikes would invite all his "Sunday School children to dine with him especially on New Year's Day on beef and plum pudding." Thus, by personal contact outside the classroom these wild lads, who became members of the first Sunday School class in Great Britain, perceived Mr. Raikes' sincerity and his interest in their welfare. Their respect for him is illustrated by the question one of them asked his mother — whether that gentleman had not been in heaven.

We might refer also to the personal influence of Eliza R. Snow in the Sunday School at Nauvoo, of Richard Ballantyne in the log cabin in Salt Lake City, of George Goddard, of Karl G. Maeser, and other pioneer Sunday School teachers whose earnest deeds still echo in the lives of men and women.

Such also was the influence of your early teachers and of mine. We remember some of the lessons on reverence for the Lord's Holy name and for the Sabbath Day, lessons on deference for the aged, on respect for parents, etc. We retain some of the memorized quotations and the "pieces" we used to "speak"; some old Sunday School songs, too, now never or seldom sung still cling in memory — all of which left indelible impressions upon the growing Sunday School boys; but the most potent influences that now stand out on the page of memory are the Sunday morning contacts and the daily lives of such teachers as Sylvia Perry, her father, Josiah Perry, Lars K. Peterson, Mozell Hammond, William Halls, his brother George, Caroline Peterson Renstrom, and others.

Throughout the Church there are thousands of unnamed, unheralded teachers such as these whom I have mentioned, to whom we pay a humble tribute, who taught by example and personal contact more effectively than by precept. Though they have passed on these many years the spiritual influence of their daily conduct is still influencing men and women who as restless boys and girls sometimes seemingly paid little attention to what their teachers taught.

TEACHERS AND FINANCIAL REMUNERATION

How is it possible to get leaders in our schoolrooms, hold them, have men of influence and women of superior ability to teach our children unless we are willing to compensate them properly in their efforts so to teach their children? It is folly for this nation to expect more teachers throughout the land to forsake other and more lucrative opportunities if they do not give to our professors in the universities, our teachers in the high schools and in day schools a compensation that their position merits. We shall have to face it: giving only $5,000,000,000 for education in the United States and expending at the same time $20,000,000,000 to take care of crime, is inconsistent. It takes us back to that old story: Which will you have—a fence around the cliff, or an ambulance down in the valley?

"THAT YOU MAY INSTRUCT MORE PERFECTLY"

THE great obligation upon a teacher is to be prepared to teach. He cannot teach others that which he himself does not know. He cannot make his students feel what he does not feel himself.

There are three things which must guide all teachers: first, get into the subject; second, get that subject into you; third, try to lead your pupils to get the subject into them—not pouring it into them, but leading them to see what you see, to know what you know, to feel what you feel.

Every teacher must be prepared on his or her lesson when he or she meets those boys and girls of the class; for, mind you, your presentation of that lesson, your attitude toward the truth in that lesson will largely determine the boys' and girls' attitude toward it and their attitude toward Church activity in general. If you turn them away after class with the feeling in their youthful hearts that they have received nothing by coming, you will find difficulty in getting them to come back the following week. But on the other hand, if you have thrilled them, or if unable to do that, if you have given them one thought which has appealed to them, you will find that their intention and desire to return will be manifest by their presence one week later.

After you have presented some idea in your class which awakens a thought in a child's mind, have you ever noticed how eagerly that little child seeks for recognition in order that he may answer any questions you may ask?

Simply reading the lesson manual before time is not enough. In so doing I have not yet made that lesson mine, and until it is mine, until I feel that I have a message to give to my class members, I am not prepared as the Lord has asked me to prepare when He calls upon me to give His word. It must be mine; what I want to give to the boys and girls is what will count when I meet them. I can make that lesson in a manual mine by study, faith, and prayer.

Let the boy know you are interested in him. When you meet him on the street, let him know that you are glad to see him. Let love radiate from your heart, and then you have a good element in which to sow the seeds of truth which will bear fruit in that boy's life, which will eventually give him immortality and eternal life.
