David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Testimony

INDIVIDUAL TESTIMONY

Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole. This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:10-12)

SO spake Peter, the chief apostle, when he was arraigned before the judges for having healed the impotent man. He bore a strong testimony to those people who but a short time before had participated, directly or indirectly, in the crucifixion of the Savior. They warned Peter and John not to preach Jesus Christ and Him crucified, but when they perceived the boldness of Peter and John, and saw the impotent man standing before them whole, they counseled among themselves what to do.

Then they returned and cautioned the apostles not to preach Jesus Christ to the people. At that point Peter and John, under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, answered, "Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard." (Acts 4:19,20

Many people today wonder wherein lies the secret of the growth, stability, and vitality of the Church of Jesus Christ.

The secret lies in the testimony, possessed by each individual who is faithful in the Church, that the Gospel consists of correct principles. It is that same testimony that was given to Peter.

This testimony has been revealed to every sincere man and woman who has conformed to the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who has obeyed the ordinances, and has become entitled to and has received the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, to guide him.

It is given unto some, says the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants, to know by the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Son of God and that He was crucified for the sins of the world. But the Lord says further there are others to whom it is given to believe upon the testimony of others' words, that they may also receive salvation if they continue faithful. To all these, however, there comes the testimony in every performance of duty.

They know that the Gospel teaches them to be better individuals, that obedience to its principles makes them stronger men and truer women. Every day such knowledge comes to them, and they cannot gainsay it; they know that obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ makes them better and truer husbands, true and honored wives, obedient children, and makes them in every respect ideal home builders.

They know that obedience to the Gospel fosters true brotherhood and fellowship among mankind; they know that they are better citizens by virtue of obedience to the laws and ordinances. As they go through their daily acts and apply religion in their vocations, the truth of the Gospel becomes exemplified in their lives.

The testimony of the Gospel is an anchor to the soul in the midst of confusion and strife. Cannot we afford, then, possessing that testimony, to manifest to the world another attribute of the Church of Christ, which is love? Knowledge of God and His laws means stability, means contentment, means peace, and with that, a heart full of love reaching out to our fellow man, offering the same blessings, the same privileges.

Love will beget tolerance and kindness. Let us remember to have charity and love for one another. Let us not tear down a brother's reputation and hurt his feelings.

Let us stand with our hearts centered and our minds fixed upon this eternal truth—that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is among men for the redemption and salvation of the human family. Let us go forth with this spirit, dealing with our fellows in the spirit of love and kindness.
