David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Thinking

"AS A MAN THINKETH"

THERE is a story told by Bishop Patrick of a great master among the Jews who once asked his scholars to tell him what is the best thing in life to desire. One said there is nothing better than contentment. Another said a good companion is the best thing. A third suggested a good neighbor; and a fourth suggested the ability to see things to come. But at last came Eleazar, who said a good heart is better than them all. "True," said the Master, "thou hast comprehended in two words all that the rest have said. For he that hath a good heart will be both contented and a good companion, and a good neighbor, and easily see what is fit to be done by him."

Many hundreds of years have passed since mankind was first taught the value of treasuring a sincere heart. "As a man thinketh in his heart, so he is," was proclaimed in the days of the wise man who wrote the Book of Proverbs. So also was the divine appeal, "My Son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways." Hillel, whose life ended just a few years after Christ was born, and in whom Judaism found one of its ablest exponents, expressed the thought in these noble words: "If you are where no men are, show yourself a man."

No principle of life was more constantly emphasized by the Great Teacher than the necessity of right thinking. To Him, the man was not what he appeared to be outwardly, nor what he professed to be by his words: what the man thought determined in all cases what the man was. No teacher emphasized more strongly than He the truth that "as a man thinketh in his heart, so he is." With Him the deadly sins were not neglect of the ritual, nor even crimes punishable by the laws of all civilized nations, but wrong ideas, motives, and feelings.

Only they whose hearts are sincere and whose thoughts are high and noble can influence others to seek to attain these high ideals.

Fundamental doctrine this, and glorious!—applicable today as it was when Solomon first wrote it, or when the great minds before his day first conceived it. Contentment, complacency, peace—all that makes life worth living—have their source in the mind of the individual. From the same source spring unrest, turbulency, misery—everything that leads to dissolution and death. It's a life lesson too seldom considered. People are influenced and moved to action more by what they think other people think than by what they think themselves. Too many arrogate to themselves the thought that sin may be indulged in with impunity so long as it is not "found out." They presume that dishonest acts may be committed if kept hidden.

Whether found out or not, all pay the penalty of sin and of indiscretion. The intent that precedes the act leaves its indelible impression upon the character. And though the culprit might offer a balm to his conscience by saying, "Rip Van Winkle-like," as William James puts it, that he will not count "this one," yet, deep down in the nerve tissue it is counted just the same, and the marks in his character will stand against him in the day of judgment. No one can hide from his thoughts nor escape from their inevitable consequences.

CHRIST'S TEACHINGS REGARDING RIGHT THINKING

HOWSOEVER men may disagree as to whether Jesus Christ did or did not teach a definite system of doctrines, they must unite in accepting the fact that he taught the virtue of right thinking and condemned most vehemently the evil of wrong thinking.

Upon this basic principle of right thinking and right feeling are founded the Savior's teachings regarding man's duty toward his neighbor. "Anger unrestrained, like murder, deserves to be punished, he declared, before the local courts. Anger that leads a man even mildly to condemn his brother is a crime that might well be tried before the supreme court of the nation. Hot passion that impels a man to strike a revengeful blow at his brother's reputation is a crime that must be judged before God's judgment throne. As a matter of fact, none of the three crimes were recognized as such by the Jewish law. Passion that flamed only in the heart could not be punished by the state. It was not a law but a principle that Jesus proclaimed; the supreme crime against one's self and against society is to cherish anger, even for an instant; much more to intensify it by giving the slightest expression to the feeling of hatred toward another."

In Adelaide, Australia, there lives a man who has lost his sight. Several years after his affliction came upon him he became converted to the Church. He is self-supporting, succeeding financially, seems happy and contented, and is in many ways a remarkable man. His brother-in-law, a minister, refuses even to talk to him on the sole ground that the sightless man is a Latter-day Saint. With the utmost compassion for his brother-in-law, the blind man said one day: "Physically I am blind; but spiritually I know that I see the truth. As my brother-in-law thinks I am spiritually blind, I have kindly asked him to lead me into the light, but he has turned against me because I have joined the Church. I understand why he does so, and, therefore, can forgive him for choosing to ignore me." Measured by the standard of kindly feelings, which one of these men is the true Christian?

Near Newcastle recently an elder was distributing Gospel tracts from door to door. His motives were pure. He sincerely believed that he had a message of vital importance to every person in the world. Important or unimportant, it certainly could do no one any harm. But whether his message did or did not possess virtue, his thoughts and feelings toward his fellows were in keeping with Christ's teachings regarding man's duty toward his neighbor. Seeing the elder tracting, a gentleman—I shall call him such, though he does not deserve the title—said:

"What are you doing?"

"I am distributing Gospel tracts," was the reply.

"Are you a Mormon elder?"

"Yes."

Without the least provocation the man, pale with rage, then raised his cane and assaulted the elder, whose first impulse, naturally, was to knock the offender down, which he could readily have done. However, he controlled himself, and received several blows without retaliating. He wisely held his ground, however, and continued his tracting. The would-be defender (?) of Christian principles walked away, his heart still filled with a bitterness made only more intense by his unjustified attack. Judged by Christ's standard of right thinking, which one of these men is the true Christian?

These individual cases are but typical of the spirit often manifest by groups and organizations in society. The passion that prompts or impels a man to strike his brother is the same as that which impels organizations to hate and despitefully to use one another. All such actions are unchristianlike, and merit the condemnation of a righteous God.

Man is prone to entertain wrong thoughts of his neighbor and to pass judgment upon his fellows, little realizing that to judge righteously requires the wisdom of divinity. The world will be happier and more Christlike only as it cherishes right thinking and makes applicable in social life and particularly in religious circles the injunction of the Savior:

"Judge not, that ye be not judged . . . ."
