David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Tobacco

SO prevalent is the use of tobacco at the present time among men, and more regrettably, among women also, that one is led to wonder whether there isn't something good in it—some element which contributes to wholesomeness, to physical vigor, to brain power, or to some other benefit which justifies the indulgence in this all but universal habit.

In an honest effort to ascertain wherein this seeming "good" lies, I have asked many men and boys to tell me what benefits they get from smoking tobacco. In every instance the answer has been indifferent and vague. Some smoke to justify a "craving"; some, to enjoy a "soothing" effect upon their nerves; others, to indulge "a pleasant pastime"; and still others, "just to be in the fashion." No one claims for it the virtues of a food, nor the stimulating effects of a tonic. Looked at in the most favorable light, it is difficult, if not quite impossible, for tobacco's most willing addicts to show any good derived from its use.

On the other hand, objections to smoking, as well as to the use of tobacco in other forms, are manifest wherever one desires to look. To a non-smoker, for example, smoking has almost become a public nuisance. Good health demands pure air. This need quickly asserts itself if the dining room or living room in our home happens to fill with smoke from the furnace. Immediately windows and doors are thrown open, and the noxious fumes ejected. But people sit in restaurants, fill the air with tobacco fumes, and think nothing of it. They will befoul the air in theaters, and blow rings of smoke in dining cars until the sign, No Smoking, is obscured in the smoky mist. In an elevator marked Capacity Six Persons, one or two of the six will inconsiderately blow smoke into the others' offended nostrils! Not infrequently in non-smoking compartments of a railway coach, smokers light their cigarettes irrespective of the rights of other occupants, who are given the choice either of enduring the noxious fumes or of raising an objection with all its unpleasantness.

I wonder what would happen if, by way of retaliation, non-smokers were to eat onions and wilfully fill the air with the odor of onion breath!

Smoking is a slovenly habit. Entering a restaurant or the dining room of an hotel one frequently finds one's self sitting at a table with the ash tray filled with the refuse of the smoker. The same thing is seen in waiting rooms. Streets are littered with burnt-out matches and cast-off remains of cigarettes and chewed ends of cigars. The slovenly litter of the cigarette smoker is everywhere in evidence, not only in the gutter, but on the sidewalks, in the well-kept parks, and in every place where the public congregates.

However, to most people these are after all but minor objections; and the few whom such conditions offend will soon become used to them on the principle expressed by Pope, that where sin is

Seen too oft, familiar with its face, We first endure, then pity, then embrace.

But smoking is positively injurious, as ample evidence of scientists and eminent educators, and the experience of leading employers of men tends to prove.

If the objections to smoking in public, if the slovenly results therefrom as seen in places where people assemble for recreation and comfort, if the useless but literal burning up of hard-earned money be not considered sound objections to the pernicious habit, surely the fact that it is positively injurious to the young manhood and womanhood of our country should cause thinking men and women to unite in an honest effort to minimize this ever-increasing evil.
