David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Tongan Greeting

A MEMORABLE OCCASION

THIRTY-TWO years ago last June, I received a joyous welcome from never-to-be-forgotten friends and members from Tonga, Tabu-Hapaii, and Vavau. Of that welcome, treasured memories, assisted by notes from my diary, awaken in my soul the joy I felt when first I greeted you. I am wondering how many present here today remember that auspicious occasion.

As soon as we landed, and our luggage was disposed of, we were ushered into Brother Mataili's auto and driven to the Mission Headquarters about one mile from the wharf. Here the house was beautifully decorated with palm branches and flowers; two arches were erected, the one over the gate through which we drove with the auto, and the other over chairs placed on mats, where we were to sit and participate in the reception.

Young boys and girls in white and blue uniforms stood in a row in position of salute, and in a circle, completely encompassing the lot, were gathered men and women and babies, while in the center of the group were the Vavau Brass Band playing welcoming selections. I had the joy of shaking hands with everyone, and bade each "Malo lile." Following a concert by the band, the Kava bowl was passed. Vili Tuiono put the first "sisi" around my neck, two school girls followed, each tying one around my waist, and Vika, another school girl, put an elegantly arranged "sisi" of beads on my shoulders.

A feast furnished by Maile followed the photographer's work, and elaborate speeches of welcome followed the feast. I think there was more freedom of spirit—more cordiality, and less restraint than I have enjoyed at other opening feasts.

Conference services were held in the long bowery of bamboo poles and palm branches. It was a commodious building, erected without a nail in it. I remember that several men and women endured no small hardship to be in attendance at that conference. One sister, for example, came from Vavau, 150 miles or more on a sailing vessel, with her little baby only three months old. The mother was seasick all the way.

Then followed ten days of spiritual feasting and luscious banquets. One feature that I remember that contributed to the joy of that occasion was a cable from Sister McKay saying—"Everything and everybody all well. I miss you very, very much." As this was the first word in three months from my loved one since I left home March 26, it seemed the dearest message I had ever had in my life.

And now, my dear friends, I greet you once again. I wish you the best that a happy life can give you, and that you may have peace and joy in daily life. May you ever cherish and practice the ideals of the Gospel.

As ironwood repulses the axe, so the true Church member should resist all forms of temptation; instead of faultfinding and backbiting, each should look for the good in others, be loyal to his country, to the Church, and to God; he takes nothing which does not belong to him, but protects his neighbor's and brother's property as his own. He shuns idleness and performs his duties in the Church willingly and prayerfully. Even when provoked to anger, he controls his temper and his tongue.

Be assured that our thoughts and our hearts are with you as you dedicate the Liahona College for the development of character among the youth and the teaching of eternal truths. In the years that are ahead it will prove a blessing to thousands of young men and women, be an honor to the Church, and a credit to the Tongan Nation.
