David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Truth

WHAT IS TRUTH?

AS Pilate asked the question, "What is truth?" Truth personified stood before him unrecognized. Pilate's inability to recognize it is that of millions also who have eyes but cannot see, ears but cannot hear, hearts but do not understand. In the presence of the representative of the highest political authority at that time on earth Jesus courageously confessed his regal authority, just as He had previously owned Himself to be the Son of God before the highest theocratic council. Surrounded by false accusers and deceivers, the Son of Man stood before this representative of the Roman government, a courageous personage whose breath had never been polluted by a falsehood, whose soul had never been stained by a lie. In Him mankind has the only safe guide in his never-ceasing effort to find truth; and in the Gospel, the good news that He gave to man, humanity has the measuring rod for theories and philosophies of all time.

Truth is defined as "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." It is "being in accord with what is, has been, or must be." Truth is the nourishment of the soul. If deprived of it entirely man would be an animal. It is thinking, feeling, acting in harmony with Right. The Spirit of Truth is of God.

Truth is often elusive and hard to discover. Perhaps that is why it is said to be hidden in a well. There are two helpful ways of becoming acquainted with Truth; namely, (1) by experience, and, (2) by observing its manifestations in the lives of others.

If you would discover Truth by personal experience, study yourself introspectively. Think of yourself as a child of God. Accept your life, body, and spirit as the gift of God. Realize that every thought will affect your progress, every act be a contributing factor to success or failure. There are two things with which you should always concern yourself: motive and method.

It is the privilege of every sincere soul to be conscious—that is, to have an awareness—of being in harmony with this spirit of truth. Every intelligent person knows also when he is out of harmony with the truth. A consciousness of wrongdoing is just as real as the sense of being in accord with right. Truth manifests itself through personality. Though ever-existent, it is recognized only as it manifests itself through intelligent entities.

Throughout all ages truth has been first perceived by a few heroic leaders who, in defense of it, frequently sacrificed their lives. To the clear perception and the courage of these intrepid leaders of men is due the progress of mankind. At sometime or other, they have had to make a choice whether to deny, modify, or defend truth,—a choice between personal ease and preferment, or ostracism, punishment, or even death. Such a choice came to Peter and John as they stood prisoners before Annas, the high priest Caiaphas, and other members of the Sanhedrin. The prisoners were accused of having performed a miracle in the name of Jesus. (Acts 4:6-12) It took real courage to bear witness of Christ in the presence of the very men who had condemned Him to death.

The defenders of truth in all ages have received from the ignorant and prejudiced populace only rejection, persecution, and often death. The reward for their courage has been stones for the martyred Stephen; prison for Paul; the scaffold for Savonarola; the fagot for Hugh Latimer; the hemlock for Socrates; the assassin's bullet for Lincoln; martyrdom for Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and crucifixion for Jesus.

Never before in the history of the world has there been greater need than today for courage to defend truth. Politically the world is in turmoil. Nations are at each other's throats in a death struggle to determine which principles of government shall determine the actions of men and of nations. Eventually, through the overruling hand of Providence, Good will be born out of this travail of the world. Already leaders of nations are perceiving how far indifference to religion and denial of God have led humanity into error.

We need men of courage to defend the children of Truth, which spring from the eternal source of Truth, as leaves and fruit upon a living tree. Some of these we name Honor, Fair Dealing, Sacredness of a Contract—whether between persons, cities, states, or nations—Temperance, Loyalty, Reverence. Springing from the source of evil are Lying, Thieving, Confiscation of Property, Subjugation of Unoffending Nations—miserable spawn that are born in hell itself.

What is truth? is the question you and I must decide as we constantly encounter the perplexities of life. When we cannot perceive it, our surest guide is the light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. If we measure our acts by that standard, we shall not go far astray.

TRUTH WILL TRIUMPH

THE world is truly in turmoil, and there are those who fear modern civilization is dangerously near destruction. The fact is that since history began, strife, wickedness, and war have existed among human beings, who it seems are too selfish and ambitious to learn what is best for them. As indicative of the slow progress of the world in regard especially to the evil of war is the following extract:

Shrieks and wailing, and every other species of out-cry that comes from grief, terror, and despair arose from within [the palace] and such spectators as had the heart to look continuously upon the spectacle, could see wretched men running to and fro, and virgins clinging to altars for protection, and frantic mothers vainly endeavoring to find hiding places for themselves and their helpless children.

That is quoted from a description of the destruction of a city 1200 years before the Christian Era.

Today as we behold nations grasping at one another's throats, the strong crushing the weak, we are prone to think that righteousness among nations is waning. In our own country, we know that the struggle is still rife between capital and labor; that enemies to our democratic institutions are becoming more blatant; we see political demogogues more seemingly successful, drunkenness and immorality still flauntingly defiant; and we wonder whether mankind is growing better or worse. In private life unemployment, disappointments, adversity, sickness, and sorrow make us discouraged and sometimes despondent.

Manifestly, there has not been much cessation of man's "inhumanity to man" in 3,000 years! Notwithstanding this, I believe that Right and Truth will eventually triumph.

We may take courage in what I believe is a fact, that in the hearts of more millions of honest men and women than ever before in the history of the world, war is abhorrent. War has lost its false glamour and boasted glory.

How utterly foolish men are to quarrel, fight, and cause misery, destruction, and death when the gifts of a divine and loving Father are all around us for the asking—are already in our possession if we would but recognize them.

As a matter of fact, it's glorious just to be alive. Joy, even ecstasy, can be experienced in the consciousness of existence. There is supreme satisfaction in sensing one's individual entity, and in realizing that that entity is part of God's great creative plan. There are none so poor, none so rich, sick or maimed who may not be conscious of this relationship.

I know that for not a few of us the true joy of living is overcast by trials, failures, worries, and perplexities incident to making a living and attempting to achieve success. Tearbedimmed eyes are often blind to the beauties that surround us. Life sometimes seems a parched and barren desert, when, as a matter of fact, there is comfort, even happiness, within our grasp if we could or would but reach for it.

Among life's sweetest blessings is fellowship with men and women whose ideals and aspirations are high and noble. Next to a sense of a kinship with God comes the helpfulness, encouragement, and inspiration of friends. Friendship is a sacred possession. As air, water and sunshine to flowers, trees, and verdure, so smiles, sympathy and love of friends to the daily life of man.

A principle of the Gospel too seldom emphasized, but which is a blessing coexistent with man's creation, is free agency. References in the Scriptures show that this principle is (1) essential to man's salvation; and, (2) may become a measuring rod by which the actions of men, of organizations, of nations may be judged. The history of the world with all its contention and strife is largely an account of man's effort to free himself from bondage and usurpation, or to protect himself in the freedom he possesses.

In the light of the principle of free agency, it is not difficult to distinguish between the right and the wrong system of government. It is not difficult to tell when an organization transcends its bounds, and becomes despotic. It is well ever to keep in mind the fact that the State exists for the individual; not the individual for the State. Man's free agency is an eternal principle of progress, and any form of government that curtails or inhibits its free exercise is wrong. When a man uses this God-given right to encroach upon the rights of another, he commits a wrong. Liberty becomes license, and the man a transgressor. It is the function of the State to curtail the violator, and to protect the violated.

Keep the principles of Christ as your guide, your companion, your ally and inspiration, and you will tingle with the consciousness of your kinship with the Infinite, and all petty trials, sorrows, and sufferings of life will fade away as temporary harmless visions seen in a dream.
