David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Twelve Apostles

MINISTRY AND AUTHORITY OF THE EARLY APOSTLES

And when it was day, He called unto Him His disciples; and of them He chose Twelve, whom also He named apostles.

SOME have asked whether the number twelve had any significance. Well, it has. The people to whom Jesus first came were the descendants of the twelve tribes of Israel. They were looking forward to an earthly king, as well as one who would stand at the head of these twelve tribes.

Luke tells us that the first apostle the Savior chose was Simon, the son of Jona. Simon, son of Jona, was the name by which he was best known among his associates, but Christ called him Cephas, which in the Hebrew means rock or stone, and in the Greek the meaning of stone or rock is Petras, or Peter. It is significant that the Savior recognized in Peter that rock-like, granite-like quality, and his "wavering" later did not belie that character.

Andrew was his brother. These men were fishermen.

James and John were sons of Zebedee; their mother's name was Salome, and she was proud of her boys. James and John were known as the "Sons of Thunder." One illustration in the Bible tells us that when Jesus and the Twelve came through Samaria at one time, they were treated with disrespect to such an extent that James and John rebelled against the treatment and said, "Lord, give us power to call down fire from Heaven and destroy them." Not the loving nature usually attributed to John, is it? As a matter of fact, he was a fearless man, unyielding for the right. James became the first martyr of the Church, and there he showed his magnificent character. Old Herod set his enmity and revenge upon James. James was betrayed by one of the soldiers, who, as he looked upon James and saw his character, repented, so tradition tells us, asked forgiveness and died with the first great martyr. There are several James' names, so keep this one in mind—James the son of Zebedee, brother of John the Beloved. He was James the Great, chosen as one of the first Twelve.

Philip is next. Philip, of whom little is known, was a native of Bethsaida. Tradition says he preached in Phrygia and died in Hierapolis. He is not the Philip who preached the gospel in Samaria. (Acts 8:5)

Bartholomew is next. Bartholomew undoubtedly is the same as Nathanael, whom Philip sought when Philip first became acquainted with the Savior, and Bartholomew is undoubtedly the Nathanael, in referring to whom Jesus said, "Behold an Israelite indeed in whom there is no guile."

Matthew the Publican, as he styles himself, was the son of Alphaeus. We do not know whether that Alphaeus was the father of James or not. If so, they were brothers, but we cannot determine. Matthew was the son of Alphaeus, and as a collector of customs at Capernaum on the Sea of Galilee became known as "The Publican." He associated with the common people, who were looked down upon by the Jews. He was also known as Levi.

Thomas, surnamed "Didymus," which means a twin, was also chosen at this time.

Now we come to those whose identity it is a little difficult to determine. Another James, known as "James the Less" to distinguish him from James the son of Zebedee, was also a son of Alphaeus. Alphaeus was a common name, so he might not be the same as Matthew's father. James "the Less" must not be confused, however, with James the brother of the Lord. You cannot find anywhere that James "the brother of the Lord" was sustained as one of the Twelve. It cannot be proved, but he might have been chosen to succeed James the Great; I do not know. If he did not believe at first in the divine mission of his brother, he did accept Him after the resurrection, and that is one of the points I wish to mention later. "James the Less" is not the author of the "Epistle according to James." The author of this Epistle was the Lord's brother who sat in the council in Jerusalem when the primitive church was threatened with destruction over some question about Jews and Gentiles.

Following "James the Less" we have Simon the Zelotes, or Simon the Canaanite; both are the same; in fact, the Canaanite is the Aramaic word for Zealot, so Simon the Zealot was probably, before he met Jesus, a member of the sect of the Zealots, a sort of voluntary ecclesiastical police to see that the law was not broken with impunity. We know very little about him; he is the least known of the Twelve Apostles.

Then we come to Judas, or Jude. Do not confuse him with another Judas, for we have two in the Twelve. Judas was the brother of James. Now this man was called Lebbaeus and also Thaddaeus. Authorities are not agreed whether he is the same as our Lord's brother Judas, author of the Epistle of Jude.

Then finally we come to Judas Iscariot—Judas of Kerioth.

Peter was a fisherman; so was Andrew; so were James and John; I believe Nathanael was; Judas Iscariot was not. I think Simon the Zealot was not, but they were humble men. Matthew was a collector of customs. Why call these men great? They were not great in the realm of finance; they were not great politically; they were not great authors, but in the realm of character they were supremely great. They were great simply because they accepted the teachings and ideals of Jesus Christ. The only reason the apostles are known to the world today is because of their loyalty to Christ and His Gospel. If it had not been for that they would have been unknown, submerged in the great sea of humanity, just as a rock thrown into the sea is gone forever.

There are apostles who are not members of the council. For example, Paul and Barnabas are referred to as "these apostles." As far as we know Barnabas was never an apostle. A man may be an apostle but not one of the Council of the Twelve.
