David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Unity

UNITY IN THE CHURCH

THE GREATEST, most impressive prayer ever uttered in this world is found in John 17:14-22. This was the Lord's prayer, uttered just before He entered the Garden of Gethsemane on the night of His betrayal. One important message therein is found in these words, "Make them one as thou, Father, and I are one."

It is the principle of unity that has enabled the wards, stakes, branches, and missions of the Church to progress and to accomplish the purposes for which the Church was established. It could not have been done by dissension and hatred. There have been difficulties. Each member of the Church has his own ideas. Sometimes they are not the same as those of the bishopric, and not the same as those of the presidency of the stake, but each has had to submerge his own ideas to the good of the whole; and in that united purpose we have achieved something which is wonderful, and of which we may well be thankfully and gratefully proud.

At this time I am thinking of the future of the Church, and I feel impressed of no more important message to give than "to keep one" and avoid things that may cause a rift among members.

One of the first conditions that will bring about disunity will be selfishness; another will be envy. "Brother so-and-so passed me by and said nothing to me about the matter"; "The bishopric chose Miss so-and-so to be organist, and she can't play half as well as I," and, "I'm not going to Sunday School any more because the bishopric appointed a certain man to act as director of the priests"; "The Sunday School chose so-and-so as a teacher; the superintendent released me, and I feel hurt"; "The presidency of the stake came and didn't come to our house, and I feel offended." OH! a hundred and one little things like that may come up—little things, insignificant in themselves, when we compare them with the greater and more real things of life; and, yet, I know that they can be so magnified that they become mountains in our lives, and we are offended, and our spirituality starves because we entertain those feelings.

There is another element—finding fault—associated with that spirit of envy. We find fault with a neighbor. We speak ill of each other. When that feeling comes, it is a good thing to just sing that simple little hymn, "Nay, Speak No Ill." I do not know of anything that will contribute more to unity in a ward, in a state, in a country, than for members to speak well of each other.

I echo the prayer of the Savior: "Make them one, Father, as thou and I are one."
