David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* University

UNIVERSITY RESPONSIBILITY

WE KNOW what was done toward corrupting the minds of youth within one generation in the days of Hitler, and we see now what is being done to corrupt the minds of youth behind the Iron Curtain. Unless our nation and the nations who love freedom take up the direct teaching of loyalty to truth, to government, to God, this poisonous teaching will corrupt millions.

A university is not a dictionary, a dispensary, nor is it a department store. It is more than a storehouse of knowledge, and more than a community of scholars. University life is essentially an exercise in thinking, preparing and living. The aim of education is to develop resources in the child that will contribute to his well-being as long as life endures; to develop power of self-mastery that he may never be a slave to indulgence or other weaknesses; to develop virile manhood, beautiful womanhood, that in every child and every youth may be found at least the promise of a friend, a companion, one who later may be fit for husband or wife, an exemplary father or a loving intelligent mother, one who can face life with courage, meet disaster with fortitude, and face death without fear.

During the first half of the twentieth century we have traveled far into the soul-destroying land of socialism and made strange alliances through which we have become involved in almost continuous hot and cold wars over the whole of the earth. In this retreat from freedom, the voices of protesting citizens have been drowned by raucous shouts of intolerance and abuse from those who led the retreat, and their millions of gullible youth, carrying banners on which are emblazoned such intriguing and misapplied labels as social justice, equality, reform, patriotism, and social welfare are marching merrily to their doom.

Intoxicated with pride in our achievement, enmeshed in the interesting problems still unsolved, we have left unguarded the gate through which are pouring the destructive hordes and forces of a new invasion of barbarism. Hearing the dangers just enumerated, the nation is threatened with the disintegrating influence of moral turpitude; honesty seems to be outmoded, the stability of the family life is threatened, loyalty and patriotism have lost their order, and crime and lawlessness, particularly among young people, are increasing alarmingly.

It is for us to decide how these evil tendencies may be averted. I want to tell you students, who will be leaders in a few years in scholastic fields and business, that unless we do make morality and ethics and spirituality and religion our direct aim, this nation will not be prepared to counteract the evil influence of the teaching behind the Iron Curtain, the leaders of which are purposely, designedly, teaching youth corrupt ideals and principles.

Our public schools, recognizing this, are setting forth ethical principles to be taught. But moral instruction is of the greatest usefulness where the teachers are in earnest, where they possess the necessary skill, where they see that moral instruction is only one item in the general program of moral education, and where all the moral forces in the school are called into play together.

FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVES OF A UNIVERSITY

WHAT is the relationship of the teachers to the students who are coming here to develop and to achieve their aims in life?

I think that the noblest aim is character, notwithstanding what some leading professors say about the special work of a university. What other conceivable purpose is there in making discoveries in science, in delving into marvelous powers hitherto hidden by nature, except for the development of the human soul? What good are they if they are separated from the individual and from the groups? What possible good would salten seas, molten lava, the mountains, the prairies be without humanity? What good are all inventions and discoveries without their application to human beings? So the paramount purpose of all education, particularly in a republican form of government such as we have here in the United States, is to make good citizens and to enrich the human soul.

Too many students arrogate to themselves a superiority of intelligence when they get just a few scraps of knowledge, and draw their conclusions—false conclusions very frequently—from their limited acquisition of facts.

Over 40 years ago I read a book by an Indian philosopher in which the statement was made that all the data of the whole universe, so far as man is individually concerned, naturally divide themselves into four distinct separate classes.

First—Things we know.

Second—Things we assume to know.

Third—Things we believe.

Fourth—Things of which we are wholly and entirely ignorant.

In the first class, things we know, for example, he names our existence. We know that we exist. We know that others around us exist, that fire burns, that water quenches thirst, that snow is soft and white, that ice is hard and cold to our senses. We know that flowers bloom and the birds sing. We know that as individual intelligences we possess certain faculties, capacities, and powers; that certain things called food, water, and air are necessary to sustain the life of our physical bodies. We know when we are happy. We know what sorrow is. We know that we can think, and that we can convey our thoughts to others.

We know that life has a present existence, and that what we call death dissolves the physical manifestations of this earthly life. Through our physical senses we have personally demonstrated these things. Of any claim outside the range of our own personal experience, "we definitely and positively really know nothing. In other words, a personal experience is the only absolute basis and infallible test of what we know." He should have included in that realm of personal knowledge spiritual experiences, for they fall within the range of this personal experience.

In the second class, things we assume to know, the author says we assume to know that the earth is round. We assume to know how old we are. We assume to know there was a certain man named Columbus who discovered America; that Washington was the first president of the United States. We assume to know that Moses led the children of Israel out of captivity in the land of Egypt. We assume to know that Benjamin Franklin by means of a kite discovered electricity; that Newton made a scientific discovery concerning the actions of force, which we named gravity.

In the third category, things we believe, he says that we believe in a great creative intelligence which has a personality; some believe he is not only a personal God, but that He is a triune being, composed of three persons, namely the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost. Others believe he is but one person. Some believe in the doctrine of literal transubstantiation, in accordance to which the bread and wine used in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper are said to be transmuted into the body of Christ. Others believe, with equal sincerity, that such a doctrine is not only false, but utterly absurd. Some believe in the immortality of all mankind, while others believe in conditional immortality only as a reward of individual effort.

Then in the fourth class, things of which we are wholly ignorant, we neither know nor assume to know, nor do we have even a definite belief as to where, when, or how, for example, matter first came into existence, or how long it will continue to exist, or what will ultimately become of it. We neither know nor assume to know, as to how many suns, moons, and stars there are throughout all the universal space—how many of them are uninhabited, or what may be the number and character of those which are inhabited. We neither know nor assume to know, nor can we formulate so much as a definite belief, as to the number of fishes or any other living things in all the waters of the earth, the insects which pervade the atmosphere and encircle and enclose the earth, or the living creatures that move upon the dry land. In all such problems, and many others, we do not hesitate to acknowledge our total ignorance. "No man is in a position to understand or appreciate how most infinitesimally small and seemingly insignificant by comparison is the value of his own definite personal knowledge until he undertakes to write out in definite form a crystallized statement of those things he can say truly he knows. Then it is for the first time he becomes clearly conscious how meager is his store of actual knowledge, and how conspicuous is his intellectual poverty."

When a student glimpses this in his first class,—if he just closes his eyes and contemplates how infinite are God's creations, he begins to sense a feeling of humility and awe. Thus he takes the first step forward toward his proper education.

It is the objective of this University to impress upon every student that God, not self, should be made the center of his life. There is his first comprehension of the difference between the animal plane of existence, and the plane of the spirituality of the soul. Thus to become conscious of one's own ignorance is the first lesson that a student should learn. To be ignorant of one's own ignorance is to be in an unprogressive, uninspired state of existence. True humility gives a glimpse of our own actual attainments, gives us a broader understanding and a more just appreciation of all mankind. It teaches us a deeper respect for the lives and experiences of our fellow men; it admonishes us to a more generous sympathy of every man in his honest efforts, and stimulates us to a more helpful desire to increase our own store of exact and definite knowledge.

One of the most important duties every individual owes to himself and to his fellow men is at all times, and as rapidly as possible, to increase the number and volume of the things he knows, and in so doing select those facts and truths of which he can make the most valuable use. Exact and definite knowledge is always of the greatest possible value and importance to every individual who has the moral courage to use it rightly.

Knowledge comes through personal effort. Its acquisition involves labor. Exact and definite knowledge comes to all of us in exact ratio with the amount of intelligence, moral courage, and perseverance we put into the active search for it—no shirking, no superficial study. In this effort to increase the data from the realm of the unknown to the realm of the known is the duty of the University, and therein comes the duty of research that must be carried on in the various scientific fields.

Another objective of the University grows naturally out of self effort, and that is to emphasize the responsibility of individual choice, of free agency. Never before has there been a time when that principle should be so emphasized in the minds of scientific men and in the minds of young hopeful students than at the present, because we have leaders of nations who trample that eternal principle under their feet, who crush the very source of the seed of liberty planted in every individual soul—a seed that never will die. Communists, no matter what they do, can never kill this immortal truth. Man is endowed with the greatest blessing next to life that can be given to mortal beings—the gift of free agency. Without this divine power to choose humanity cannot progress. What a travesty on human nature when a person or a group of persons, though endowed with a consciousness of being able to rise in human dignity to realms indiscernible by lower creations, yet will still be content to obey animal instincts without putting forth effort to experience the joy of goodness, purity, self-mastery, and faith that spring from compliance to moral rules.

A final objective of education is teaching for life. It is true that we have to make a living. To some making a living is the whole purpose of existence. Some make the object of life pleasure. Some make the object of life fame, or wealth, but the true end of life is not mere existence. It is not pleasure, it is not fame, it is not wealth. It is the perfection of humanity through individual achievement under the guidance of God's inspiration. "Let every man remember that the destiny of mankind is inconquerable, and that it depends greatly upon his will to collaborate in the transcendent past. Let him remember that the law is and always has been to struggle, and that the fight has lost nothing of its violence by being transposed from the material on to the spiritual plane. Let him remember that his own dignity, his nobility as a human being must emerge from his efforts to liberate himself from his bondage and to obey his deepest aspirations. And let him above all never forget that the divine spark is in him alone, and that he is free to disregard it, to kill it, or to come closer to God by showing his eagerness to work with Him and for Him."

UNION BUILDING DEDICATORY PRAYER

O GOD, Our Eternal Father:

On this occasion of dedication of the Union Building, members of the Board of Trustees, of the Alumni Association, of the faculty, of the student body, and patrons of the University of Utah, in oneness of spirit reverently approach Thee in gratitude and praise.

We are grateful that Thy divine inspiration motivated the Pioneers soon after they began to build settlements to lay the foundation of a state school system by incorporating the University of the State of Deseret. We express our obligation to these noble men and women, who, though compelled to struggle for meager necessities of existence, sensed the need of trained minds to lead them and their children in search of nature's secrets and the higher and better life for man.

Never didst Thou forsake them; every honest effort Thou didst reward. From a few students in one room in a small dwelling, the University has expanded to a campus measured by square miles, buildings counted by the dozens, equipment valued in millions. Thousands of students have been her beneficiaries. The honor her graduates have brought to their Alma Mater has been achieved not by their personal gain in added pleasure or pelf, but by their increased contributions to the enrichment and betterment of human society.

To this end have faculty and student body contributed their means and united their efforts to construct this spacious, useable, much-needed Union Building.

That the ends of true education may be enhanced, we now invoke Thy Providential care upon the entire edifice from foundation to roof.

May lofty ideals that contribute to the dignity of true manhood and womanhood permeate every room, every corridor, and hallway.

Above all, inasmuch as the Union Building may be considered a delightful, stimulating home for every member of the University family (with guests made welcome), may the lessons learned herein impress each with the fact that he owes an obligation not only to his Alma Mater, but also to the larger family into which he some day will graduate;

That it is he and he alone who determines whether he will be a useless or a useful member thereof;

That to the extent that he contributes to the dignity of man will his service to society be worth while;

That if by his acts he preys upon others, or by personal negligence or indulgence influences his fellows to grovel on the animal plane of existence, he thereby disgraces himself and discredits his school;

That sincerity of speech and action contributes to nobility of character;

That a promise given be held sacred;

That in all social intercourse students and teachers shall be motivated by a desire to make society more spiritual and less depraved;

May the Union Building of the University of Utah in all its extra-curricular activities, whether in ballroom, participating in drama, art, literature, music, in intercollegiate contests, or even in those social, confidential conversations that make so memorable and cherished the social hours of school-day companionship, prove itself to be a most potent educational factor of this state institution.

To the developing and the disseminating of these virtues, and every other ideal that will contribute to the drawing of the human soul nearer to a knowledge of Thee and hasten the day of peace and brotherhood, we dedicate the Union Building of the University of Utah with all its furnishings and equipment, and invoke Thy protection and guidance, in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.
