David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* War

CAUSES OF WAR

THE great need of the world today is applied religion.

When I think or read of the horrors of war, when I picture young men who have been forced to carry the gun and slay their fellow men, running across a field, burrowing into the earth as animals to protect themselves from their fellow men, when I read of these men lying heaped in trenches, and in fancy hear their groans as they turn their ghastly faces to heaven, when I think of the devastated towns and see fleeing from those towns husbandless women, dragging fatherless children, when I think of the thousands of human beings who are going to die of starvation and disease,—because we are told that for every soldier that dies in battle five others die of exposure, disease and starvation—I say when I think of all these horrors that come in the wake of war, I try to find out the cause of it all.

The real causes are not evident; however, you will discover that one cause of disastrous war lies deeply rooted in the fact that nations have never applied the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The roots of the causes of war lie deeply bedded in vanity, selfishness, unjust commercialism, unrighteousness, and other things contrary to the spirit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. O, if they could only apply the Gospel in their nationalism! But they consider it only as a thing apart from daily life—as something to be treated as a mere social function. They haven't felt that it is a vital force, the vital force in humanity.

BOYS IN THE SERVICE

TO REALIZE, even to a small degree, the magnitude of the stupendous task of mobilizing, caring for and equipping our men in the service, one must visit our camps; and to see how rapidly and efficiently this herculean job is being performed makes a man's spirit warm with increased loyalty to Uncle Sam.

In this connection here is a duty we at home must perform; and by doing it foster the spirit of cheer among the boys. Let me relate an incident:

About 11 o'clock last Thursday morning, I was lounging on a cot with six or eight boys around me, exchanging experiences and telling stories, when someone cried, "Mail!" immediately, there was a rush, and the sergeant was surrounded. I observed the boy's faces as the packages and letters were distributed. Anticipatory, hopeful, eager expressions spread over the countenances of those boys, huddled together listening, not quietly, to the names. The largest packages went first—a cake from Florida; a box of candy next, followed by the papers. Then the letters. How small that packet of letters looked for that crowd of home-loving boys! And how quickly they vanished as one after another was thrown—not handed—thrown among the crowd as each owner's name was called! How many were disappointed was evidenced by the chorus, "Is that all? A-a-h! O-Oh! Left again!" Then each went back to his bunk. I observed some of their faces, the forced smiles, quickly followed by shadows, which like clouds passing over the sun, obscured the light of expectant hope, and left only gloom.

I tried to imagine what the effect would be of a repetition of such an experience for just one week. For a boy to hear "Mail" called twice a day—to rush twice a day with his comrades in eager expectancy, to listen in vain for his name, to return to his cot and pretend to read a magazine while his more-favored companions are feasting on letters and delicacies from home—to go through this experience twice a day, day after day for seven days and more, I tell you, I concluded that it would be just about as trying as "going over the top"!

Now relatives, sweethearts and friends can not only save the soldiers all this unpleasantness but add measurably to their cheerfulness, if they will only write. Send a letter, or a paper, or a card, some candy, a clipping, a piece of mother's apron—anything, just so it is from home!

Don't let the boys be repeatedly disappointed when the sergeant brings the mail.

PREVENTION OF WAR

THERE are many fundamental reasons why war should be prevented, one of the chief among which I think is this:

War is guided by no principle, and will hold no principle inviolate.

Such a thing is dangerous to society. Even though we grant its necessity at certain stages of the world's development, today a force that violates all honor and knows no principle might annihilate civilization. I do not mean to say that the motive which prompts a nation to go to war may not be a worthy one. On the contrary, a nation entering a war may be actuated by the very noblest of principles.

In paragraph two of D&C 134 of the Doctrine and Covenants, I read that "No government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life."

This paragraph sets forth two fundamental conditions indispensable to peace in organized society:

These are 1.—The acceptance by the group of standard rules of conduct; 2. The holding of such rules or laws inviolate.

Wherever human beings group together either for common protection or general advancement, whether as family, clan, state or nation, and no rules of conduct or laws are recognized, confusion, if not absolute anarchy, is sure to prevail. The more just and equitable these standards, the more harmonious and peaceable the associations of those who comprise the group. Only by compliance to principles of justice and right can peace ever be established in civilized society. "Nothing can bring you peace," says Emerson, "but the triumph of principle." If, therefore, there were no other reason, I say, war should be outlawed by the united vote of all civilized nations because—

"Everything is fair in love and war," is a beastly adage, and springs from the fact that the selfishness and avariciousness of man recognize no principle. The history of war proves this. Even before Christianity, war and its brutal methods were occasionally, though feebly, criticized, and there were accepted among warriors "rudimentary morals of war." For example, it became quite unethical to kill women and children and to slaughter prisoners.

Christianity established the principle "that an unjust war is wicked; and it strove to ameliorate the unnecessary horrors and to introduce the element of 'chivalrous war-fare.'" These elements of mercy, however, were violated during the 16th century when men became mad in the religious wars that stained the pages of history during that time.

The First World War had scarcely begun before codes of warfare, international agreements, promises, honor, principles of humanity were ruthlessly violated. For example, one provision in the code stated that when seige was laid to a city the non-combatants must have a chance to get away in order to escape starvation as well as bombardment.

By food blockades, submarines, and bombing from the air, non-combatants, including women and innocent children, were ruthlessly murdered. Again, an old article of the code provided that merchant ships about to be sunk for carrying contraband must be warned and searched and that their crews must be allowed to escape. In violation of this, ships were sunk without warning.

There was another provision in the code that civilians should be given warning of a bombardment. The success of aeroplane bombardment depended upon surprise attacks, and so, contrary to all principle, innocent non-combatants were maimed, mangled or blown to pieces.

The taking of hostages had long been designated as "a usage of barbarous and semi-civilized warfare, for centuries discontinued by civilized nations"; yet hostages were held in the last war and sometimes shot if towns did not behave submissively.

At the second battle of Ypres "a cloud of irridescent chlorine gas rolled across the western trench line, and sent . . . soldiers by the thousands back to hospitals, coughing and choking themselves to death from rotted, inflamed lungs." And this in face of the fact that the nations that fought in the great war had agreed not to use it.

With death-dealing inventions, with the aeroplane perfected and used as an engine of destruction, with war, barbarous and beastly, recognizing no human constraint of restriction and violating every known principle of humanity, what group of men, what state, what nation, or what group of nations can be so blind as to start another war—a holocaust that might destroy civilization itself?

And yet I realize that picturing the possible horrors of the next war will not prevent it. You cannot frighten men into war prevention. You can, however, educate the leaders of nations to hold inviolate the principles of mercy, of justice, of right.

In the present stage of morality and spirituality in the world, I do not believe it possible to eliminate the causes of war. But even though the causes of war may exist and continue to exist so long as evil continues its eternal struggle with good, it still is possible to prevent war.

There are two impregnable fortifications against accidental war. One is the holding of principle inviolate. "Nothing can bring you peace but yourself. Nothing can bring you peace but the triumph of principles."

The other is the expanding of an international sentiment in favor of arbitration. Let the offended inflammable person, state or nation, pause long enough for cooler, more clear-headed thinking and for interested parties to weigh the facts and to determine who the sinful aggressor is.

As to the first of these fundamentals of peace, the triumph of principle, there should be no question in any Christian's mind as to what principles should be held inviolate. For ever 2,000 years, men have been singing the beautiful song of the angels, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace, good will to men," and all the while men and women have been crying and longing for peace. Seldom, if ever, do we meet a man who does not say he wishes he might have it, yet only a very few are willing to pay the price of peace.

Triumph of principles means the subjugation of the enemies of peace—avarice, lust, envy, pride, worldly ambitions, anger—the six temptations offered in varying form by the tempter to the Savior on the Mount of Temptation.

Ungoverned appetite, unrestrained passion, envy, and hatred, ill-gotten gain, the exercise of unrighteous dominion in governing men and crushing them—these are the enemies to peace. Yielding to these evils brings misery to the individual, unhappiness to the home, war among nations, and discontent, misery and death all around. They are the opposite of the peace that Christ came to give to the world.

Shall mankind never be able to overcome avarice? Shall we never learn to seek to give rather than to get? Only by serving our fellow men can we obtain that peace which Christ the Prince of Peace came to establish. His teachings prove clearly that there is no road to universal peace which does not lead through the heart of humanity.

The second fundamental to the establishing of peace is but the application of one of Christ's principles to life when it is stirred possibly either by avarice or by a sense of suffering from injustice. This principle applied to international disputes will prove an effective means of preventing wars if nations will but agree to an international court of arbitration and all nations accept the obligation to help enforce the court's decisions.

The Church is told explicitly by revelation to "Renounce war and to proclaim peace," and to the accomplishment of this noble end, all faithful members have dedicated their lives. They hope to establish peace by striving in practical ways to unite the hearts of the children of men in one great universal brotherhood, in which principles of truth and righteousness will dictate and triumph in the lives of men.

THE CHURCH AND THE PRESENT WAR

THERE are many who would like to know what the attitude of the Church is toward the present war.

The resurrected Lord's first greeting to His disciples, in the evening of that memorable day, was "Peace be unto you." That was His message, too, at the last meeting He had with them before His crucifixion. He said: "These words I have spoken unto you that in me ye might have peace."

The peace of Christ abides in the heart. It is an individual blessing. But it is a condition to be enjoyed also by groups of individuals, and to that end His disciples were to declare peace to the world.

In the face of the tragic condition among mankind, honest-thinking men and women ask how is it possible to reconcile the teachings of Jesus with the participation of the Church in armed conflict.

War is basically selfish. Its roots feed in the soil of envy, hatred, desire for domination. Its fruit, therefore, is always bitter. They who cultivate and propagate it spread death and destruction, and are enemies of the human race.

War originates in the hearts of men who seek to despoil, to conquer, or to destroy other individuals or groups of individuals. Self exaltation is a motivating factor; force, the means of attainment. War is rebellious action against moral order.

The present war had its beginning in militarism, a false philosophy which believes that "war is a biological necessity for the purification and progress of nations." It proclaims that Might determines Right, and that only the strongest nations should survive and rule. It says "The grandeur of history lies in the perpetual conflicts of nations, and it is simply foolish to desire the suppression of their rivalry."

War impels you to hate your enemies.

The Prince of Peace says, "Love our enemies."

War says, "Curse them that curse you."

The Prince of Peace says, "Pray for them that curse you."

War says, "Injure and kill them that hate you."

The Risen Lord says, "Do good to them that hate you."

Thus we see that war is incompatible with Christ's teachings. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the gospel of peace. War is its antithesis, and produces hate. It is vain to attempt to reconcile war with true Christianity.

In the face of all this, I shall seem inconsistent when I declare that I uphold our country in the gigantic task it has assumed in the present world conflict, and sustain the Church in its loyal support of the government in its fight against dictatorship.

In justification of this seeming inconsistency, I shall not attempt to prove that there are occasions when Jesus would approve of a nation's starting a war. That He used force to drive from the temple the money changers and other desecrators of the House of God, is a fact; but only a misapplication of the text can make that incident a justification for one Christian nation's going to war against another. On that occasion, as on all occasions, Jesus opposed and denounced wrong. With the strength of fiery indignation and of His own moral force, and not merely with a whip of small cords, Jesus drove the self-convicted desecrators from the temple.

Neither shall I attempt to prove that He favored war when He said: "Think not that I come to send peace on earth; I came not to send peace but a sword." (Matt. 10:34)

They who would quote this saying as indicating that Jesus approves of war surely put a strained interpretation on its true meaning, which refers most clearly to the incompatibility between truth and error. It refers to the necessity of a choice, which has been made by thousands, between accepting the gospel or continuing in ease and comfort with relatives. There is not in that quotation any justification for one Christian nation's declaring war upon another.

Nor, again, would I try to justify my seeming inconsistency by referring to what He said on another occasion as follows:

But now, he that hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip; and he that hath no sword, let him sell his garments and buy one . . .

And they said, Lord, behold here are two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough. (Luke 22:36, 38)

Without reading into the text something which is not intended or even implied, the most that one can get from this admonition is that henceforth the disciples going forth into an antagonistic world might supply themselves with necessary support and the usual means of defense.

None of these sayings of the Savior's can be taken to prove that he justifies war.

Notwithstanding all this, I still say that there are conditions when entrance into war is justifiable, and when a Christian nation may, without violation of principles, take up arms against an opposing force.

Such a condition, however, is not a real or fancied insult given by one nation to another. When this occurs proper reparation may be made by mutual understanding, apology, or by arbitration.

Neither is there justifiable cause found in a desire or even a need for territorial expansion. The taking of territory implies the subjugation of the weak by the strong—the application of the jungle law.

Nor is war justified in an attempt to enforce a new order of government, or even to impel others to a particular form of worship, however better the government or eternally true the principles of the enforced religion may be.

There are, however, two conditions which may justify a truly Christian man to enter—mind you, I say enter, not begin—a war; (1) An attempt to prevent a nation from dominating another or depriving it of its free agency, and (2) Loyalty to country. Possibly there is a third; viz., Defense of a weak nation that is being unjustly crushed by a strong, ruthless one.

Paramount among these reasons, of course, is the defense of man's freedom. An attempt to rob man of his free agency caused dissension even in heaven. In that rebellion Lucifer said in substance: "By the law of force I will compel the human family to subscribe to the eternal plan, but give me thine honor and power." To deprive an intelligent human being of his free agency is to commit the crime of the ages.

Impelling motives of this archenemy to liberty were pride, ambition, a sense of superiority, a will to dominate his fellows and to be exalted above them, and a determination to deprive human beings of their freedom to speak and to act as their reason and judgment would dictate.

So fundamental in man's eternal progress is his inherent right to choose, that the Lord would defend it even at the price of war. Without freedom of thought, freedom of choice, freedom of action within lawful bounds, man cannot progress. The Lord recognized this, and also the fact that it would take man thousands of years to make the earth habitable for self-governing individuals. Throughout the ages advanced souls have yearned for a society in which liberty and justice prevail. Men have sought for it, fought for it, have died for it. Ancient freemen prized it, slaves longed for it, the Magna Charta demanded it, the Constitution of the United States declared it.

A second obligation that impels us to become participants in this world war is loyalty to government. The greatest responsibility of the state is to guard the lives, and to protect the property and rights of its citizens; and if the state is obligated to protect its citizens from lawlessness within its boundaries, it is equally obligated to protect them from lawless encroachments from without—whether the attacking criminals be individuals or nations.

From treachery the state is in duty bound to protect itself, and its only effective means of doing so under present world conditions is by armed forces. As a Church:

We believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and property, and the government from the unlawful assaults and encroachments of all persons in times of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to laws, and relief afforded. (D&C 134:11)

Even though we sense the hellish origin of war, even though we feel confident that war will never end war, yet under existing conditions we find ourselves as a body committed to combat this evil thing. With other loyal citizens we serve our country as bearers of arms, rather than remaining aloof to enjoy a freedom for which others have fought and died.

One purpose of emphasizing this theme is to give encouragement to young men now engaged in armed conflict and to reassure them that they are fighting for an eternal principle fundamental to the peace and progress of mankind.

Today (Easter) as we celebrate the resurrection of our Lord and Savior, there is a cloud of spiritual heaviness hanging over the world, as there was darkness at the time of the crucifixion. Let us hope that when this sad orgy shall have ended, that the honest in heart will experience a spiritual resurrection and will associate with one another in a newness of life. As seeds of future wars are often sown around the peace table, may the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ and not the spirit of retaliation and revenge actuate those who meet to determine peace terms. When that blessed occasion comes, may the representatives of the nations recognize the inalienable rights of peoples everywhere to govern themselves.

WAR FOR FREEDOM

IT is well for us to keep in mind (1) the things against which we are fighting; and, (2) the ideals for which we have our all on the altar.

This war had an evil origin. True, its roots may be found in resentment at the terms of the Versailles Treaty. People were exasperated over the miseries of war, over financial exploitations that followed inflation in Germany and of the threats of communism, but the real causes lie in the violation of honor and integrity, and in a desire to dominate and to make powerful a supposedly super race.

The doctrine of freedom upon which the Government of the United States is founded is interwoven with belief in God and the principles of Christianity. When we fight for freedom of speech, the right to worship, we fight for the preservation of the very soul of America. Lose that soul and we lose our liberty. Contrary to the totalitarian ideal that the individual exists for the State, the doctrine of freedom declares that "everything must be within humanity, nothing against humanity, nothing outside of humanity." Therefore, as against the tyranny and despotism of totalitarianism and dictatorship, let us willingly and heroically defend the Constitution of this land that guarantees to every citizen of the Republic, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and favors the divine pronouncement that the souls of men are precious in the sight of God.

This is an age when we need men of courage to defend the virtues that spring from the eternal source of Truth, as leaves and fruit upon a living tree. Some of these we name Honor, Fair Dealing, Sacredness of a Contract, whether between persons, cities, states, or nations—Temperance, Loyalty, Reverence. Springing from the source of Evil are Lying, Thieving, Confiscation of Property, Subjugation of Unoffending Nations — miserable spawn that are born in hell itself.

You men have been accepted as a unit for training because you cherish in common high ideals. You believe in the elevation, not the degradation of humanity. You have been taught that acts of stealing, of greed, lying and adultery, are abhorrent no matter under what guise they may be committed either by individuals or nations. You believe in the brotherhood, not the conquest of man—a brotherhood that involves confidence in your brother, not suspicion and hatred. It involves truthful dealings, not chicanery and fraud.

WAR—A CURSE TO MANKIND

NEARLY 2,700 years have passed since the eye of prophecy visioned a time when "war shall be no more." (Micah 4:3-5) During the intervening centuries, many nations have lifted up sword against nations; and war has continued to be one of mankind's greatest evils. The latest (I wish we could say confidently the last) was one of the most devastating in the history of the world. What destruction, sorrow, and suffering it has caused!

We are close enough to the tragedy to realize that war is the greatest curse that can be detailed upon mankind. Under its standards gather violence, malignity, rage, fraud, perfidy, rapacity, and lust. We wonder how many more years will pass before "they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid," till in Lord Tennyson's words: " . . . the war-drums throbbed no longer, and the battle-flags were furled in the parliament of man, the Federation of the world."

Because of terrible forces, newly discovered, scientists and military experts are now saying that all present means of defense are inadequate, are in fact already antiquated, and must be changed if the world is to be protected from future devastation. I would that these men of reputed wisdom and foresight would lay equal emphasis on the fact that the future safety of the world depends on the changing of men's ways of thinking and acting. Human beings and nations must have a change of mind. Hate and envy, suspicion and greed must be supplanted by sympathy, forbearance, tolerance, and justice before the hoped-for time comes that "nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more."

Now that another terrible war is over, the paramount question is—Are human minds equal to the problems they must face? Are minds sufficiently filled with virtues needed in the present crisis?

Yes, World War II is ended, but old battles are yet to be fought, new victories yet to be won, before the peace for which we pray can be realized.

What are these battles to be fought?

1) Man's suspicion and lack of trust in his fellow human beings is one of the greatest enemies of peace. Nations are distrustful of one another.

2) The battle against Godlessness must still be fought. Nietsche is dead, but the poisonous seed that he and others like him have sown in blindness and bitterness still produce fruit of skepticism and unbelief. Spiritual attainment, not physical possessions, not the indulgence and the gratification of impulses, must become the chief goal. I cannot imagine peace in a world from which God and religion are banished.

3) Another old battle still raging, and one we must win before permanent peace is established on earth, is the battle against selfishness; it is the root from which spring most human ills and suffering. Unless the battle against selfishness is won at the peace table, our hopes for a permanent peace may be shattered, and the world again stricken in warfare.

4) A fourth old battle that is still raging, and in which the opposition seems to be gaining ground, is the battle against intemperance. Intemperance goes hand in hand with lawlessness, and lawlessness is an enemy of peace.
