David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Weber College

My dear Friends:

LAST evening your beloved president, Dr. Dixon, called to see me at the hospital and graciously left three or four books, more or less profound, for my entertainment and instruction during convalescence. He also reminded me that January 8 is Founder's Day.

After he left, I lay in reminiscent mood trying to analyze the real source of my affection for this cherished institution.

I concluded first that this attachment is rooted in the fact that not a few years of my life are interwoven in its history and growth. As a youth of 16 I was a student in its first rented home in the Second Ward Meetinghouse. Three instructors of that period stand out in memory — Principal Moench, Professor Haag, and Professor Pedersen. Later I was a student when it entered its first new home on Jefferson Avenue. In September, 1899, I became a member of the faculty, and later was appointed principal. From then on in my interest and affection the welfare of Weber was second only to the welfare of my family and loved ones. During that period the faculty, as loyal a group as ever taught school, assumed the responsibility of building this $45,000 addition in which you meet today. Funds were raised by soliciting contributions from loyal patrons in Weber county, from the Church, and from Henry Peery and Samuel Newhouse of Salt Lake City. People are interested in that which they help to make or build. Service is the road that leads to love. Thus after twelve to fourteen years of interest and intimacy, part of my very self, as that of my fellow teachers, seems to linger in the halls and classrooms of fondly-cherished Weber.

However, there is a more intimate bond. What I learned in the classes during the old Second Ward experience has undoubtedly become sealed in memory's crevasses. I cannot recall anything specific; but I shall never forget my classmates of that happy adolescent period. When I meet them now after the passing of half a century I'm surprised to see how old they have grown. Occasionally, I note an expression in their faces that indicates that they are equally surprised at me. I recalled them reminiscently last night. Some have crossed the Great Divide, but they and those who still trudge toward the hilltop have been and are honorable citizens, a credit to the school and to the community.

The courses taken in the first new home of Weber are more distinct, particularly the lessons in physics and English literature; but in detail these, too, are hazy; but my schoolmates I can still name by the score. Several have gained renown in music, art, education, and business. Nearly all have made happy homes—all reflect honor upon the school that impressed them with the value of high ideals. They are like brothers and sisters, and their home is Weber.

But nearer still are the students who crowded these halls from 1900 to 1910. To the teachers they are as their own boys and girls. After thirty, thirty-five, nearly forty years, I meet them now in different parts of Utah, Idaho, Wyoming, Nevada, and California. Strangely enough I remember them still as students, and am surprised to meet men and women whose features are furrowed by the passing years—parents now they are and even grandparents. But their countenances still glow when we mention the happy days in Weber, and my heart warms as I see them worthy citizens and not a few of them able leaders in civic, religious, and political life. Of all that number I can recall only three who have besmeared the purple and white by trailing it in the dust of dissipation and dishonor. All the others as they march along hold that banner unsullied as it waves in royal dignity and honor.

So, as I search for the source of my affection for the good old school, I find it not in its architecture, not in its brick walls, its beams and rafters, not even in the classrooms that connote so many fond memories, nor in the scholastic courses of study and the efficient instruction of the professors who compose the excellent faculty, but in the personal integrity and worth of the hundreds and thousands of students who in their lives in this old work-a-day world exemplify the ideals for which Weber Stake Academy—now Weber College—has ever stood.

These ideals are the eternal verities—individual freedom to choose one's life as long as one does not deprive another of that same right; integrity, fair dealing, unbroken pledges whether spoken or written, faith in God and belief that there is still good in our fellow men.

For the preservation of these and other fundamental virtues democracies of the world are at this very hour fighting on the high seas and on European battle fields. To reconsecrate itself to the application of these indispensable elements in true civilization is today the world's most pressing need.

These and every other fundamental truth and noble virtue dear old Weber has ever held aloft as worthy ideals. God bless the students who cherish them, and who, after graduation, exemplify them in their lives, thus reflecting added luster and honor to their beloved alma mater—Weber College—cherished by our county, admired by our state, and honored by all who have come under her influence.
