David O. McKay, Pathways to Happiness ( 1957)

* Welfare

THE CHURCH SECURITY PLAN

THE paramount purpose of the Church Security Plan is to help people to help themselves, to supplant dependence by independence; indolence and idleness by thrift and work.

Merely to supply food, clothing, and shelter for those who are in need is not a difficult task for the Church with its complete organization, as a glance at its ecclesiastical groupings, its priesthood quorums, and its auxiliary organizations will readily show.

Each stake is presided over by three high priests known as the stake presidency, assisted by 12 men who constitute the high council, advisers to and representatives of the stake presidency. Under the jurisdiction of these 15 men are groups of high priests, seventies, and elders, and auxiliary associations designated as follows: Relief Society, Sunday School, Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association and Primary. In a stake capacity, these are known as stake officers and have general jurisdiction over all the wards within the boundaries of the stake.

The number of wards in each stake varies. They number from 4 or 5 to 20, or even more. But each stake is complete in its organization, is indeed a Church in miniature. The ward group is presided over also by three high priests known as the bishopric. They have as their representatives members of the priesthood quorums who act as ward teachers. There are also in the ward, groups of young men made up of priests, ages 17 to 20; teachers, ages 15 to 16, and also groups of deacons made up of boys ranging in age from 12 to 14 inclusive. There are also auxiliary groups in the ward as designated above in the stake.

It is the responsibility of each of these groups to look after the welfare of its members. Thus in the performance of this Church duty, which is carried out without monetary consideration, the financial as well as the spiritual condition of each family may be obtained. This condition is reported to the bishop whose duty it is to render such assistance as the family may need, either financial or spiritual.

Giving something for nothing as a grant is contrary to the fundamental teachings of the Church. The real purpose of the Church Security Plan is to produce independence on the part of each individual, to make him self-supporting, to replace idleness with thrift and productivity.

Many instances might be cited in which by supplying a little money men have been enabled to recuperate their finances, to re-establish themselves in business, and to go on as independent citizens. For the purpose of carrying on this part of the program, the Church has set up a non-profit organization known as the Co-operative Security Corporation. It was incorporated in the State of Utah April 21, 1937, and was qualified in the State of Idaho June 23, 1937, and in the State of Arizona July 8, 1937. It will be qualified in other states as conditions require. This corporation is entitled to make loans, taking securities for loans. It will take title to all property, both real and personal, that comes to it from the co-operation of this program. The capital with which it carries on its work is provided so far by the general Church funds.

FOUR FUNDAMENTALS OF THE CHURCH SECURITY PLAN

THE FIRST fundamental principal upon which the success of this movement depends is the cherishing in our hearts of the spirit of Christ. Charles Zublin, an international authority on city government, once commented upon the group spirit as he perceived it working in the Church. One day as a few of us were driving Dr. Zublin to view the Davis and Weber County canal, he chanced to inquire about some phases of the Mormon Church. Among other things, he asked about what we mean by the term "ward." We then explained that it means a group of from 150 to 500 or 1000 people organized for mutual aid and general assistance to the Church, and that from four to ten or more groups constitute a larger group called a stake, and that within the ward are groups of young men, Priests, Teachers and Deacons. There are also women's groups, the Relief Society, the Young Women's Mutual Association, Primary, and older men's groups, each working for the welfare of the whole. We reached our destination before we had explained the rest of the organization of the Church. As he stood on the bank of the canal, looking at it, yet thinking of something else, he said, "How can we introduce that ward group idea into every city in the United States?"

"Just what do you mean?" we asked.

"Why, that feeling of each individual working for the welfare of the whole."

We answered, "You must have a common interest."

"Yes," he said, "but must that common interest be a religious one?"

"We do not know," we answered, "but it is a religious one here, and it works well."

When the individual is right, the community will be right. The challenge is here and we are going to meet it, but we cannot meet it successfully unless we keep the spirit of Christ in our hearts. That is a fundamental principle.

The second fundamental is courtesy and consideration. "Courtesy is to society what oil is to machinery." Each one will recognize his duty and act in the office to which he has been appointed in all diligence, as a member of a committee, or as a member of a quorum. Ward, stake and regional committees have been appointed authoritatively, and in their respective positions represent the Authorities of the Church. The mere matter of courtesy or of proper recognition should prompt each member to confer with the rightly-appointed group.

Now to the third principle—that of keeping confidence. It may happen that as officers and representatives in this work you may observe things and may receive confidences which you should keep inviolate. Investigation will be necessary in order to avoid duplication of orders, and, in some cases, unwarranted requests. When a man or woman finds out what the conditions of a particular family are, the information thus received must not be made public. Thus backbiting and evil speaking may be avoided. Gossip and slander sometimes injure reputations, and the innocent are made to suffer. Keeping confidence is a very important element in the success of this work, because men and women are susceptible to injury, their hearts are tender, and little children are so easily hurt.

The fourth fundamental is quorum consciousness. As an illustration of what these groups may do, let us take for example an Elders' quorum composed of 96 men. Sixty of them we shall assume are getting along fairly well and are independent of any outside help. They go to work in the morning, come home each night, and at the end of the month, receive their checks or other financial rewards for their labors. But what about the other 36? Twenty of these, perhaps, have only one-half month's work and the other 16 no employment at all. Now, if the 80 men who have employment or part employment—or even a majority of them were to consult together each week, and through their various committees consider the welfare of their associates, I am sure that in most cases help could be provided for the 16 who are in need of it. Let these 80 men of the quorum go over the "make-work projects" one by one and decide specifically upon jobs for their unemployed associates. Every quorum should meet at least once a month to make such assignments and render such help.

It is surprising how apparently insurmountable difficulties are overcome, and how new avenues of promise are opened. By co-operative effort we can accomplish much. New jobs can be found for the unemployed, farms can be saved, and new industries established.

Our objectives are for others' comfort and happiness. Let the spirit of co-operation guide and influence you in your work unto success!

SPIRITUALITY IN THE WELFARE PLAN

THE development of our spiritual nature should concern us most. Spirituality is the highest acquisition of the soul, the divine in man. It is the consciousness of victory over self and of communion with the infinite. It is spirituality alone which really gives one the best in life.

It is something to supply clothing to the scantily clad, to furnish ample food to those whose table is thinly spread, to give activity to those who are fighting desperately the despair that comes from enforced idleness, but after all is said and done, the greatest blessings that will accrue from the Church Security Plan are spiritual.

There is more spirituality expressed in giving than in receiving. The greatest spiritual blessing comes from helping another. If you want to be miserable, just harbor hate for a brother, and if you want to hate, just do your brother some injury. But if you would be happy, render a kind service, make somebody else happy.

Tens of thousands of people who have co-operatively worked to make the Welfare Plan a success have been motivated by a desire to have the Church a living activity for good. Christ's Church is His vineyard in which He invites everybody to work.

There is also the realization that we are doing something to make the world better. The church is a means of rendering mutual service in order and wisdom. Jesus Christ is its author. He Himself, while in mortality, was the personification and exemplification of brotherhood and spirituality, and it is He who says to you and to all the world, "Learn of Me and listen to My words; walk in the meekness of My spirit and ye shall have peace in Me."
