Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Preface

Children of the Noble Birthright

When we consider what it means to raise up a family to the Lord, we must ask ourselves a few questions: Who is this generation that we are attempting to raise up to the Lord? Are they really the children of the noble birthright? What part will they play in this final dispensation of time? Let me illustrate in part the answer to those questions with something that happened in our family a few years ago.

One of our older sons was working in a cemetery, and my younger sons and I used to go there in the evening and scare him. That was probably not the thing to do, but we all enjoyed it, including the son who worked there. Once when we were kidding about it at supper, I told him, "Son, if you have any spare time up there, why don't you dig a big hole for your father. It ought to be about six and a half feet long and six feet deep. You may as well get it ready." One of my other boys said, "Yeah, do one for me, too. When the day comes for me to be called home, I'll be ready." We all laughed about it.

However, another son very seriously said, "Well, you won't need one for me."

"Why not?" we asked.

"Because I'm not going to die."

We all laughed and said, "Surely you're going to die. Everybody's going to die. Nobody escapes death."

He said, "Well, I'm not planning on it."

I could tell he meant what he had said, so I pursued it further. "What do you mean?" I asked.

"After hearing about my friend's patriarchal blessing and some other things, I hope I'll be here when the Savior comes," he replied. "I hope I'll be caught up and changed in the twinkling of an eye, so I won't need some cemetery plot."

We could see he was very serious about the idea, and who were we to say otherwise? Perhaps what he said will come to pass. It was a serious thought that reminded me of the inspired question, "Who is this generation we are raising up to the Lord?"

My wife and I were somewhat sobered some days later to see our six-year-old son come home with a T-shirt they'd given him at school. Across the front of this beautiful green shirt were the words The Class of 2000. We were quite taken aback to think that one of our own would be graduating in that year. Of course, no one knows when the Lord will come but our Father in heaven. But certainly the time is drawing closer. It may well be that this generation we are attempting to raise up to the Lord will be the generation to meet him when he comes. At any rate, we must give our best effort to prepare this generation to receive him, either in this life or the next.
