Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Introduction

Raising Up a Family to the Lord

A couple of years ago while on a plane to a stake conference, I sat by a couple in their sixties, both of whom were faithful members of the Church. After we had discussed the gospel a little, the woman began to pour out her heart to me about her six children. She felt that she and her husband had been fairly successful with four of them, but two had turned completely away from the Church, rebelling at everything that was good.

Through her tears she said, "What did we do wrong? They went through the Young Men and Young Women programs, through Boy Scouts, through all the activities the Church provided. We made sure they were active in the Church, believing that would keep them on the right track.

"We also believed that if we fulfilled all of our Church callings, which we did, our children would be blessed and protected. Now we're confused—we don't know what we could have done differently."

This good woman nearly begged me to explain to her and her husband what they had done wrong or to tell them if they had misplaced their faith in the "systems" of the Church. She was brokenhearted and desperate for an answer. She also expressed great concern about the upcoming generation and what she should do to influence her active children and grandchildren. All in all, it was a touching, heartbreaking discussion with her and her husband.

As I listened to this good couple, I lamented with them about what had happened to their family. My heart was drawn out in sympathy, and I wanted somehow to help them. I've thought many times since that day about some of the hard questions they asked. For example, "If you do your duty, will the Lord take care of your family?" "If you fulfill your callings faithfully, to what degree will the Lord help with your family and 'take up the slack'?" "What influence can we have on our children and grandchildren when they're not living daily under our tutelage in our own home?"

Is it natural that some children are just going to rebel? After all, a third of the hosts of heaven did. Also, some of Adam's children and some of Lehi's did. Are there things we can do to ensure, to some degree, that none of our children will be lost and that none will rebel? Why do things seem to go fairly smoothly in some families while others seem to have all kinds of difficulties? Why is it that in some families some of the children have turned out all right and others, at least so far, have not? Why do children rebel? Are children, in the beginning, all good and holy and wholesome? Does responsibility for their rebellion rest with the parents, with the children, or with both?

The prophets have given some specific hope and counsel about such questions as came from this good couple. Elder Boyd K. Packer has said, "It is a great challenge to raise a family in the darkening mists of our moral environment" ("Our Moral Environment," Ensign, May 1992, p. 68). President Harold B. Lee said, "We emphasize that the greatest work you will do will be within the walls of your home" (Ensign, July 1973, p. 98). President David O. McKay said, "No other success can compensate for failure in the home" (Improvement Era, June 1964, p. 445).

The measure of our success as parents, however, will not rest solely on how our children turn out. That judgment might be just if we could raise our families in a perfectly moral environment, but that is not now possible. And even if it were, they would still have the agency to choose for themselves. Were not the lost third of the hosts of heaven raised in our heavenly home?

Even good and responsible parents sometimes lose children to influences over which they have no control. They agonize over rebellious sons or daughters. They are puzzled about why they feel so helpless when they have tried so hard to do what they should. It is my conviction that those wicked influences will one day be overruled.

Elder Orson F. Whitney, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, once said:

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared—and he never taught more comforting doctrine—that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return. They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God. (Conference Report, April 1929, p. 110.)

This promise gives hope to all of us. The real purpose of this book will be to try to describe what the role of parents is and what they can do to be as faithful as possible and thereby assist in the redemption of their children, particularly for those who go astray. Thus this book will try to deal with some of the hard realities, such as:

Â What do you do when a child does not want to pray?

Â Are all family prayers spiritual ones, or at times are they somewhat routine or even, on occasion, humorous?

Â What can you expect from family home evenings?

Â How do you handle difficult problems when children do not want to read the scriptures with the family?

Â Do you get children up in the morning to read the scriptures, or do you read at night?

Â What do you do to keep children from rebelling against what is right?

Â How do you handle children who don't want to get a job in their teen years?

Â What do you do with a child who may want to have an undesirable friend?

Â How do you teach your children to be self-reliant?

Â What kinds of family activities help develop spiritual maturity?

Â How do you handle discipline?

Â Are family rules necessary?

Â How important is the content of family prayers?

Â What can be done to make routine experiences into spiritual ones?

I salute all of the parents of Zion. I salute the active parents, the less-active parents, the part-member families, and the single-adult parents, for raising a family is one of the greatest challenges of life.

After my mission, I thought, "If I can just get married, all of my problems will be solved." How naive I was! I knew nothing of the challenges that naturally come with marriage and children. I repeat, I salute the families of the Church for the challenges they face and the countless decisions they must make as they faithfully lead their children to do what is right.

A Note on Marriage and Single Parents

By design, this book centers upon the relationship of parents and children. I have purposely not written about the relationship of husbands and wives. However, in stressing the relationship between parents and children, I have assumed that the relationship between husband and wife is healthy, viable, and strong.

I recognize that many homes have only one parent. I am convinced that they, too, can employ the practices described in this book and be successful, even though it may be more difficult than if there were two parents. Sometimes a family has just one parent because of death or divorce. Sometimes only one parent is a member of the Church. Sometimes one is less active than the other. Just the same, one spiritually motivated parent can successfully raise up a family to the Lord. Some of the best men and women I have known have come from such families. May the Lord always bless those good mothers and fathers who may think they have to do it "on their own" but actually bring up their children under the direction of the Lord.

In families with two parents, the husband and wife must always keep in mind that their relationship is more important than the relationship between parents and children. In time, the children will grow up and start their own homes and families, and the tie to their own children will probably be stronger than that to their parents. But the husband and wife will be together always. If they are faithful, their marriage will be eternal.

Thus, from the time a husband and wife are married, they must continue to strengthen their relationship. They must be particularly careful during and after the years they have children at home. Often husbands go off to work while wives become involved with their children's problems and perhaps schooling or employment after the children have left home. Couples must be careful not to invest so much time in their children, work, and other activities that they lose touch with each other. After the children are gone, some parents sit and look at each other, not knowing what to do. Many marriages have broken up after the children have gone because the husband and wife no longer knew each other. Over the years they have grown apart. Thus, as couples bring up their families, they must also take time for each other.

The purpose of this book is to help parents, no matter what their marital status, raise up their children to the Lord. In it I have tried to teach true principles and then give scores of stories, illustrations, and examples so the principles can be clearly understood and applied by anyone. I hope and pray that this effort will help thousands of parents to better raise up their children to the Lord.

Normal Family Challenges

To emphasize the everyday challenges families face, let me list some of the challenges we shared with our eight children over a two-week period—sort of a "snapshot" of their lives:

Returned missionary, age twenty-one: How can he find a wife? Should he enroll in college? Will his grades be good enough? Will he have to work while going to school? Will he be able to get a job? How can he use his faith to find a job when "there are none"? How can he live while he has no money to draw upon? What financial assistance should he expect from his parents? How can the parents help him while still allowing him to be self-reliant? Should he buy a car? If he buys one, should he pay cash or buy it on credit? Should his parents co-sign with him or not be liable? How does he adjust to life when he has lived in a protected environment and must now return to "the world"?

Boy on a mission, age nineteen: Who finances his mission? If his parents finance it, how will they make ends meet? Who writes letters to him week after week? Do all the family take turns, or does one person do most of it? How can we encourage him when he is down? What principles should we try to teach him in our letters? How can we more effectively pray for him and his investigators? How can we better convey our love to him? How do we help him when his companion is discouraged or uncooperative? How do we tell him about what is happening at home without making him homesick? How do we deal with his girlfriend who likes to visit us regularly?

Boy, age eighteen: Girls, girls, girls! Do parents get him up early to go to work, or does he get up on his own? Problems with friends; difficulties with girlfriends. Who decides what time he comes home at night from a date? How many dates should he have? Whom should he date? Who decides his bedtime and his time to get up? How do we manage sharing and use of the car? Who puts gas in the car? Who pays for the gas? How much time should he spend with the family? How much with friends? How do we let him spread his wings and leave the nest without knocking the nest down? How often can he go skiing? How much money should he save? How much should he spend? Does he pay his tithing promptly? How much should he save for his mission? How much time should he study? How much time should he have fun? How many ball games should he go to? How many games should he watch on TV? How can we help him have more initiative?

Girl, age sixteen: Boys, boys, boys! Who decides on dress standards? How short is too short? How stylish is too stylish? Is she overweight? Is she underweight? How can we counteract the influence of peers? Should she go to the dance? Will she be asked to go? How often can she use the car? Where can she go? Should she put gas in the car? Does she eat properly, or does she eat too much junk food? Does she fast too much or not enough? Piano lessons. Flute lessons. Who sets the standard on television shows, especially those that are questionable but that "everyone else at school watches"? Who handles the ups and downs of her emotions? Who handles the stresses of sensitivity between allegiance to friends and allegiance to family? How can she handle the pressure of a Church calling? How can she help a friend in trouble? How can she deal with hurt feelings? Who will go with her to the swim meet, the school play, the a cappella choir presentation? Who provides the needed priesthood blessings? Who provides the long talks that always come late at night? Who helps her build her self-esteem?

Girl, age thirteen; Telephone calls, telephone calls, telephone calls! How can we have patience to answer the phone (again) when we know the call will be for her? Who handles the emotional roller-coaster ride of puberty? Who handles the talks about exercise and weight? What do we do about flute lessons and piano lessons? How can she handle challenges with grades and school work? Friends, friends, friends! If she needs to go to the store or to school or to various activities, who will drive? Since she is too young to get a job, how can she earn money? How much should she spend? How much should she save? What if her financial needs are greater than the family can provide? What movies can she watch? What videos? How many, how often, and with whom? What music can she listen to? Can she have a tape player? What radio stations are allowed? How can she handle problems with a teacher? Can she wear big earrings, little earrings, or no earrings at all? Can she wear makeup? How much? Who decides? How often should she baby-sit? What if she has agreed to baby-sit but now doesn't want to? How do we handle the dozens of school activities, plays, concerts, Church activities, and so on?

Boy, age eleven: Friends, friends, friends! Awakening feelings for a girlfriend. Doors left open. Bed left unmade. Messy room. Face needs washing. Hair needs combing. Shirt needs to be tucked in. Tennis shoes need to be tied. Needs to learn gentleness with girls. "I'm bored." Is he proficient in division and multiplication? Who makes sure? Who takes him through the flashcards? Piano lessons. Reading assignments. Who helps with science? With English? Do we just accept handwriting as a total loss? What can he cook? He focuses mainly on brownies, cookies, cakes, and pies—but how often is too often? Who helps him with cookie sales to the neighborhood? Who decides what TV shows are appropriate? Who assigns chores? Who will play chess and checkers with him? Who will go walking with him? Who will make sure he writes in his journal and reads the scriptures? Who will drive him to the store? Who will get him to bed on time?

Boy, age seven: Who will help him practice his reading? Who will help with his handwriting? Who will help with arithmetic? Who helps him clean his room? What do we do about pajamas in the bathroom, bedspread on the floor, tennis shoes on the pillow, gum on the bedpost, and marbles in the shower? Dog to be fed? "It's not my turn." "Chores are for girls." "Housework, especially, is for girls." "Girls are dumb." Who teaches him to clean the kitchen? Who will take him to the store, to school, to activities? Mud on the carpet; toys in the garage; bike on the front porch. Broken collarbone from falling from a tree. Short prayers. Very little clean-up and hang-up but lots of mess-up. How can we be more loving and tolerant?

Girl, age four: Love, love, love! Games, games, games! Wants to be involved with the older kids but is left out of most things: "She's too little." Struggles in conversations to get in her "two bits." Time to go to bed; time to get up. Time to learn her ABCs, to draw, to write the alphabet. Problems with friends. Problems in not having friends. "Mommy, can I play?" "Can so-and-so come over?" "Guess what? Guess what?" Excitement about telephone calls. Dirty face, messy hair. Forgot to brush her teeth. Learning to work around the house. Talk, talk, talk! "Mom, what can I do?" "Do I have to?" "Tell me just one more story." "You forgot to come in and pray with me."

Seeing this brief snapshot of typical family life should make us humbly salute all parents, especially those who in dedication respond to the needs of their children. Parents all over the Church face such challenges every day of their lives. Even when many of the responsibilities belong to the children, who has to teach the children to accept them! Good old Mom and Dad. The numbers of decisions to be made, the judgment required, the sensitivity, love, inspiration, diligence, and hard work needed to raise children are beyond anyone's ability to describe. Even after the children have left home, the responsibilities of parents do not end. Instead, they expand as children marry and begin raising children of their own.

Raising a Family with the Spirit of the Lord

I bear testimony that parents cannot adequately raise their children without direction from the Lord. The challenge is too great, and the consequences are eternal.

President Ezra Taft Benson often said that his goal was to have "no empty chairs" in heaven. He wanted every member of his family to be there. He has counseled:

Make it a family objective to all be together in the celestial kingdom. Strive to make your home a little bit of heaven on earth so that after this life is over, you may be able to say:

We are all here! Father, mother, sister, brother, All who hold each other dear. Each chair is filled— We're all at home. . . . We're all—all here (Ensign, November 1981, p. 107).

Is that not the objective of all good parents? Was this not the concern of the good couple I spoke with on the plane? There are no perfect families. There are no families without problems. There are no families who "have everything together." Part of the purpose of life is to learn how to raise a family in the face of the adversities and trials that come in mortality.

President Spencer W. Kimball, in providing comfort to some who had lost their children to unfaithfulness, commented on the proverb "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it" (Proverbs 22:6). He said, "As a prophet, perhaps I would say that the scripture could very well read, 'Train up a child in the way he should go, and if it even be that he is old, he will ultimately return to it.' " Above all else, parents must never give up hope. There are things they can do to bring back family members who have strayed, many of which will be discussed in this book.

This book was not intended to provide an academic approach to raising families. In it you will find very little theory and no high-sounding words, flowery concepts, or beautifully organized plans. Instead, I have tried to emphasize the hard realities of raising a family from the point of view of a father, a mother, and their children. I have used many stories and examples to illustrate key elements of how to help children pray, read the scriptures, have faith, and repent. I have tried to show the impact of love, discipline, work, and the Spirit of the Lord upon a family. I apologize for all of the personal examples about our family or people close to us, but I know no way to write such a book without such stories. As you read these stories and examples, please try to overlook the personalities and watch for the principles that made an experience a success or, because of our weakness, made it go not so smoothly.

Although the principles of how to raise a family to the Lord never change, the personality of each father, mother, and child is unique, and how they apply those principles will also be unique. Thus we should never critique one another in our skill as parents. Situations and circumstances vary widely from family to family, and only the Lord, in his ultimate wisdom, can properly render any such judgment. I have a feeling that even then, most of the judgments will be our own, as we may have a clearer view of what we have done or not done in raising our families.

Those who feel they have all the answers about raising a family may still have a lot to learn. The very idea of something so challenging will humble all good parents, leaving them with more questions than answers. On the other hand, in raising a family, particularly a large family, parents do learn much, and by sharing the principles they have learned, they may help others. That is the purpose of this book.

If we would follow the counsel of the Lord more directly, more of the true fruits we desire in raising a family would be ours. Alma said it beautifully: "My son, I trust that I shall have great joy in you, because of your steadiness and your faithfulness unto God; . . . I say unto you, my son, that I have had great joy in thee already, because of thy faithfulness" (Alma 38:2-3). John also said it well: "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth" (3 John 1:4).

Marriage and Attempts to Have a Family

Let me share a personal experience that taught us to better trust in the Lord even in the face of challenges and trials. Perhaps this example will start us at the beginning, before children arrive in a family on earth.

After my mission, I had a great desire to be married. Part of that feeling came from a young lady who waited two and a half years for me. More importantly, though, I had studied the scriptures enough to know, in some measure, the great value of being married and raising a family.

When I returned home, things did not work out with the young lady who had waited for me. Seven months later, though, I married Janelle Schlink in the Mesa Arizona Temple. We both had great desires to have a family and were pleased and delighted that at last the time had come when we could do so. Our friends began to have their families—a boy here, a girl there. Nine months passed, a year, a year and a half, two years of waiting. Still no children came.

I gave my wife priesthood blessings two or three times during those years, promising that she would conceive and bear children. Still nothing happened. Three years, then three and a half years went by, and then four. During this time, my wife had a miscarriage that was very traumatic. That was the only time I saw her discouraged. I suppose our desires and expectations were so high that to finally conceive and then to lose the baby was devastating.

Finally five years passed by. We determined to seriously consider adoption. I spent a number of occasions alone over a period of weeks praying about it, as my wife felt better about adopting than I did. Finally, I definitely received an answer that we should adopt. It helped me when I recalled that Jesus was adopted by Joseph, the husband of Mary; that Joseph Smith had two adopted children; and that one of my best friends had just adopted a baby girl. All in all, it felt like the right thing to do.

We put our names in for adoption through the Relief Society and were informed that it would be perhaps a year or more until we would be able to have a baby. The wait began.

A Priesthood Blessing

About this same time, we went to the Arizona Temple. After the session, we were visiting with a good brother, a longtime family friend. As we visited, it was determined that he ought to provide a blessing to my wife. We were overjoyed, as we knew that he was very close to the Lord. We told him we would be glad to have the blessing but thought we should fast and pray about it. We set a date for a few days later when we would all fast and come together for the blessing.

The appointed day arrived. We went to this good brother's home in the spirit of fasting and prayer. He gave my wife a beautiful blessing, very similar to those I had given her. He promised her that she would have natural children.

We left his home filled with the Spirit. To our great delight, about six weeks later the doctor confirmed that she was pregnant. We surely thanked the Lord in prayer and in fasting for the blessing we had received, trying to put as much effort into giving thanks as we had in asking for the blessing. We also called the adoption agency and had our names taken off the list, saying, "We're going to have our own baby now. Adoption won't be necessary." Our joy increased as the months passed by.

Added Trials

About four months into the pregnancy, I arrived home from work one day to find my wife weeping. She had just arrived home from the doctor's office; the doctor had found that the fetus was dead and would have to be removed immediately.

This was one of the only times I have hardened my heart against the Lord. "What more can we do?" I thought. "We're trying to keep the commandments. Thou hast commanded us to multiply and replenish the earth. We've fasted. We've prayed. We've had blessings. We've waited for five years. Thou hast not answered our prayers. And now we have to go through another miscarriage."

My wife said, "We've got to go right now. The hospital is waiting for us." Her bag was packed, and we went to the car to leave. As we drove out, she told me we ought to go by and tell this good brother and his wife about it. I said, "No, absolutely not." Feeling as I did at that moment, the last person I wanted to talk to was this spiritual priesthood holder who had given her the blessing. I refused to go.

As we drove off, my wife persisted. I continued to tell her no, that we wouldn't stop. Fortunately, this good brother's home was on the way to the hospital. She continued to persist. Finally I said, "Well, you go in. I'll just wait in the car." But that would not do; she thought I should be the one to tell them. I finally consented to briefly go in.

We knocked on the door. As soon as the man's wife saw us, she knew something was wrong. I emotionally blurted out what had happened, asked her to tell her husband, and then turned to leave. However, this faithful brother was in the next room and heard what was said. He immediately walked into the living room, fell to his knees, and said, "Let's pray." His wife knelt down, and my wife went over and knelt down. I was left standing there with no desire whatsoever to pray. Finally, probably from the pressure, I knelt down as well.

Then I learned a great lesson that has helped me with others on many occasions since that time. I heard a servant of the Lord pray with all of his soul. He poured out his heart, telling the Lord we didn't know why this had happened but that the priesthood blessing was still in full force. He said that we would humbly submit to this trial in spite of the apparent problems and difficulties and our strong feelings about them. He said that we knew the Lord loved us, and that we loved the Lord and would do whatever he commanded us to do. He confirmed with the Lord that we would humbly submit to this trial and to any other that might come—that we would trust in God.

This great leader in the priesthood, in that brief prayer, softened my heart. He removed, by the Spirit, all of my anger. He invited the Spirit of the Lord to return to me and humbled me, for which I will be ever grateful. We then left, humbled in spirit even though still saddened. We went to the hospital, where the surgery was performed.

Adoption

A few days later I was again alone in prayer. I felt a strong impression that my wife and I should immediately call the Relief Society adoption agency and put our names back on the list for adoptions. "Do it now," the Spirit whispered. "Right now!"

My wife and I immediately called them. They said, "We're glad to reinstate your name on the list. However, because you canceled out, it will take about a year and a half wait now."

We said, "Well, that's all right. We just want our names back on the list."

About three weeks later, I received a phone call at work. The Relief Society sister on the other end of the line said, "Would you like to have a baby son? If so, come and get him right now." I called my wife and rushed home. We could hardly believe our good fortune! We ran to the store to buy some diapers. We didn't even have any place to put the baby.

When we got to the adoption agency, they left the baby in a room with us and said, "We'll give you a few minutes to look him over and decide whether you really want him." He was unclothed. We checked him over from head to foot and found him in perfect condition. We just wept for joy.

We told them we would be very pleased to have him. We signed the papers, and the caseworker said, "As you know, there were many, many people before you on the list. You would have had a long time yet to wait, even if you had not taken your name off the list the first time. But as we went through the pictures of the families, we tried to place the baby but couldn't. We went over and over the pictures of people who were on the list way ahead of you. None of them felt right. We finally got down to some of the relatively new applicants, namely the Cooks, and felt the Spirit tell us, 'Place the boy there.' For that reason we called you."

We were overjoyed as we took the baby home. He ended up sleeping in a chest of drawers for the first few nights. We didn't have furniture, clothing, blankets, or anything for him as he was totally unexpected.

What a great joy to us to finally have a son! I'm sure we must have been the happiest parents in all of Mesa, Arizona. He was our boy. About a year and a half later, after the adoption was final, we had the great joy of taking him to the Arizona Temple to have him sealed to us for time and all eternity. At last we had a son. At last we were on our way to fulfilling the injunction of the Lord to multiply and replenish the earth.

Promises Fulfilled

About a year and a half later, six and a half years into our marriage, our first natural son arrived. A year and a half later another son came. Then a daughter arrived less than two years later. Another daughter graced our home three years after that. Then another son came less than two years later. He was followed by another son four years after that. Three years later another beautiful daughter arrived. How blessed we have been with our children!

Truly the Lord answers prayers and fulfills all of his promises. He has said, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you" (3 Nephi 18:20).

How true also are the words of Moroni, "I would show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6).

True it is that "after much tribulation come the blessings" (D&C 58:4).

It is easy to see, after the fact, the involvement of the Lord in an experience such as this one. I'm sure having had that challenge of no children for so many years caused us to do our best to be prepared when the children did come. We thank the Lord for a good family, as I'm sure you do as you think of your family.

I bear testimony that the Lord fulfills his promises. If we will do our part, be patient, and keep the commandments, the Lord will answer our prayers concerning our families. He will bless us in our sacred duty to raise up our children unto him.
