Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter One

The Individual, the Family, and the Church

Some years ago a fire erupted in the middle of the night, completely destroying a family's residence. A neighbor tried to console the family's seven-year-old, not knowing that he was about to be taught a great principle. "Johnny, it's sure too bad your home burned down," he said.

Johnny thought a moment and then said, "Oh, that's where you're mistaken. That wasn't our home; that was just our house. We still have our home; we just don't have anyplace to put it right now."

What a great principle that child taught about home. What does the word home bring to your mind? To some, it means a place to eat, a place to sleep, a place where worldly goods are stored. To others more spiritually inclined, it means a place where family is, where the heart is, a sacred place, a peaceful place, an escape from a wicked world.

The still, small voice whispers yet a deeper meaning: home is heaven. We are strangers here on earth. My real home is not here but there. My challenge is to learn how to make a home here on earth similar to the one I left in heaven. The Lord says we were taught "even before [we] were born." We "received [our] first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth . . . to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men" (D&C 138:56).

A good part of this teaching—perhaps the most important part—may have been to know how to labor at home. We were taught by the Lord, by the best of all teachers, and our task during mortality may be to relearn in the flesh what we once knew in the spirit.

How might I remember and rediscover what I once knew? The Lord answers, "Pray and I will make 'known unto [you things] . . . from the foundation of the world . . . according to [your] faith and . . . holy works' " (see Alma 12:30]. "I will 'bring all things [back] to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you' " (see John 14:26; Alma 12:30) "and [will enlarge] the memory of this people" (see Alma 37:8).

The Constitution of Family Life

This chapter is one of the most important chapters in the whole book as it attempts to lay a constitution or doctrinal base from which all the responsibilities of individuals, families, and the Church flow. It discusses in some detail the eternal view of family and home held by the Lord coming from the scriptures themselves. If we can clearly understand that divine role and the relationship that exists between us as individuals, the family, and the Church, we will have a much better understanding of what the Lord expects of us, of the things for which we will ultimately be held accountable with respect to ourselves and our families. You might be tempted to read through this chapter quickly or perhaps even skip over some of the material, as considerable emphasis is given to doctrinal matters. Please do not do so, and you will find the information of great benefit later in the book.

All Are Members of a Family

At times when we speak of home and family, some who are single or widowed might feel that these teachings don't apply to them. But when the Lord sent us here for our individual growth, he sent us to live with and be nurtured spiritually and temporally by a family. The Lord organized the whole earth this way. There is no other way to enter mortality.

You still may say, "I don't have a family. I'm all alone." May I remind you that you always were and ever will be a member of the family of God. You are his son or his daughter. It doesn't matter if your parents or spouse or brothers or sisters or children are members or nonmembers, living or dead; they are still your family. And if you are righteous and faithful to the end, no matter what your present status, you will ultimately be blessed as part of a family unit. Remember also that when the scriptures use the word family, they may be speaking not just of one's immediate family but also of an extended family—grandparents, great-grandparents, and so on. We must keep this extended view of family in mind in order to understand the instructions the Lord has given to families (particularly those instructions dealing with self-reliance).

Whether we are parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, uncles, cousins, or children—whether we're married or single—we must understand that in the Lord's view, we are part of a family. Regardless of our family situation, we must learn and live, to the degree we can, the principles governing family life in preparation for exaltation.

The Premortal Family Council

When I try to explain the eternal principles governing family life, the Spirit witnesses that we lived as a family before we came here, and that these principles are "burned into" our souls. "You're on the right track," it whispers. "Keep moving forward. Discover and live these principles related to families, and in time you will create a home on earth similar to the one you experienced in heaven."

If we are willing to listen, the Lord will teach us of the sacredness of that heavenly organization called family, called home.

For just a moment, imagine that you are in the premortal existence, in that council in heaven, yes, even a council of the Father's own family. Could not the Father have given us counsel like this: "My children, my children, marriage on earth will be ordained of God unto men [see D&C 49:15-16; 131:1-4].

"By divine decree, you will be copartners with God in bringing children to earth [see Genesis 1:22, 28; 2 Nephi 2:22-23; D&C 132:56-63].

"The family will be the principal agency for the spiritual and temporal nurturing of the individual [see Mosiah 4:14-15; D&C 68:25, .

"When you go to earth, teach your children to love the Lord thy God with all their hearts [see Deuteronomy 6:5-7] and to love and serve one another [see Mosiah 4:15].

"Pray in your families both morning, mid-day, and evening, and I will quicken your memory of these teachings [see 3 Nephi 18:21; Alma 34:21, 27; D&C 68:28].

"Teach your children repentance, faith in Christ, baptism, the gift of the Holy Ghost, priesthood covenants, and temple ordinances [see D&C 68:25, 27; 132:19]. Grandparents, uncles, and aunts, you can help.

"Consecrate your family resources to the Lord. Be free with your substance [see D&C 42:30-31; Jacob 2:17; D&C 119:1-7].

"Provoke not your children to wrath [see Ephesians 6:4], neither suffer that they fight and quarrel one with another, thus sowing seeds of contention [see Mosiah 4:14].

"Fathers-to-be, you will learn that true spiritual leadership is mostly at home, not so much in the world. Mothers-to-be, yours will be a sacred calling unlike any other, to raise these little children so they will someday be as I am. And unless all of you become as little children, you will not be able to return home to me.

"Learn your duty from living prophets and from the scriptures.

"Lastly, because of the sacred nature of parenthood, I will personally teach you, through the Holy Ghost, those things that matter most. Stay close to me; humbly ask for help."

Cautions from the Father

Perhaps the Father cautioned us in words like these:

"My children, the influence of the world will be strong, and there will be heavy influence to keep your families small. However, remember, 'As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children . . . . Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them' [Psalm 127:4-5].

"Remember to keep your family responsibilities as a priority. There will be many who will want to encroach upon your responsibility to teach and provide activities for your family. Never forget that yours is the primary responsibility, and that your ultimate success in all other endeavors will be in direct proportion to the attention you give these divinely appointed relationships [see D&C 88:119].

"Strive to be together. Avoid activities that would pull you apart. Remember, where love runs deep, so too do feelings and frictions, as love may become frustrated [see 2 Nephi 1:14, .

"As children, be sure to give heed to your father and mother, remembering that I, the Lord, have placed them over you. Honor them [see Exodus 20:12].

"Remember that once you are a parent, you will always be a parent, whether a grandparent, a great-grandparent, or a parent as I am. Your responsibilities to preside go on through the generations to help turn the hearts of the children to their fathers. Resist the temptation to be uninvolved, to retire from your family, and to follow only your own interests. As grandparents, your wisdom and vision will allow you to draw together your whole family, which I, the Lord, have given you [see Mosiah 2:5]."

Perhaps he concluded:

"My children, don't be too concerned about remembering all these things. When they are taught to you, they will seem wonderfully familiar, as if you had always known them. You will have, because you learned them here in your heavenly home [see 1 Nephi 15:8, .

"You will suffer affliction with your children in allowing them to grow and develop, just as I have suffered affliction with you [see D&C 133:52-53]. But don't be afraid; I have given my angels charge concerning you. I will send them from my very presence to be with you, to bear you up [see D&C 84:42, 88; 133:53]. This is your opportunity to experience what I have taught you. Follow the promptings of my Spirit. Remember that I love you."

The Exalted Concept of Home

Parents, whatever you are doing, return home.

Children, wherever you are, no matter what your failure, problem, or sin, you will always be loved by your family. Go home.

Grandparents, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, draw your families together. Return home. May the concept of home be exalted, for the Lord so organized it in the beginning.

I pay tribute to my grandparents, to my parents, especially to my wife, and to my children in having made my home the best place in all the world. There's no place I would rather be than home.

And lastly, may the day come when together we will sing this praise of home and family:

O my Father, thou that dwellest In the high and glorious place, When shall I regain thy presence And again behold thy face? In the heav'ns are parents single? No, the thought makes reason stare! Truth is reason; truth eternal Tells me I've a mother there. When I leave this frail existence, When I lay this mortal by, Father, Mother, may I meet you In your royal courts on high? Then, at length, when I've completed All you sent me forth to do, With your mutual approbation Let me come [home] and dwell with you ("O My Father," Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], no. 292].

The Role of the Individual, the Family, and the Church

Even with this divine understanding of home, some people become confused as they struggle to balance what they should do at home, as individuals, and in the Church. To be successful with our families, we must clearly understand our roles as individuals, the role the family plays in support of individuals, and the role the Church plays in supporting the individual and the family.

Diagram 1 illustrates the way some might incorrectly direct their families. You will notice the dark lines indicating that the Church is connected to and directed by the Lord and that the Church bypasses the family and is well connected to the individuals in the Church.

In this diagram, the relationship of the family to the individual and the family to the Lord is weak. The link from the individual to the family and to the Lord is also weak, the individual perhaps not having a proper understanding of the value of the Lord in his or her life and of the support the family can be. This approach is more chapel centered, meaning that the person's approach to a spiritual life is centered around the Church.

Diagram 2 shows the relationship that should properly exist between the Lord, the individual, the family, and the Church. The link is strongest between the individual and the Lord, for every person is saved individually, not as a member of a group. The family has a strong relationship with the Lord and with the individual, whom it supports in the quest for exaltation. Individuals are not exalted as singles but within a family unit. The Church appropriately makes available all the priesthood keys and necessary ordinances for the salvation of man. It is also directed by the Lord in its proper role as a support to the family and as a support to the individual.

Following are some specific principles that outline the roles of the individual, the family, and the Church. You might be tempted to read over them quickly, but I believe it is essential to understand them before reading what follows in this book. Please consider them carefully; you may also want to look up some of the scriptural references to broaden your understanding.

The Individual

a. The capacity to know good from evil through the Light of Christ (D&C 84:46; 93:2; Moroni 7:15-16).

b. The capacity to choose (free agency) (2 Nephi 2:15-16).

Â The ability to resist temptation (1 Corinthians 10:13).

Â The ability to live the commandments (1 Nephi 3:7).

c. Mortality (2 Nephi 2:22-25).

Â A physical body (D&C 93:33-35).

Â The opportunity to prove ourselves (Abraham 3:25).

Â The ability to procreate (Moses 2:28).

Â The ability to die (1 Corinthians 15:21-22).

d. Resurrection (Alma 11:42-44; 2 Nephi 9:22; 3 Nephi 26:4-5).

a. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ (3 Nephi 27:19).

b. Forgiveness (through personal repentance) (3 Nephi 27:20; D&C 19:15-19).

c. Personal direction from God (revelation) (D&C 42:61; 43:16).

d. Gifts of the Spirit (Moroni 10:8, 17).

e. Priesthood (Alma 13:1-9; D&C 84:17-21).

Â Men—hold the power of the priesthood (D&C 113:7-8).

Â Women—enjoy the blessings and influence of the priesthood.

a. Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins by one having authority (3 Nephi 11:33-34).

b. Confirmation as a member of the true Church of Jesus Christ and reception of the gift of the Holy Ghost (D&C 33:15; John 3:5).

c. The temple endowment (D&C 105:11-12, 33; 110:9).

d. Marriage for time and all eternity (D&C 131:1-4).

a. Exercise faith in the Lord Jesus Christ (Alma 5:15).

b. Repent of personal sins (D&C 29:49; 19:16-17).

c. Pray (3 Nephi 13:6; 2 Nephi 32:8-9; D&C 10:5).

d. Obey the will of the Lord as revealed through the living prophet (D&C 28:2).

e. Search out, understand, and apply the principles found in the scriptures, as revealed by the Holy Ghost (John 5:39; 2 Nephi 32:3).

f. Renew covenants through partaking of the sacrament (D&C 59:9; 3 Nephi 18:6-7).

g. Share the gospel (Mark 16:15; D&C 133:8-11; 88:81).

h. Keep appropriate personal records and seek out our kindred dead (Moses 6:5, 8, 45-46).

i. Consecrate our time, talents, and means to the Lord (D&C 42:30-34; Mosiah 2:34; D&C 58:35, 36; Omni 1:26).

j. Develop the pure love of Christ (charity) (Moroni 7:47; 10:21).

k. Keep all of the laws of God and endure to the end (D&C 14:7; Mosiah 2:22, 41).

Clearly the individual is the focus and the reason for the plan of salvation, and the Savior and his teachings are the center of all that is done that the individual might be exalted.

The Family

a. Marriage for time and all eternity (D&C 131:1-4; 132:19-21).

b. Being sealed as an eternal family (immediate and extended) (D&C 128:18-19; 131:1-4; 132:19-21).

c. Exaltation (D&C 132:19-21, 37).

a. Teach gospel ordinances and covenants within the family.

b. Teach gospel principles within the family (D&C 68:25-28; Ephesians 6:4; Alma 39:12; D&C 93:40-50).

c. Teach children to pray. Pray as a family. (D&C 68:28; 3 Nephi 18:21).

d. Provide for the essential needs of the family (D&C 83:2, 4; 75:28; 1 Timothy 5:8).

e. Share the gospel as a family (Mosiah 18:8-10; D&C 52:36).

f. Prepare the family to be worthy to be sealed together for time and all eternity (D&C 88:22; 132:19).

g. Consecrate family resources to the Lord (D&C 42:30-31; 119:1-7; 51:3).

h. Strengthen family members in keeping all of the commandments (D&C 68:25-28; 93:41-43; Proverbs 22:6).

The family is the most important unit in time and in eternity. It is through families that we are exalted.

The Church

a. Doctrinal dimension (principles, doctrines, ordinances).

Â The Lord directs his Church by revealing his will and doctrine through his prophets (Amos 3:7; D&C 28:2).

Â Through his living prophet, God provides his priesthood with the keys of authority to teach the doctrine and to perform the saving ordinances (D&C 84:19-21; 107:65, 67).

b. Institutional dimension (programs, services, methods, and facilities).

Â The institution helps teach and implement the doctrine by providing support programs, services, methods, and facilities (D&C 38:34-36; 55:4; 70:11-12; 94:14-15).

Â The institution provides its members an opportunity to serve God in an organized way (D&C 59:5; 75:28-29).

Truly, the Church exists to serve the individual and the family.

Points of Focus for Individuals and Families

To properly delineate the roles of the individual, the family, and the Church, you might find helpful the following outline of responsibilities of individuals and families. It is provided to help individuals and families select goals, establish priorities, and obey the commandments. Foremost attention is given to helping families worship, pray, share, serve, work, and play together. (This information is not meant to be all inclusive.)

Spiritual Welfare

a. Exercise faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

b. Repent of personal sins and maintain personal worthiness.

c. Have regular individual and family prayer.

d. Fast regularly and as needed.

a. Have daily scripture study as individuals and as a family.

b. Study and obey messages of the prophet and other General Authorities.

a. Hold your spouse and family as a sacred priority.

b. Magnify your callings in the Church.

c. Help activate, fellowship, and strengthen those in need.

a. Blessing of children.

b. Baptism.

c. Confirmation.

d. Ordinations to the priesthood.

e. Temple endowment.

f. Marriage for time and all eternity.

g. Sacrament for the renewing of all covenants.

Temporal Welfare

a. Eat a balanced diet.

b. Get sufficient sleep.

c. Get appropriate exercise.

a. Maintain financial independence.

Â Pay honest tithes and offerings

Â Avoid unnecessary debt

Â Save regularly

Â Develop employable skills (for example, through educational or vocational training)

b. Provide for basic needs.

Â Food (plant a family garden)

Â Clothing

Â Fuel

Â Shelter

Â Obtain and maintain a year's supply of food and other necessities

Missionary Work

Family History

a. Four-generation family group sheet.

b. Personal and family history.

One can truly understand the prophetic statement by President Spencer W. Kimball when he said, "Only as we see clearly the responsibilities of each individual and the role of families and the home can we properly understand that the priesthood quorums and the auxiliary organizations, even wards and stakes, exist primarily to help members live the gospel in the home." President Kimball further said that our success "will largely be determined by how faithfully we focus on living the gospel in the home."

Helping Fathers Stay on Target

Some years ago the Church published a statement of thirteen principles that has always helped me keep my role as a father in focus. These same principles, of course, would generally apply to a single sister who heads her family or to a sister married to a nonmember. The principles should help fathers distinguish their role clearly from the roles of individuals and the Church:

Individual and Family Worship

The mission of the Church is well explained in the scriptures: to bring all to Christ by proclaiming the gospel (D&C 133:37), perfecting the Saints (Ephesians 4:12), and redeeming the dead (D&C 138:54). The mission of the family is also clearly stated in scripture. The Lord has indicated that a man and woman joined in marriage become one flesh (Genesis 2:24). Then this new eternal unit is to have a family. When that couple is sealed together, the man and woman may eventually become exalted as gods and have a continuation of the family forever (D&C 132:19-20).

Parents, then, help their mortal children come to know the Father and the Son and teach them the road to eternal life. Children begin that process by being born under the covenant or by being sealed to their parents. Thus, the Father's mission is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. Parents participate in that same mission in a general sense, but specifically in attempting to teach their children to "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ . . . endure to the end . . . [and thus obtain] eternal life" (2 Nephi 31:20).

The Youth Study

As we look at the true meaning of home and the role of the individual, the family, and the Church, we may ask, "Of all the duties, responsibilities, and commandments parents are supposed to teach their children, which have the highest priority?"

Some years ago, the Church conducted what was called "A Youth Study." Found within that study, I believe, is the basic answer to what causes individuals and families to turn to the Lord. The study focused only on young men, but the spiritual principles relating to the worship of the Lord would surely have application for young women as well. The study asked some hard questions about what constitutes success in raising a family, and it found four "gospel outcomes" that indicated, in some measure, that parents had been successful. The four gospel outcomes were:

l. Ordination to the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Perhaps any parents whose son had accomplished those four gospel outcomes could feel, in some measure, successful as parents. At least they would feel that they had launched their son on the road to eternal life. Perhaps no other gospel outcomes outweigh those identified above.

After those outcomes had been determined, hundreds of young men were interviewed throughout the United States to determine if any common factors determined whether a young man would accomplish those outcomes or not. Those who had obtained the priesthood, gone to the temple, and served missions were interviewed, as were others who had not accomplished those things. The results were astounding; the causes were so simple that perhaps some of us have overlooked them.

The study showed that two factors were at the root of whether young men would attain those gospel outcomes: personal prayer and personal scripture study.

It ought not surprise us that to attain the desired gospel outcomes, individual worship of the Lord would be preeminent. One who has turned fully to the Lord in prayer and searched the words of the Lord to learn what the Lord would have him do would naturally be led to those outcomes. In fact, the correlation between the gospel outcomes and the practices of regular personal prayer and personal scripture study was in the high ninetieth percentile, one of the highest correlations of any study the Church has done.

We can conclude that if children truly pray and read the scriptures on their own, that may be the best insurance of all that the children will ultimately achieve those outcomes.

The next logical question is, "How do you get young people to pray and to read the scriptures?" What was it, in the case of those young men, that influenced them to do what they did? Again, the answer was so simple that some of us have probably been looking beyond the mark. The influencing factors were:

If we want our children to pray, we must show them by example through family prayer. If we want our children to read the scriptures, they need to see the scriptures being read in the family. The factor that has the greatest effect on private religious behavior is family worship, meaning that the family is having regular family prayer, family scripture study, and family home evening.

Conveying Spiritual Values

The third factor in influencing children to pray and read the scriptures is an agreement on values that are transmitted from parents to children. An example might be when your daughter asks, "Why are we the only family in the whole ward that won't ———— on Sunday?" You might be tempted to say, "Because I said so," or "Because the Church says so." But a more inspired parent might say, "Well, you know that keeping the Lord's day holy is not something we just made up. Let me show you something." Then you could open the Doctrine and Covenants to section 59 and read these beautiful verses:

And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day; for verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High; nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times (vv. 9-11).

Then you could explain, "As you can see, the Lord teaches us that Sunday is a holy day. It's not a day for us to do what we want. It's a day to rest from our labors and 'to pay our devotions to the Most High,' meaning that we should go to our Church meetings, partake of the sacrament, do our other Church duties, and visit the sick, the poor, and the needy. It's a day consecrated to the Lord, and I bear testimony to you, my dear daughter, that this is true and that the Lord has blessed us greatly for keeping the Sabbath Day. Here are some of the blessings he promises:

And inasmuch as ye do these things with thanksgiving, with cheerful hearts and countenances, not with much laughter, for this is sin, but with a glad heart and a cheerful countenance—verily I say, that inasmuch as ye do this, the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth.

Yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for vineyards; yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart; yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul. And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion (vv. 15-20).

"Can you see, my dear, that the Lord gave us all of these things for our benefit? These are truly beautiful promises about the Sabbath Day, aren't they?"

After that, you might bear testimony, saying, "I know that these blessings from keeping the Sabbath Day are real, and that's why we do it."

Perhaps then the daughter might say, "I never quite understood it that way. I do believe that's true. Thank you. I can see why I should keep the Sabbath Day holy."

Through such interaction, a value is transferred from one generation to another. Such values are often "caught" more than they are "taught" as children see them operating in their family. If family prayer, family scripture reading and home evening, and the sharing of values are taking place in the family, they tend to produce young men and women who will pray and read the scriptures on their own. And thus they will attain such gospel outcomes as serving missions, receiving their endowments, and being married in the temple. That should probably not surprise us, as the true role of the family is as a support and strength to the individual.

Scriptural Instruction to Parents

Moses surely had a clear view of the proper role of parents when he conveyed these important instructions to the house of Israel:

Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. And it shall be, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou buildedst not, and houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be full; then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him (Deuteronomy 6:4-13).

Clearly the focus of these verses is upon loving the Lord. That seems to be the foundation and the secret for raising a family to the Lord. It also seems evident that parents are to teach the word of the Lord diligently to their children, not just in formal settings but, in the words of the scripture, "when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up." It also seems evident that in those days the word was even written down and carried with people (see verse 8) as they went about their daily affairs. They even put these writings in a small container at their door or post or gate (see verse 9] to help them not to forget the Lord.

The Lord described the blessings he gave that he swore to give Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; their houses were full of all good things, and they were prospering with wells, vineyards, and olive trees. Then the Lord gave a great warning: "Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt . . . Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name."

All of us have a tendency to forget the Lord and not have him be a full partner in our families. The meaning of these words cannot be misunderstood. Surely an eternal family must have as its foundation the love of God so that the Spirit of the Lord will permeate the family. A celestial family, an eternal family, can be such only if founded upon these principles.

These concepts have been true throughout the ages. We learn of Adam and Eve, "By them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled . . . . Therefore I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children" (Moses 6:6, 58).

Isaiah tells us, "All thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children" (Isaiah 54:13).

Proverbs contains what is probably the best-known instruction to parents about teaching their children: "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it" (Proverbs 22:6).

What a responsibility rests upon parents! If they can teach their children when they are young, inspiring them to be taught of the Lord as Isaiah said, truly when they are old they will not depart from the truth. In ways that are not well understood by us, the Spirit of the Lord is planted into their hearts. Even though they may depart from it for a while, they will return because they are children of the covenant. The Lord has written his word in their hearts, and ultimately it will bring them back to him.

The Book of Mormon teaches a powerful example of the evil influence parents can have upon their children if they teach them incorrectly:

Ye shall remember your children, how that ye have grieved their hearts because of the example that ye have set before them; and also, remember that ye may, because of your filthiness, bring your children unto destruction, and their sins be heaped upon your heads at the last day (Jacob 3:10).

Behold, ye have done greater iniquities than the Lamanites, our brethren. Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples before them; and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up to God against you. And because of the strictness of the word of God, which cometh down against you, many hearts died, pierced with deep wounds (Jacob 2:35).

The power of example for good or evil can have a lasting impact on children. Thus the Lord has told us, "I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth" (D&C 93:40).

Inspired General Authorities have also spoken about the sacred role of parents:

The Lord organized the family unit in the beginning. He intended that the home be the center of learning—that the father and mother be teachers.

The Lord fixed families to give parents more influence on children than all other agencies combined. There is safety in this arrangement. It provides parents the privilege, the awesome privilege, of molding the life and character of a child, even though outside agencies have influence.

Parenthood imposes a singular responsibility. Not only must parents put good things into the minds of children, we must keep bad things out. That is why we have been cautioned against the unrestricted invasion of our homes by the media. While some agencies that have influence on our children are good, some are not. Parental vigilance should be constant. Safeguard your children against those who seek to destroy them.

How would you pass the test, parents, if your family was isolated from the Church and you had to supply all religious training? Have you become so dependent on others that you do little or nothing at home? Tell me, how much of the gospel would your children know, if all they knew is what they had been taught at home? Ponder that. I repeat, how much of the gospel would your children know if all they knew is what they had been taught at home! (Elder A. Theodore Tuttle).

Perhaps all of our responsibilities as parents are best summed up by these last three quotations from modern-day prophets:

"The greatest work you will ever do will be within the walls of your own home" (President Harold B. Lee).

"We should be teaching our people over and over again that the most important leadership position in time and eternity is that of father [and mother]" (President Spencer W. Kimball).

"No other success can compensate for failure in the home" (President David O. McKay).

Thus, as we consider the responsibility the Lord has laid on parents from the beginning, we recognize the awesome nature of attempting to lead a family in righteousness. Could anyone do that without the full direction and participation of the Lord? We can clearly see the necessity of having the Spirit of the Lord to guide us, or it could not be effectively done.

In summary, private religious behavior (such as private prayer and scripture study) is much more powerful than public religious life (attending meetings, classes, social events, athletics, and so on) in determining whether or not the desired gospel outcomes will be attained.

The Divine Role of the Church

What role, then, does the Church play in these gospel outcomes? The Church plays an important role in supporting the individual and the family. It helps in teaching children about prayer, scripture reading, and gospel values, but it is much less influential than the family.

In some families, the Church becomes the only influence in these areas. But we should not assume that the Church alone can teach children to pray and read the scriptures. Do not make the Church the cornerstone of your hope for your children. In doing so, there would be much risk. You have the responsibility to teach them correct principles, with the Church assisting.

Some have asked, "What impact do classes, social activities, meeting attendance, Church athletics, Scouting, and so on have on young people in attaining the gospel outcomes?" The answer is that they do help, but they have much less of an impact than the family itself.

Another important element revealed by the Church's study is that when young men reach age sixteen or so, an adult advisor (normally not the bishop but some other good man) has about as much influence upon them as do their parents. As you probably know, there are times when parents have a hard time getting through to their children or when the children are not able or willing to receive counsel from their parents. A trusted adult advisor who can share the same message as the parents and be a "second witness" can be of great help, especially in the later teen years, in assisting young men to reach those gospel outcomes.

Such adult advisors have much more potential for obtaining the gospel outcomes than do peers, bishops, Church programs, or maybe even a young man's own family when he is that age. The study found that the advisor's age, education, or occupation didn't matter much. What really mattered was whether the young man felt that the advisor was trusting, respectful, and caring—characteristics of the advisor himself.

We should not underestimate or misunderstand the role of the Church. Participation in the Church really does reinforce the spiritual foundations that are laid at home. But mere attendance at church activities is not an end in and of itself, nor does it guarantee that young men and women are moving toward desired gospel outcomes. However, if an activity is calculated spiritually to move young people toward those outcomes, then the impact is real and is an addition to what is happening at home.

Considering the information from the "youth study," we might now ask, "If all of the above is true, how can families so be taught? Can that not be accomplished through church meetings and activities, and especially through home teachers? Is that not their divine role as they relate to individuals and families?"

The duty of the home teachers is to "visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties" (D&C 20:47).

I am always impressed, as I think of this scripture, to recognize that when the Lord talked about priesthood holders visiting the homes of the Saints, he could have given them a long list of commandments. But he simply said, "Visit the house of each member, exhorting them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties" (D&C 20:51). Note where the primary emphasis lies—to get them to pray. Prayer will draw people to the Lord and inspire them to attend to their family duties.

Some have asked, "What are those family duties?" Some have suggested they may be found in fulfilling the mission of the Church to convert people to the Lord through proclaiming the gospel, perfecting the Saints, and redeeming the dead. That is a teaching worth pondering. Perhaps another good description is found in a booklet published by the Church entitled Family Guidebook. You would do well to obtain a copy. A summary of its content is:

Â Hold family home evening at least once a week.

Â Have family and individual prayers at least twice a day.

Â Bless the food you eat (at each meal).

Â Make time for family activities.

Â Study the scriptures as a family.

Â Have meal-time discussions.

Â Discuss the gospel while working together.

Â Use special holidays and occasions to teach the gospel.

Â Teach by example the payment of tithing and other offerings.

Â Teach the gospel through bedtime stories.

Â Hold private interviews.

All such activities help parents become the true spiritual leaders of the home. If parents were to concentrate on prayer, scripture reading, and these other family duties, surely they would be successful in raising up a family to the Lord.

If home teachers, after counseling with family heads, were to focus on these basics, they would have a much greater impact in helping parents strengthen families. Without question, inspired fathers, mothers, and children would welcome them into the home. Yes, inspired home teachers have a divine role to play in helping turn parents and families more fully to the Lord.

This booklet also describes blessings and ordinances that may be performed in the home:

The Counsel of Living Prophets

I have always been impressed with the teachings of the prophets, for they speak not only to people living at this time but also to the next generation. Their prophetic statements prepare families for the challenges and problems that lie before the Church and the world.

For example, President Heber J. Grant talked so much about the Word of Wisdom that many people wondered, "Is that the only talk he has?" Conference after conference he addressed the Saints on the importance of keeping the Word of Wisdom. In those days, some of the Saints were quite slack in keeping that commandment, and the emphasis was greatly needed. One man wrote to President Grant, saying, "Do you not have some other talk? Please give some other talk other than the Word of Wisdom." President Grant's response to his secretary was, "Well, there's one man that surely needs it," and the next conference he gave another talk on the Word of Wisdom.

How inspired President Grant was! In our day we can clearly see the assault of Satan on the Word of Wisdom, for the world is full of alcohol, tobacco, and drugs. How important it was that a prophet could see a generation ahead and teach the parents to teach their children so that they might be prepared for the onslaught that would come. Had that not been done, a generation of the Church might have been lost.

Think of President David O. McKay. What was his principal teaching? The importance of home, family, and marriage, including the duty of husband and wife to love and cherish one another. What followed in the next generation? Divorce, separation, destruction of the family unit. Once again, had parents not abided by his counsel, a generation of the Church might have been lost.

What about another prophet of the Lord, President Ezra Taft Benson, who, in conference after conference, stressed the importance of reading the Book of Mormon. Surely he spoke not only to the present generation but also to the generation that would follow. If we will follow his counsel, our children will be able to withstand the onslaught that is yet to come. I have a feeling that only young men and women who have been raised on that kind of a spiritual diet will be able to withstand the winds and torrents that will descend upon the world in the generations that will follow ours. How important it is that we make sure our families are being raised on that most inspired counsel.

President Benson once said: "Any man who will not teach his family to read in the scriptures and do that which he has been commanded to do relative to the Book of Mormon is in as much peril as the men who would not enter the ark in the days of Noah." What solemn counsel from a prophet of the Lord.

Thus we can clearly see that if parents will teach their children these basic elements relative to prayer and scripture reading, they will have dealt with two of the great cornerstones of gospel conversion. They will be in good stead for having helped their families become converted to the Lord and to be so converted throughout their lives.

As you now read the rest of the book, please keep in mind these important principles of what home and family really mean and your responsibility before the Lord to raise your family righteously. Keep in mind the true roles of the individual, the family, and the Church, and especially the importance of individual and family worship on the outcomes described in the youth study. On this foundation we can raise up a family to the Lord.

Conclusion

Let us conclude this chapter by turning to the inspired principles directed to parents. These are found in Doctrine and Covenants, section 68, upon which the rest of this book is structured:

Parents Are to Teach the Doctrine of Repentance, Faith in Christ, Baptism, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost

"Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized" (vv. 25-26).

Children Are to be Baptized and Receive the Laying on of Hands

"And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands" (v. 27).

Parents Are to Teach Their Children to Pray and to Walk Uprightly

"And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord" (v. 28).

The Saints (Children Included) Are to Be Taught to Observe the Sabbath Day

"And the inhabitants of Zion shall also observe the Sabbath day to keep it holy" (v. 29).

The Saints (Children Included) Are to Labor in All Faithfulness and Not Be Idle Nor Greedy

"And the inhabitants of Zion also shall remember their labors, inasmuch as they are appointed to labor, in all faithfulness; for the idler shall be had in remembrance before the Lord. Now, I, the Lord, am not well pleased with the inhabitants of Zion, for there are idlers among them; and their children are also growing up in wickedness; they also seek not earnestly the riches of eternity, but their eyes are full of greediness" (vv. 30-31).

These Sayings Are to Be Taught to All the Saints (Including Children)

"These things ought not to be, and must be done away from among them; wherefore, let my servant Oliver Cowdery carry these sayings unto the land of Zion" (v. 32).

The Saints (Children Included) Are to Observe Their Prayers

"And a commandment I give unto them—that he that observeth not his prayers before the Lord in the season thereof, let him be had in remembrance before the judge of my people" (v. 33).

These Sayings Are True and Faithful for All (Children Included)

"These sayings are true and faithful; wherefore, transgress them not, neither take therefrom. Behold, I am Alpha and Omega, and I come quickly. Amen" (vv. 34-35).

It is interesting that in this commandment the Lord says that parents are to teach their children a set of doctrines before they are eight years old or the sin will be upon their own heads.

It has always been impressive to me that we are to teach these doctrines to children before they reach the age of eight. It is no small matter that Satan cannot tempt children before that age. Perhaps this has more to do with a "divine timing" and parents' opportunity to teach than many have realized. The specific doctrines the Lord mentions are:

Â Faith in Christ.

Â Repentance.

Â Baptism.

Â Gift of the Holy Ghost.

Â Prayer.

Â Walking uprightly before the Lord.

Â Observing the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy.

Â Laboring in all faithfulness, without being an idler.

Â Preventing children from growing up in wickedness or having their eyes full of greediness.

Â Seeking for the riches of eternity.

At the conclusion, in verse 34, the Lord indicates that these sayings are true and faithful, referring to the whole section, but I believe also specifically to these verses. He also says that we are not to transgress them or take from them. I believe he is saying that if we will follow those principles and teach them by the Spirit to our children, we will be able to raise up a family to the Lord. Thus, the remainder of this book is largely constructed upon the principles mentioned by the Lord in these key verses.
