Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Two

Teaching Your Family by the Spirit

One afternoon a few years ago, one of my sons (about sixteen years old at the time) came home from school very upset about things. He was having trouble learning everything he needed to know for some tests the next day, and some friends had been giving him a hard time as well. He really felt down. In his frustration, he began to cause some contention in the family. My wife and I thought, "Should we get involved?" As the night wore on, we thought, "No, we'll let it pass. He'll sleep through this thing and feel better in the morning." We opted not to get involved, which is difficult sometimes, but I think we were wise to stay out of the situation that night.

The next morning, however, the problems started again at breakfast. Because our son was upset, he offended one of his sisters, and she began to cry. When breakfast was over, I took him by the arm and said, "Son, come here for a minute." I took him into my bedroom, shut and locked the door, and knelt down. He knelt down as well, still angry.

I did my best to offer a prayer for him: "Heavenly Father, bless my son. He's hurting today. He's had some problems with the family. He's worried about his tests at school." And I expressed my love to him the best I could in that prayer, exercising my faith that the Lord would help him that day if he would humble his heart.

After a few minutes, his heart was humbled, and as soon as the amen was uttered, he said, "Dad, let me pray." In his prayer he asked for forgiveness. He told the Lord that he loved him and that he loved me. He told the Lord he would ask forgiveness of his sister. He said he was feeling great stress but that he believed the Lord would help him. After that prayer, a father and a son embraced in great love, and, with the Lord as part of the solution, the love between the two of them was enriched a hundredfold.

He went off to school that day, did well in his tests, and came home on cloud nine, thrilled to tell his mother and me about his success and that he knew the Lord had intervened and helped him. He had no doubt about that.

About two weeks later, I was feeling the pressure and strain of having to direct some important meetings and give a couple of talks that day. Again we were sitting at breakfast, and I was not as responsive to some of the children as I should have been. I was feeling about the way my son had felt. I even caused a bit of a problem with one of the children.

After breakfast, my son took me by the arm and said, "Dad, come with me a minute." Again we went into the bedroom. He shut the door and locked it. He knelt down and I knelt down. Then I heard a good boy offer a prayer for his dad, saying things like, "My dad's really worried. He's got to do some things that he's not had a chance to prepare for as he would have liked to do. He's concerned about his meetings and his talks. Please help him, Heavenly Father. Please inspire him. I love him."

It didn't take long for a heart that wasn't as humble as it should have been to be rapidly humbled. And then I offered a prayer of thanksgiving for a good son and asked forgiveness of the Lord. After the prayer there was another hug, and again our love multiplied.

I've often wondered why the love multiplies so in such situations. It is because the Lord is in the situation. It is not just a father or mother giving counsel to a child. But the Lord is in it, and when he is in it, revelation flows and love multiplies.

Well, I went off to work that day and did all of the things I had to do. Everything went well. When I pulled into the garage that evening, this same son, who had called ahead to find out what time I had left the office, was waiting for me. When he saw me, he asked, "Well, Dad, how did your day go?" Then, of course, that morning's experience flashed back into my mind, and in gratitude I replied, "Son, this has been a great day. My concerns were unfounded. The Lord did bless me, and I was able to give my talks."

"I already knew," he said.

"What do you mean?"

"Well, I already knew, Dad. That's the way the Lord does it. I've prayed for you about seventeen times today. I prayed in nearly every class. I prayed when I was at the cafeteria. I even prayed when I was in the bathroom that the Lord would bless you today." And then he added, "I already knew."

I've thought much about this incident in relation to teaching by the Spirit. I suspect that neither I nor anyone else could ever teach in words or doctrine all that can be learned in a real experience with the Spirit of the Lord.

The Power of Worshiping the Lord

In teaching and learning by the Spirit, the importance of individual and family worship cannot be overstated. It may be the most important key in raising up a faithful family to the Lord. We ought not to be surprised that this is so. One day a lawyer asked Jesus, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?"

Jesus answered:

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets (Matthew 22:35-40).

In other words, the first commandment to us as individuals as well as families is to love the Lord with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. After having done so, we are to learn through our families how to serve others in the family and then others beyond the family. That great summary statement of the Lord is so inclusive: all of the scriptures in the Savior's day centered upon those two great commandments. What they do is tie an individual or family to the Lord. And when the Lord is part of something, it will not fail.

Naturally, then, we must learn to become more reliant upon the Lord. We must learn how to teach our families by his Spirit, for if we teach in any other way, it will not have a lasting effect.

If we learn to have the Spirit of the Lord with us and to teach by that Spirit, we will be able to keep the roles of the individual, the family, and the Church in their proper perspective. We will better understand the sacred roles of father, mother, and children. We will receive ample instruction from the Lord because, after all, our children were his children first. He desires even more than we do to see his children saved. Thus, he wants to be a full partner in your marriage, in your family, and in your relationship with yourself. I repeat, he wants to give daily instruction in how to better direct our families in an inspired way.

The Lord has clearly stated, "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

Clearly, when we desire any blessing, it is governed by a law. The secret to working with the Lord is to discover what the law is and obey it; then the Lord will convey that blessing to us. The Lord has also said: "All who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world" (D&C 132:5). Evidently the law includes certain eternal conditions, which, if met, will allow us to obtain the blessing at the Lord's hand. Let us, then, attempt to describe some of those conditions that, if present, will allow the Spirit of the Lord to be with a good father or mother in leading the family.

Listening with the Spirit

When we consider what it means to teach by the Spirit, we must recognize clearly that three parties are involved: the one speaking, the one listening, and the Spirit of the Lord. One of the most challenging things for the one speaking is to hear correctly what the Lord would have him or her teach.

President Marion G. Romney once said to some of his associates, "Brethren, I'm really beginning to worry about my wife. Her hearing is going out on her. I'm going home tonight and test it." That evening he sat down in his big chair in the living room and called out, "Ida, please bring me a glass of water." There was dead silence. So he said a little louder, "Ida, please bring me a glass of water." Again nothing. So this time he loudly said, "Ida, please bring me a glass of water!" She arrived at his side and said, "My, my, my Marion, I've answered you three times. What do you want?" He was really embarrassed to finally admit that his own hearing was going.

In truth, it's one thing to be able to hear and another to understand. I often think of a time when Brother Romney followed two young people out of a meeting at which he had spoken. One boy said, "That was the most boring meeting I've ever attended in my whole life. All Brother Romney did was quote scriptures. I couldn't stand it. I couldn't wait to get out of there." The other boy said through his tears, "That was the most spiritual meeting I've ever attended. I think I have had my life changed." The difference was in the attitude of those listening and their reception and response to the Spirit.

The Holy Ghost Is the Teacher

I think one of the greatest things I know about teaching is that the one taking the role of teacher really is not the teacher. Be very careful if you see yourself beginning to act like one who has all the answers, because that would be getting out of your true role. The Lord has said: "I the Lord ask you this question—unto what were ye ordained? To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth to teach the truth" (D&C 50:13-14).

Who was sent forth to teach the truth? The Comforter. Me? No, the Comforter. I may assist. I may be an instrument in the hands of the Lord to preach and help things along, but the Comforter is the teacher. I think that is a truth we would all agree to, but I also think most of us have a hard time applying it or recognizing it. This boy that Brother Romney overheard had been taught by the Holy Ghost. He had heard the Lord's voice to him personally. Brother Romney did something, but I think he would have been quick to say it was very little. Perhaps he prepared the way and did some things to set the stage, but he would clearly have recognized who it was that had changed the boy's heart.

If someone asked me, "What is the single greatest thing you know about teaching?" I would be quick to respond that it must be done by the Spirit. And I believe I would add, "The thing that has the greatest effect on teaching and learning by the Spirit is that one's heart must be in tune with the Lord, largely through prayer."

Is it not logical, then, to understand that the Lord will teach us? He will, and he can enlighten our understandings and quicken the light within us until we can see and foresee things we would not otherwise understand.

Remember when the Nephites gathered at the temple in the land Bountiful? The first time the Lord spoke, they understood it not. The second time, they understood it not. The third time, "[they] did open their ears to hear it," and they heard (see 3 Nephi 11:3-5). The Lord explained in Doctrine and Covenants 136:32 how to open our ears, our eyes, and our hearts: "Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear."

Let's look at that verse phrase by phrase: "Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom . . . " Of whom is the Lord speaking when he says this? He's speaking about us.

While reading, I might ask myself, "How does one obtain wisdom?" The world would say by reading, studying, going to college, learning from experience, and so on. Those are pretty good answers, none of which, however, the Lord gives. He says there is another way to do it. It is not that those answers are bad, but that they are secondary. Here's how one gets wisdom: First, "by humbling himself . . . "

Isn't that interesting? If we want to be wise in the Lord, if we want to understand in our hearts what he is saying to us, if we want to be able to hear that voice, the answer, above all others, is to humble ourselves before him.

For example, we must recognize who is who before we stand to teach. We might run through our minds in prayer those feelings of who we are, who the Lord is, and what he must do now—not what we must do, but rather what he must do to touch the hearts of our children. If you can humble the hearts of your children, they will understand what God says to them.

The second way we learn is by "calling upon the Lord . . . "

If we will pray that the Lord will teach us, after we have humbled ourselves, what will be the result? "[Our] eyes may be opened, that [we] may see, and [our] ears opened that [we] may hear," for, as the Lord says in the next verse, his "Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite."

The Spirit Teaches the Humble and Contrite

Whom will the Spirit enlighten? The humble and contrite. How about the prideful? The Spirit of the Lord will not attend them.

Occasionally I have sat in Church classes about how to properly raise children. I have often been amused to see that the younger couples seem to have all the answers. They may have received some training about how to be good parents, so they tend to think they really know how to do it. The more seasoned parents who have been through the experience are not so quick to raise their hands.

If we ever allow pride to enter our hearts, thinking we know all about how to raise a family and that we "are really good parents," in that day the heavens will be sealed to us. But if we will humble ourselves and pray to the Lord as often as we can, the Lord truly will open our eyes that we may see and our ears that we may hear. I bear witness to that principle. Don't be too worried about the details of teaching. Be much more concerned about how to turn to the Lord and receive instruction from the true source. Knowing how to receive an answer from God may be the greatest gift you could ever bequeath to your children.

Some might say, "Well, I don't know how very well myself." That's all right. If you just have the desire to know more, and if you keep persisting, the Lord will bestow that knowledge upon you little by little until you feel more confident. I bear testimony of that truth.

In most cases, children who have the Spirit of the Lord with them are alert and responsive to brothers and sisters and their parents. Rebellious, disobedient children do not have the Spirit. They look down at their feet, won't look you in the eye, and when asked a question do not respond or do so reluctantly. I bear testimony that if we will teach our children to have the Spirit of the Lord, they will be responsive not only to the Lord but to their parents and brothers and sisters as well. Perhaps that is one of the final measures of the degree to which people have the Spirit—they are responsive to the Lord and to their fellowman.

It is one thing to have the Spirit yourself. It is another to be able to use it with other people. When you are ready to teach, make sure the Spirit is there. As the Lord has said, "If ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach" (D&C 42:14). Your teaching won't do any good or make any difference if you don't have the Spirit.

As I watch teachers, sometimes I worry that they're not concerned enough about having the Spirit of the Lord with them all the time while they are teaching. Again, if we don't have the Spirit, we shall not teach—at least not in the Lord's way.

Let us teach our children to have a prayer in their hearts as we instruct them. Then they will learn through the Spirit of the Lord. Parents must be praying as well while they're teaching.

A parent might offer a simple prayer, such as: "Please instruct me, Heavenly Father. I'm worried about one of my sons. I don't know what to do to soften his heart. Help me." As she prays with a humble heart, the Lord will speak to her and whisper to her something she can now do that she had not thought of before. And as great as the instruction is, the one thing perhaps greater is that she is learning how to receive instruction from the Lord. If we take the Spirit for our guide, we will not be deceived, and we will be enabled to get through these perilous times (see D&C 45:57).

How to Invite the Spirit

Think, for a moment, of times when you really need the Spirit. I would like to make some specific suggestions about how you can have that blessing, either for yourself (in times of discouragement, for example) or for those you are teaching. These suggestions will prepare the way for the Spirit; in fact, they will immediately invite the Spirit into what you are going to do. I've emphasized the word immediately because that's when we usually need it. For example, when we are teaching or counseling someone, we can't wait for help later; we need it right now. Here are the suggestions:

One of the most important things you can do is pray fervently for the Spirit. The Lord tells us so in the scriptures. Sometimes missionaries try to counter the objections of an investigator by giving their opinion or an explanation or some kind of reasoning. And those things are all right. But a more powerful way to deal with an objection is to pray. When someone tries to reason against paying tithing, for example, a missionary might say, "What did the Lord say about tithing when you asked him about it? Come on, Brother Brown, let's kneel down." Then Brother Brown is in the hands of the Lord. Brother Brown's heart will be changed, if he is humble, by the Lord himself.

You may have a child with whom you are struggling. When appropriate, kneeling in prayer with the child could have a much greater impact than anything you might say in reasoning with him or her. Children need to see prayer in action. They need to feel it. Then comes the witness, which is so important.

I have often said something to missionaries that also applies to parents. The primary objective of a missionary is to provide a spiritual experience to the investigator. Similarly, the single greatest thing you can do for your students—for your children—is to give them a spiritual experience. Help them to experience the Spirit with you, and then teach them how to have the experience alone. Either way, it's worth more than all the instruction you could provide on the subject. In essence, what we're talking about is showing them a means for doing it.

When you have a problem with one of your children, is one of your first inclinations to pray with him or her, or does that come later or not at all? Perhaps that is a measure of your own spirituality. When you are presented with a problem of any kind, is your first inclination to pray? If it is, I would say to you, "Bless you for humbly recognizing that God is in his heaven. He holds all nations in his hands and is surely capable of helping you. "If your first inclination is to turn to him, I bear witness in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ that he will speak to you. He will give you revelation. He will change the heart of a child or a student or someone else who is not responding. He can do that. You can't. All you can do, in large measure, is to help set up an environment where that can happen.

Let us remember, then, when teaching that to pray is absolutely essential or understanding will not occur. The Lord said it so well in the Book of Mormon: "And it came to pass that he commanded the multitude that they should cease to pray, and also his disciples. And he commanded them that they should not cease to pray in their hearts" (3 Nephi 20:1).

It's evident that Jesus, wanting to talk to the people, asked them to stop praying vocally. But in order for them to understand his teaching, even being the Son of God, it was necessary that they pray in their hearts while being taught. Jesus further illustrated this with the words: "I perceive that ye are weak, that ye cannot understand all my words which I am commanded of the Father to speak unto you at this time. Therefore, go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things which I have said, and ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand, and prepare your minds for the morrow, and I come unto you again" (3 Nephi 17:2-3).

He seemed to sense when the "students" were filled and tired and knew when to stop teaching. But he counseled them that some of the greatest learning was yet to take place even after they left him, and that in order to bring that learning about, they would need to go to their homes and ponder and ask the Father in prayer that they might understand. If they would do that, then the understanding of what he had taught would rest in their hearts, and they would be prepared for his teachings when he came the next day. If we can understand that principle, we will be much more successful as parents when we're actually teaching our children. They have a very real part to play in learning. The teacher's role is not just to place concepts in someone's mind. It is to help students learn and experience the concepts for themselves. Real learning takes place between the learner and the Lord.

I know when we speak the words the Lord has given us in the holy scriptures, the Spirit of the Lord comes. If you will do it in humility, the moment you pick up the passages and start to read them, the Lord will speak through you in power, and the Spirit will be conveyed to those who are listening.

The scriptures are the words of the Lord to us, and the Spirit of the Lord will speak through them to all—both young and old. If we use the scriptures to teach our families, the very words of the Lord will reach their hearts.

I remember once when two of our daughters were coming into their teen years and were beginning to feel pressure from their peers to dress a little more like some of the young women of the world. Some were telling them they should wear more makeup, more jewelry, more worldly clothing. We were reading the scriptures one morning when the subject came up. I think by inspiration we just happened to be reading in the Book of Mormon in the words of Isaiah: "Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet—therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts" (2 Nephi 13:16-17).

We immediately saw that these passages were not directed to daughters of the world but to the daughters of Zion, to faithful female members of the Church. The Lord spoke of how in the last days many would be tempted to do just what some were suggesting to my daughters that they do—namely, to dress in a more worldly way.

Isaiah continues: "In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments, and cauls [hairnets], and round tires like the moon [ornaments like a crescent moon]; the chains and the bracelets, and the mufflers [veils]; the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the head-bands, and the tablets, and the earrings; the rings, and nose jewels; the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping-pins; the glasses [transparent garments], and the fine linen, and hoods, and the veils" (2 Nephi 13:18-23).

Evidently the Lord is not pleased with those who go too far in adorning their bodies. The Lord is surely not suggesting that we go to the extreme of not doing anything to adorn ourselves, but he is giving a great caution about going too far, about beginning to dress in the way of the world.

This underscores a great principle that is taught to the missionaries and that probably applies well to teaching this principle to our sons and daughters: There should never be anything about you—the way you speak or especially your appearance—that comes over stronger than the real you. In other words, we want people to know us and love us for being ourselves, not for external adornments used to attract attention or perhaps even motivate some unrighteous feelings in those who might be influenced by us.

As we read these passages that morning and, as parents, bore testimony to the truthfulness of the principles, we could see that the message reached the hearts of our girls. They asked a number of questions: "What about this? What about that?" As we worked through those questions as a family, a standard evolved about what the Lord expects of a righteous young woman in properly adorning herself. The standard was not our standard, but it was based on a standard given in the scriptures. In other words, it was the Lord's standard.

What made this experience so powerful was the fact that had it been just our standard, we would later have had to enforce it with more specific rules and perhaps to discuss it frequently with our children. (And we have done some of that over the years.) But what impressed us most was the fact that the Lord himself, through his Spirit, reached the hearts of our daughters that morning, He placed in them a value, a standard, a level of expectation, that did not come from their parents. It came from the Lord. Thus, they accepted it as their own and lived it from that day forward.

Thanks be to the scriptures. Thanks be to the Lord for his words that are so imbued with his Spirit. You will face nothing in life for which the basic principles are not found in the scriptures. The key is to understand them and to share them with your family. Nephi taught the value of the scriptures when he said: "Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do" (2 Nephi 32:3). It is evident that the Lord does provide the answers in the scriptures if we will but seek them out.

May I restate again that it isn't just the finding of the knowledge or the clarification of the principle in the scriptures. It's the added testimony that goes with it that causes the teaching taught by the Spirit through a good parent to reach the heart of the child and change his heart. Sometimes some of the teaching will not occur as quickly as illustrated above. Sometimes one of your children might really need to prayerfully consider something and weigh it over a period of time in order to gain a true understanding. Yet, once again, if the parent teaches the principle by the Spirit and then the child is taught how to receive an answer from the Lord by praying about it himself, he will then obtain from the Lord the truth in his own heart, which will change his behavior.

I have always loved these words: "They shall give heed to that which is written, and pretend to no other revelation; and they shall pray always that I may unfold the same to their understanding" (D&C 32:4).

This passage has to do with the scriptures. It indicates clearly that if we will pray about them, the Lord will unfold them to our understanding. By that I mean not just an academic understanding but a true understanding of the heart.

In the Book of Mormon, the leaders struggled for some time to teach the Saints of their day how to properly use the scriptures. They were attempting to bring souls to Christ—the nonmembers and the less active—and had used many different means to do it, but they had not been too successful. Then Alma, the great high priest, as they were preparing to go on a mission to reclaim the apostate Zoramites (the less active), received this great understanding from the Lord: "The preaching of the word had a great tendency to lead the people to do that which was just—yea, it had had more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else, which had happened unto them—therefore Alma thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of God" (Alma 31:5).

The preaching of the word of the Lord affected their minds and changed their hearts; nothing had a more powerful effect on the people. If parents can adopt that approach, making sure that their children are exposed regularly to the words of the Lord, many of their problems will be solved in the children's early years and will never come up later. There really aren't any big problems; there are just a lot of little ones that have been allowed to fester and grow. (More specific information on scripture study is given in chapter 4.)

Testify frequently while you are teaching. This may even be more important than the thing you are teaching. Testify in the name of the Lord that the things you are teaching are true. If you will do that, it will bring the Spirit of the Lord.

At times parents forget the great power that is found in bearing testimony to their children. Sometimes we're more of a mind to try to convince them logically that something is right, such as paying tithing, keeping the Sabbath Day holy, coming in at a reasonable hour in the evening, being kind to their friends, and so on. At times we can describe things logically and teach them to our family and they are accepted. But many times that is not the case. One of the greatest spiritual tools the Lord has given us for influencing others, including our children, is the power of our own testimony.

Nephi wrote, "I . . . cannot write all the things which were taught among my people; neither am I mighty in writing, like unto speaking; for when a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men" (2 Nephi 33:1). If fathers and mothers will speak by the power of the Holy Ghost in love and testimony to their children, the message will reach their hearts and can change them.

Alma provides a powerful example of this principle. He stepped down from the judgment-seat "that he himself might go forth among his people, or among the people of Nephi, that he might preach the word of God unto them, to stir them up in remembrance of their duty, and that he might pull down, by the word of God, all the pride and craftiness and all the contentions which were among his people, seeing no way that he might reclaim them save it were in bearing down in pure testimony against them" (Alma 4:19).

Children as well as adults can be proud or angry or contentious and thus repel the Spirit of the Lord. But a parent's testimony can help dispel such negative attitudes.

I had an interesting experience with one of my sons when he was about eight years old. He was studying math and had learned nearly all of his pluses and minuses, passing them off with me. But after a while he got discouraged and quit. I let him decide what to do, thinking that after a while he would come back and finish them up. But he never returned. Finally, some days later, I "laid down the law" and told him that we had to solve this problem that had come between us. He was a little hard-hearted and didn't want to do it. I had him sit on a chair for a while, and that still didn't help to humble him.

Finally, I realized I was approaching him in the wrong way, so he and I went into the bedroom and had a word of prayer together. That softened his heart about halfway. Then I told him he ought to stay in the bedroom and pray and find out what the Lord wanted him to do, to listen for the voice of the Lord. Somewhat to my surprise, instead of staying there a minute or two, he stayed there on his knees ten or fifteen minutes. When I finally went back to see how he was doing, he said the Lord had told him by the Spirit that he should do his math and that he would obey that voice and do it even though he didn't want to.

I was thrilled to hear that he had had a real experience with the Lord. He and I went to tell his mother about it. Then we spent some time studying, and he passed off the first of three tests on his pluses. He couldn't pass off his minuses that day, but a couple of days later he did.

Later that same night I had a chat with him to reinforce the importance of what had happened. I asked him how he felt about it, and we reviewed the fact that he had been a little prideful and hard-hearted and mad and that's why things had not been going well in math for him during the past month. I told him I had felt inspired, when I was upset with him, to take him into the bedroom so we could kneel and pray together. I reminded him that the time he had humbled himself was when I had prayed and then he had prayed.

I asked him, before I told him any of the things I have just stated, "Son, have you ever in your life heard the voice of the Lord?" He answered, "Yes, I have."

I said, "When?"

He said, "Today."

I said, "What do you mean?"

He said, "When I went in and knelt and prayed and stayed in the room and asked the Lord what to do, that's when he told me I should do my math."

I said, "How do you know? What was the voice like?"

He said, "Well, it was just a voice that told me it was okay, that it was right to do, and that everything would be all right and that I could do it."

I said, "In other words, it was a peaceful, calm voice?"

He said, "Dad, that's what it was."

He seemed touched by the fact that I reinforced that with him, and I think he learned a good lesson, as did I. I told him he should be careful to remember this time when he prayed and immediately got an answer from the Lord. I told him that he would have other problems when he got older, but that they could all be solved this same way. He seemed very pleased by that.

This whole episode seemed to turn on the impression that I should take my son into our room to pray. The thought was clear that if I could do that and humble his heart, then he would respond and learn his math tables. But it had to be because he wanted to, not just because I wanted him to. The Spirit had to touch him for that to occur—my words were not enough. The whole issue began to turn when, on bended knee, I bore testimony and told him that I knew the Lord would help him if he would have faith. The words were carried from my heart to his, and he humbled himself and stayed there in the room, praying until his heart was fully humbled. If we can remember to use such spiritual tools in dealing with our children, we will have much more of an impact upon them.

Another example that illustrates this principle is how I came to obtain my own testimony. My older brother had always been an inspiration to me. One evening when he was about seventeen, he came home from a Church youth meeting and announced to me that his teacher had told him to gain his own testimony and not to rely on those of others. He said—almost prophetically—"I'm going to gain that personal witness and testimony, no matter how long it takes or what the cost. I will pay the price to know."

He then began fasting, praying, and studying the Book of Mormon. One morning a short time later, he was stricken by paralysis. He could not move his body, and his right side was in terrible pain. He was barely able to whisper to my father that he wanted a blessing. As soon as the blessing was completed, my brother was miraculously healed. He uncoiled his tense body, straightened up, and was free of pain.

When he was later examined by a doctor, the diagnosis was that he had had what appeared to be a ruptured appendix, but no trace of damaged tissue was found in his body. Later, my brother told me of his feelings about being healed, and he told me that he knew the Church was true. However, he said a spiritual witness of the Book of Mormon had come before the healing. He told me how he had studied the book and prayed over every page. He bore his testimony to me. I was very touched by this experience, and I said in my heart, "If the Lord will answer my brother, he will also answer me."

Thus at age twelve I began to read the Book of Mormon. I, too, received a personal confirmation of the truthfulness of the gospel. I knew then and have never doubted since that the Book of Mormon is the word of God and that the gospel is true.

It is now clear to me that my brother's testimony reached my heart and caused me to desire the same thing he had. Many times the teachings parents have given to their children lie dormant in their hearts, waiting for a time to come forth. When problems and challenges surround us, if we will be alert enough to turn them into spiritual experiences through our testimonies, our children will be turned to the Lord. Then the teachings we have planted in their hearts will spring up and bear fruit, and our children will be able to use them to resolve many of their own problems.

Music has a great impact on the soul. For a long time in our home, we have had a practice of singing when we have family prayer—both in the morning and in the evening. I am not suggesting this as a doctrine of the Church or even suggesting that you ought to do it. I'm just telling you what we do. We have found it to be very helpful with our children, when we kneel down in a circle, to sing a hymn before we pray. We have found that it prepares the way for the Spirit among family members. It calms the little ones who may be punching their neighbor or things like that. It quiets them so that they're thinking of the Lord, and then we pray.

As a child I never really learned the Primary songs because I didn't have many opportunities to go to Primary. However, my children and my good wife have taught me most of the songs as we have sung before family prayer. Singing seems to bring the Spirit. If you ever feel down, get into the habit of singing to yourself. Sing those sacred hymns, and they will fill you with the Spirit of the Lord.

Some time ago in California, we had a meeting of our area council (regional representatives and mission presidents). Instead of talking about the less active, we said, "We want you to go out and be with the less active. We're going to give you half an hour of instruction, and then we'll ask you to go out for two hours and meet with some of them. Your objective is to bring them back to the Lord." We gave them instructions about what to do and discussed the spiritual tools mentioned here—tools that can prepare the way for the Spirit.

The brethren were filing out to make their visits, and, as you can imagine, it was quite a challenge for them to go out and begin reactivating people within an hour or so and try to turn them to the Lord. (We later learned that thirty-seven people were activated that night as a result of these brethren visiting in their homes.)

One of the brethren was walking out without a hymnbook, and I said to him, "You forgot your hymnbook. Take a hymnbook with you in case you want to sing in the home of a less-active member."

He said, "Brother Cook, I'm willing to do six of those things you listed, but one of them I will not do. I couldn't sing in front of anybody. I've never sung in my whole life, and I'm not planning on it."

I said, "I know you're not, but what if the Lord is planning on your singing?"

He kind of stared at me and mumbled, "Oh, I'll take it." He reported to us later that as he took the book, he said in his heart, "I'll never sing, not for anybody."

Well, they went to the home of a less-active member. They prayed with him, read some scriptures, and bore testimony. But the man was hard-hearted and would not respond. This leader sat there praying, "Heavenly Father, what shall we do? How can we humble this man before thee so we can teach him with the Spirit? There's no need for us to go ahead until he's humbled in his heart."

He later recounted, "I was sitting there praying, trying to decide what to do, when all of a sudden my younger companion stood up and said, 'My companion and I are going to sing to you.' I looked at him and thought, 'You've got to be kidding.' But we decided to sing 'As I Have Loved You' because it was the shortest number in the book."

These two men, the one about sixty and the other about forty—two companions who had never sung to an audience before in their lives—stood up in front of this older, less-active fellow, his wife, and an inactive son. They started singing, "As I have loved you, love one another, this new commandment, love one another." They had only got about halfway through when the tears started running down the cheeks of this crusty old fellow. To see and hear these two men singing this sweet song humbled his heart. They then bore testimony and taught him some basic things about how to pray.

I later learned that this man now pays a full tithe and attends some of his sacrament meetings and ward socials. The change in his life is due, at least in part, to someone who knew how to use music to humble the hearts of the people. Use music in your home. Use it for yourself. It will bring the Spirit of the Lord.

Some have asked, "How can I effectively use music in the home to set a spiritual mood?" Several answers come to mind.

* Our family sings before family prayer—usually just a verse or two and almost always from memory.

* We sing before scripture reading and during family home evenings.

* We have a number of tapes of spiritual music that we really like. Many times, especially on Sunday or early in the morning, we'll play them to set the spirit in the home. Sometimes when there has been a little contention or some problems, my wife turns on some of that music, and it seems to calm everyone.

* As parents we have found it most enjoyable for all if Dad or Mom sings to the children after they have prayed and are in bed ready to go to sleep. We've always sung to the younger ones. Our older girls even enjoyed that "special attention" into their teenage years.

* As a young missionary, I had a number of discouraging days, but I learned a great lesson and now I have a lot fewer of those days. What I have learned is that I used to wait until I was discouraged before using music or some of the other spiritual tools. As I got a little older I thought, "Why wait? Why go into the valley of despair before trying to be happy? Why not use those things every day and thus avoid discouragement altogether?"

* In a home where music is properly used, you would probably hear good music at many times. For example, you might hear the father singing in the shower on most mornings. He might not be a very good singer, but he would be better than he used to be. Try it! Your voice will sound great when you've got all that tile around you. Singing in the shower certainly helps cheer you up, and it might even help you have a little better day. A family that uses good music might carry a few tapes of spiritual music in the car that the family can listen to if they feel the need. Little things like these can make a real difference and help remove discouragement.

* I believe that parents have a responsibility to set a proper spirit in the morning before people leave for work and school. For some years, each morning we've played music on the stereo. Sometimes we play something lively like "You Are My Sunshine," "Zip-A-Dee-Doo-Dah," "When the Red, Red Robin," or other fun music—something lively to get everyone going. At other times we play spiritual music, such as hymns performed by the Tabernacle Choir, that fill the house and lift everybody's spirits.

Music can have a great impact on our families if we use it appropriately. It was the Lord who said: "My soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads" (D&C 25:12).

Thus, if we can use music in the spirit of worship, it will become a prayer to the Lord, helping you, your spouse, and your children to soften your hearts and be taught by the Spirit of the Lord.

I've always been impressed by what Jesus and his apostles did before he went out to suffer in the Garden of Gethsemane: "When they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives" (Matthew 26:30).

I'm sure the Lord received great comfort from that hymn. Could not our families obtain the same benefit? Also, great teaching comes from singing the songs of Zion. It has been a great blessing for me to learn songs like "I Am a Child of God" and "Teach Me to Walk in the Light."

If children were to hear the songs of Zion sung at home and learned themselves to sing while getting dressed or taking a shower, it would surely remove a lot of negativity from our homes and replace it with the Spirit of the Lord. There is nothing quite like a good hymn to discourage discouragement. Remember what King Saul did when he felt discouraged? He asked David to play the harp for him, which seemed to bring the Spirit back to him: "It came to pass, when the evil spirit which was not of God was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him" (JST, Samuel 16:23).

Paul also understood the power of good music: "Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord" (Colossians 3:16). Truly we can teach and admonish one another through hymns and spiritual songs if we do it in the right spirit.

Let us, then, let music ring in our homes—good, wholesome music that will lift the spirits of all and lift our hearts to the Lord. Thereby we will invite the Spirit of the Lord to be with us.

Express love openly for God and his children, and the Spirit will be felt profoundly (see John 13:34-35; 1 Nephi 11:21-23; Moroni 7:47-48). It is impossible to stand up and express love for the Lord and not have the Spirit of the Lord come upon you. If you want to bring the Spirit of the Lord into your home, you must learn yourself and teach your children how to regularly express love and gratitude to God and to one another. It's impossible to humbly count your blessings and not have the Spirit of the Lord come to you. It's impossible to express your love sincerely to one of your family members or to your spouse and not have the Spirit of the Lord come.

Love has tremendous power. No wonder the scriptures say that God is love (see 1 John 4:8). I don't know anything more powerful than throwing your arms around your children every day. At the end of our family prayers, my wife and I throw our arms around every one of our children. We hold them tight and whisper, "I love you." Sometimes harsh words and many other problems can be melted away in an embrace, surpassing anything you could say. Be sure to express your love amply to your family and to the Lord, and the Spirit will be with you in that very instant.

Let me illustrate this principle with an incident that occurred between my daughter and me when I was about to leave for a stake conference. I was talking with her one night, and after she had said her prayers, I asked her what she prayed about.

She said, "What do you mean, Dad?"

"What do you pray about?" I responded. "Now that you're older, you say your prayers silently, and I don't get to hear them anymore."

She replied, "Well, I always tell Heavenly Father how much I love him. Not just sometimes—I always tell him. He's given me so many blessings. I'm very thankful for all my blessings."

Then she said, "Dad, do you have to go to conference again tomorrow?"

I told her I did.

She said, "Oh, it breaks my heart to have you leave. It's hard for me to see you go every week. Do you have to go again?"

I told her that I did, and I explained why. She threw her arms around my neck and expressed her love to me, telling me how much she would miss me. I found it hard to make her understand why I had to go.

I finally determined that the best way to help her understand was to pray with her. I asked her to offer prayer that I would be safe on the journey, and she did so, expressing love for me and faith in the Lord that I would be protected. Then I offered a prayer in thanksgiving for such a wonderful daughter. The Spirit of the Lord came in abundance, and our love was greatly increased as a result of that small experience together.

The next day as I flew to San Francisco, I thought, "What a power love is, especially the love between a father and a daughter." The Spirit seemed to impress upon me how much I loved my daughter and what a good girl she was. Her heart was always softened to spiritual things. She was always quick to help others. I thought what a wonderful wife and mother she would one day be.

The impression continued. I wondered, "If my daughter ever became inactive as she grew to adulthood, how far would I go to reclaim her?" I answered in my heart, "Knowing my great love for her, I would give everything I have. I would pray for her, fast for her, love her. I would do all within my power to influence her to return to the Lord. I would never give up. It wouldn't matter how long it took or what I had to invest, I would never give up until she was once again turned to the Lord." How strongly I felt the Spirit that morning! Yes, when one is filled with love, the Spirit comes in abundance.

Just after I returned from my mission, my bishop called me to be the assistant clerk in our ward. As I sat in various leadership meetings, occasionally those attending would discuss a Sister Smith who lived in our ward. I heard comments like, "Well, you know how Sister Smith is," or "Home teaching Sister Smith is no picnic; in fact, home teachers haven't been in her home for the past two years," or "Sister Smith is the worst housekeeper in the ward," or "Sister Smith does nothing but mope around her house and collect newspapers. If you went to her home you would see newspapers on her porch and stacked to the ceiling in her living room." I thought, "I hope I never get assigned as a home teacher to Sister Smith."

One day my younger brother and I were in a market purchasing some groceries for my mother. As we walked out, the thought came to me, "Why don't you go back behind this store and see Sister Smith!" I was a little surprised at the thought, and probably from curiosity more than anything else, I said to my brother, "Why don't we go back and see where Sister Smith lives?" I suppose the idea was, "We'll see if everything people have said about her house is true."

As we went around the back of the store and looked at her home from a distance, we could see that at least some of the stories were true. The house was dilapidated. The fence was broken down and unpainted, and her yard was full of junk. As we stood there, an impression came: "Go visit Sister Smith." I was taken aback and thought, "I'm not her home teacher." But the impression continued: "Go visit Sister Smith."

I said to my brother, "Let's go visit her." He was surprised, but nonetheless we headed for the door. I remember praying rather intently, "What shall I say? What will we do? Why are we going there?" As we entered her yard, we saw the newspapers. Sure enough, they were stacked all over the porch. I could see through the window that newspapers were stacked inside her house as well.

We knocked on the door. She opened it and rather gruffly said, "What is it? What do you want?" I struggled to know what to say, but finally I blurted out, "Well, we're members of your ward." The moment the word ward came out, she said, "You mean you're Mormons? I've told that bishop ten times not to send anybody to my home. I want nothing to do with the Mormon church, so leave." As I prayed in my heart what to say, the words came out, "Well, Sister Smith, this is my younger brother, and he and I just came by to tell you that we love you. Even if you don't particularly care about us, we do love you. We just wanted to ask if there was anything we could do to help you today."

She stood there staring at us and finally said, "What did you say?"

I repeated myself, trying to have her really feel of our love.

She said, "You've come to ask if you could help me?" Then tears came to her eyes. Then lots of tears. She invited us in. We spent nearly two hours listening as she told us about her problems.

She apologized for the condition of her house and yard. She told us about the leak in her roof. She said she had no one to help her—she didn't have any family. She told us about her problems at the death of her husband a few years earlier when she had felt offended by some Church members. She just poured out her tears. She got it all out. We rejoiced, perhaps more than she did, in finally seeing all the bitterness come forth.

You can imagine the joy my brother and I felt as we accompanied her to church the next Sunday, and she attended church many other Sundays until she passed away about six months later.

I've often thought, "What if we had not responded to the promptings? What if we had not been told what to say?" It surely would not have turned out the same way. It is most impressive to understand that when sincere love or gratitude is expressed, the Spirit of the Lord comes in abundance. Let us be filled with love in our families and thus be filled with the Spirit of the Lord.

In your family, when you are prompted to do so, share a spiritual experience. Don't just have some repertoire of experiences you traditionally tell (although it's good to have a repertoire), but be praying that the Lord will draw from you the one that needs to be shared. If you do so, who knows the good it may bring? Sometimes we might not give our best effort in teaching because, after all, who is listening? "Just our family." But who is more important?

We really must do our best to have the Spirit of the Lord when we're teaching our families. Have you ever tried to share a spiritual experience when the timing was wrong? Or have you ever told an experience that perhaps you shouldn't have? How do you feel when you've just related an experience and it doesn't go over at all? Most people feel a spirit of rejection from those being taught. One of my greatest fears in teaching and in life is to feel a withdrawal of the Spirit, to feel that I'm left standing alone. I have felt that sometimes, and I don't like it. It is a rejection in a sense. It is an affront to the Lord. And you feel the affront as well. In sharing a spiritual experience, be sure to do so only when prompted. Alma gave some strict counsel about when it is appropriate to share spiritual things: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him" (Alma 12:9). Some things can be delivered only by the Spirit. Some things are to be delivered only when those listening will receive them with "heed and diligence."

Instead of just teaching principles or even telling our children what to do, we can tell them about a spiritual experience and help them relate it to the challenge they are facing. This will have much more of an impact in changing their hearts. If we do this, we will influence them for righteousness' sake because the Spirit of the Lord is with us.

I've also found that many experiences with my family have been of great benefit to others, and I believe strongly in recording in some detail my key experiences week after week. I have learned, as have many others, that if I do not record them when they occur, the impact of the experiences or the feelings that attended them are soon lost. However, if I record them and remember them, I can use them to help others.

During a stake conference in the Midwest, I learned that the mission president and his wife were bringing an investigator to the meeting. She had taken the missionary lessons a number of times and had read much about the Church, but she just could not make the decision to be baptized. As a professional psychologist, she was having trouble with the intellectual decision about whether the Church was true. The president and his wife asked if I would talk with her.

Before the Sunday meeting, I was shaking hands with people in the congregation, and I talked with this woman for a few minutes. She seemed to me to be one of those people who have a testimony but just don't realize it. I asked her to listen carefully during the conference, suggesting that the Lord would tell her in her heart as well as in her mind what she ought to do, and that she should then be courageous enough to follow those promptings.

During my talk, I discussed the need to trust one's feelings, and I told a story about a scientist I had met who had wanted to calibrate everything in a test tube, so to speak, before accepting it as true. However, he deeply loved his wife and children, and he finally realized that this truth of the heart was greater than anything he might learn through the scientific method.

Six weeks later I received a letter from her. She wrote: "My greatest stumbling block in getting closer to the Church is my fearfulness in trusting my feelings as a valid basis for a decision. I respect the commitment of baptism too much to join the Church lacking conviction and confirmation on which to build the foundation of a testimony and solid membership. I sincerely desire to believe. I have fasted and prayed and read the scriptures. I attend meetings, keep the commandments and Word of Wisdom, and pay tithing. I feel weary and frustrated, and I know the deficit is in me. Although this is not one of those decisions one can intellectualize entirely, or get swept away by nice feelings or programs or friendly people, it is hard for me to know how to discern the appropriate devotion and cause of action. This is the most important decision I will ever make, and I feel terribly accountable and rather inadequate. This circumstance makes me feel very humble and reliant upon God for help—which is probably good.

"Regardless of any decision I eventually make, I am grateful for what I've learned. Whether or not I join the LDS church I will always feel kindly toward it because I have been given much by it and because of it. Thank you."

As I read her letter, I thought, "I'll call her this week sometime, or maybe write her a letter." But as I was working at home that morning, the impression came a couple of times that I should call her, and that I should do it now. I called the mission president, got her phone number, and called her home only to reach her answering machine. I thought, "Well, she's probably at work, so I'll just leave my phone number." Why, then, had I received those urgent impressions?

To my surprise, just two minutes later, she returned my call. She said, "I just got home a minute or so after you left your message."

I thanked her for her letter and said I had felt I should call and talk with her about her feelings.

She told me that it wasn't just by chance that I had called, and she was very touched by the fact that I would call. She said, "You wouldn't have known this, but I've been somewhat discouraged about all of this, and in the past couple of weeks have been somewhat turned away, almost deciding I ought not go in the direction of becoming a member of the Church. At least I've been discouraged about it and have about determined to just forget it all. I was thinking those thoughts even this very morning. It's interesting that you would call me right now when I needed something."

Her greatest concern seemed to center in her inability to trust her feelings as a valid basis for a decision. It was evident as I interviewed her on the phone that she was morally clean, keeping the Word of Wisdom, and even paying tithing. She was obedient to the commandments. She just didn't know for sure that it was all true or at least did not know how to obtain a confirmation so she would know that she knew it was true.

I talked with her about the times she had felt the Spirit as a swelling in the breast (see Alma 32:28), as a burning in the bosom (see D&C 9:8), and as a feeling of peace (see D&C 6:22-23), and about the need to trust in the Spirit and thereby receive its fruits and the witness she lacked (see D&C 11:12-14).

I had previously discussed with my wife a couple of stories that I might share to help this woman understand how to trust her feelings in faith, and I decided to tell her about one of my sons.

This son had decided to go to college, but he didn't have a job to support himself while he was there. Nevertheless, he went in pure faith that he would obtain employment, trusting that the Lord would deliver something up. As the days passed, though, nothing came through. Finally, out of funds, he called to tell us he would have to come home. Our family fasted and prayed for him, and within twenty-four hours of the time he was going to leave, he had three job offers. He is now working two of the three jobs. I told this woman that such things happen through faith, after our faith has been tested and tried.

I challenged her not to do what anyone else told her to do, that we would never want her to feel pressured to be baptized, but that she now needed to go to the Lord and humbly pray again for direction as to what he would have her do. I promised her in the name of the Lord that if she would do that, she would receive the impression in her heart and mind of what she ought to do, and that she ought to then be spiritually mature enough to act on those impressions given by the Spirit.

The next day in my office, I received a message from the mission president that the woman had asked for baptism the coming Saturday.

During our phone conversation, this good sister and I discussed many of the principles of how to gain a testimony. But I think it was the story of my son at college—a story I had written in my journal so I would not forget it—that really helped her understand what she needed to do.

Seek to have spiritual experiences. Then record them. And then pray during your time of need that the appropriate ones will come back to your mind to help people in need. Spiritual experiences have great impact upon the soul. Share them as prompted by the Spirit (see D&C 50:21-22; Luke 10:25-37; Acts 26:1-32).

What a blessing it is to have the priesthood in the home, either in a worthy father or a worthy son. Those families who have neither can still turn to a relative, or to a friend who is a priesthood leader, home teacher, quorum leader, or neighbor. Using the priesthood and its ordinances in your home is another way to invite the Spirit of the Lord to help you in raising your family.

Without question, the Spirit can be felt in the ordinances, such as baptism, the sacrament, and the temple ordinances. The scriptures teach that "in the ordinances . . . the power of godliness is manifest" (D&C 84:20). Also, the Lord will greatly bless those who seek a patriarchal blessing. Parents should always encourage their children at the appropriate time to obtain such a blessing from an ordained patriarch of the Church. It will be of great guidance to them, and if they read it humbly, they will have the Spirit of the Lord come to them each time they ponder these personalized words of the Lord to them.

A priesthood blessing is an ordinance that can greatly help individuals and families. I don't know of anything that can bring the Spirit more quickly than when a child asks for a blessing. Sadly, however, most members of the Church probably do not take sufficient advantage of priesthood blessings. How long has it been since you sought one? We are not told how often to have one, but wouldn't it be appropriate to have a blessing during times of stress or trouble or decision throughout the year? Some members of the Church, including mothers and fathers, go for many years without having a blessing. Sometimes we wait until we're in a crisis before we ask for one. But sometimes there is a benefit in just asking for a blessing to see if the Lord has any additional direction for us.

Let us be quick to teach our families the necessity of having a blessing. Single-parent and part-member families may face special challenges in that respect. But, just the same, they ought to faithfully seek a blessing from worthy priesthood leaders. Grandparents can often be of great help in these things.

Sometimes some have asked, "Is it proper to give a blessing if someone hasn't asked for one?" They typically quote the passage that says: "Require not miracles, except I shall command you, except casting out devils, healing the sick, and against poisonous serpents, and against deadly poisons; and these things ye shall not do, except it be required of you by them who desire it, that the scriptures might be fulfilled; for ye shall do according to that which is written" (D&C 24:13-14).

Some people have misinterpreted those verses, I think, to mean that we shouldn't give a blessing unless asked to do so. Let me give you an example. A serious earthquake occurred in a Central American country where I was serving as the area president. Nearly ten thousand people were killed, including several members of the Church.

On the first evening after the earthquake, I went into a chapel where we were housing some of the injured. The electricity was out, and the church was dark. People were suffering, and they had no medical supplies. The first three people I came upon had serious injuries—one had a broken hip, another had a broken arm, and the third had serious internal injuries. I asked each one, "Have you had a priesthood blessing?" Each said no.

I was quite surprised at this. I took the bishop into the hall and asked, "Bishop, why haven't these people had blessings?"

He answered, "No one has asked for one, Elder Cook. I couldn't give a blessing unless I was asked, could I?" Well, that wasn't too wise, was it?

When people seem to need a blessing but have not asked for one, we might review with them the counsel found in James 5:14-16: "Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much."

Then we might bear testimony to the healing power of the priesthood and say something like, "You know, Sister Brown, I wonder if you would like to have a blessing. You don't have to have one, of course. But if you would like one, I would be pleased to give it to you." When I have used such an approach, no one has ever said no.

We walk a fine line in such matters. The Lord wants people to ask for a blessing as a measure of their faith. But many people don't even know a blessing is available. Others are not sensitive enough to ask, or they may have forgotten about the possibility and need a gentle reminder. We can at least set the stage and then hope they will ask.

I believe parents should teach their children to ask for priesthood blessings fairly regularly when they have a need. We probably need a blessing many more times than we ask for one. Perhaps we don't want to bother anyone, or we aren't humble enough to ask. Maybe we have thought: "I can handle this. I don't need the Lord on this problem. I can take care of it."

Children learn to ask for blessings if they see their parents having blessings. They learn to ask for blessings if parents, through faith, teach them the importance of having a blessing. Then the Lord will help them more because of their faith. If your children can see the results of a priesthood blessing, you will not have to tell them to ask for one.

When we returned to the United States from living in Mexico, one of my daughters was having difficulty adjusting because she could not find a friend. She didn't feel close to anyone, and she didn't feel that anyone at school particularly liked her. Worst of all, her best friend had left on a mission with her family just one day before we arrived home. The two girls wrote to each other often, talking about how much they missed being together.

Even after many weeks, things got no better. We encouraged our daughter to make more friends and to become more involved in activities at school. We talked to her about the different girls in her seminary class and in our ward, but to no avail. After some time, we determined that what she really needed was a priesthood blessing. We suggested this to her, and in a few days she prepared herself for a blessing and asked for one.

In the blessing, she was told that she would find not only one friend but several. She seemed very encouraged by this, and I'm sure she believed what was said. However, the next few weeks went on in much the same way. No new friends appeared—not even one.

We told her not to lose hope, explaining that the Lord will sometimes try us to see if we will really believe. We reminded her of these words of Moroni: "I would show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6). She persisted in faith. Within a few weeks, she began to "pal around" with one of the girls in our ward. Soon they became true friends. Then another friend came on the scene, and then another. Our daughter was happy again, and she learned much from having this new set of friends. In addition, three years later when her old friend returned, within a matter of minutes they were back into their old friendship.

I think my daughter learned a great lesson about the importance of seeking a priesthood blessing when prayer alone doesn't seem to be enough. It surely gave the family an opportunity, after the blessing and with her permission, to pray that she might find friends. Thus, the experience helped all of us increase our faith.

A priesthood blessing may also be given over your home. Especially during times of contention or difficulties, would it not be wise to bless the home and all who live there? The Lord has told us how to do that (see D&C 75:18-22; Luke 10:5-9).

In addition, we are told by the presiding brethren that we can dedicate our homes. The Church's General Handbook of Instructions notes:

Church members may have their homes dedicated, whether or not the homes are free of debt, as sacred edifices where the Holy Spirit can reside, and as sanctuaries where family members can worship, find safety from the world, grow spiritually, and prepare for eternal family relationships. Unlike Church buildings, homes are not dedicated and consecrated to the Lord (see the Melchizedek Priesthood Leadership Handbook for additional instruction on dedicating homes).

Living in a dedicated home can be a great blessing to the family. Such a priesthood blessing may assist you greatly as you move forward in creating a more celestial home.

The seven suggestions in this chapter will always help bring the Spirit of the Lord as you work with your family or with others. Are these not some of the spiritual gifts that Christ gave to prepare the way for the Holy Ghost to testify and change people's hearts? Give of yourself spiritually, and you will be able to discern the needs of family members and commit them, in the Spirit, to act. Then they will repent and come unto Christ.

You may have children who will not respond to the Master's voice at this time—I repeat, at this time. Jesus taught that he could bring people to himself only upon their repentance (see D&C 18:12). But with wayward children and others, we just go on loving them and trying again and again at other times when they may have a more repentant heart and will respond to the Spirit (see 3 Nephi 18:32).

Let us not be discouraged by any of these suggestions. Some might think, "I can't do all of those things. I'm really not able to do them." My answer would be, "Anyone can do these things. We just have to humble ourselves and be believing." Someone might ask, "How do you pray humbly? How do you humble yourself that much to cause those things to happen?"

An excellent but difficult question. Let's look in Alma 38:13 for just one example: "Do not pray as the Zoramites do, for ye have seen that they pray to be heard of men, and to be praised for their wisdom. Do not say: O God, I thank thee that we are better than our brethren; but rather say: O Lord, forgive my unworthiness, and remember my brethren in mercy—yea, acknowledge your unworthiness before God at all times."

That's a great key. Over the years my prayers have been filled increasingly with that thought—to ask the Lord for forgiveness, to try not to judge someone else or be worried about what they're doing wrong but to recognize my own weaknesses before him. I am convinced, as you are, that the closer you draw to the Lord the further away you realize you are.

Brigham Young, at one time, preached a fiery sermon on repentance. John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff went up to the prophet after the sermon to resign as apostles. They said, "We don't feel worthy to go on, President Young, as apostles of the Lord." And Brigham Young answered them, "No, my brethren, you'll find that the closer you draw to the Lord, the further away you'll recognize you really are, and that brings true humility." If you will acknowledge who the Lord is and who you are, that will bring the spirit of humility. I would venture to say there is not one of us who does not have much to ask for in the spirit of forgiveness daily. Remembering that will help us be more humble.

When problems or questions occur in our family, instead of reacting so quickly or giving a pat answer, as some of us do, let us try to humbly turn our hearts to the Lord and to find a way to turn our children's hearts to the Lord. If we will do that, we will have much more success in our families.

Let us not forget to be vigilant against Satan. He will do all in his power to destroy our understanding of these principles. Let us not discipline when we are angry; true teaching can take place only in a setting where the Spirit of the Lord is present. Then the teaching will be permanently received in the heart of the one who is listening. The single greatest thing a teacher does is provide the environment in which people can have a spiritual experience. How does a teacher do that? These seven spiritual keys will help you provide such an experience. I pray we may all learn how to do it better.

As parents learn to teach with the Spirit, children will learn to hear the voice of the Lord for themselves. They will learn the power of the Spirit through the example of their parents. They will know how to obtain answers to prayer. I bear testimony that if the Lord is humbly invited into a situation, he will be there immediately through the power of the Holy Ghost. Isn't that a great indication of his love?

If parents and children are humble in their hearts, the Spirit of the Lord will come to them immediately. They will feel direction come to them, individually and uniquely. Each will know that the Lord has spoken. That's a great truth that ought not to be overlooked or taken for granted.

Conclusion

May the Lord bless you, above all else, to be a great teacher in your family, in the Church, or wherever you go. I think one of the greatest tributes that could be paid to teachers is, "With all of their teaching, they magnified the Lord in the eyes of the people." Moses couldn't go into the promised land because he wouldn't magnify the Lord in the eyes of the people (see Numbers 20:12). If you will turn your family and others to God, if you will help them to humble themselves and go to the Lord for their strength and for their answers, I bear witness that he will magnify you as a teacher. You will have the Spirit of the Lord with you, and he will use you as an instrument to change the hearts of your children as well as the hearts of others to seek after God, to seek after the blessings he has promised to all who follow him.

I bear testimony that these things are true. They might have been said in weakness or not been communicated clearly, but if you've listened by the Spirit, the Lord has been able to speak some things to your heart that may set you on a quest of learning better how to receive the Spirit and thereby bless the lives of all you might be able to teach. May the Lord bless you to do that. Get the Lord involved and lives will be changed.

I bear testimony that God lives. I express my love to him who faileth not his children, nor will he fail to help you with his children who are yours as well. He stands ever ready to respond through his Son, Jesus Christ, for any blessing they desire of him. I bear witness of Jesus Christ, as a special disciple of his, even one of the Seventy, that all he has taught us is true, that he is the way, that he is the model. If you have any question about teaching by the Spirit, just ask, "What would he do?" If you'll pursue that thought, you'll begin to teach more as he did and ultimately become as he is.

May the Lord bless you and your family. I leave a blessing upon you, in faith, that if you will exercise your righteous desires, prayerfully think about them, ponder them, and work on them, the Lord will lead you step by step along the way until you obtain those things the Lord desires you and your family to have.
