Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Three

Teaching Your Family to Pray

While our family was living in Montevideo, Uruguay, we were out for a drive one day when we passed a dog pound. Our children had been after us for some time to buy a dog, as in Montevideo dogs could run free—they didn't have to be chained up or fenced in. We debated the issue for some time and finally went inside, where we were surrounded by scores of dogs of all kinds. After looking around, we finally found her—a mongrel pup with curly golden hair. She seemed to have been made just for our family. We bought her and headed home amid great noise and excitement.

Our oldest son, then eight years of age, soon became the one who took care of her. She responded to all of the family but most of all to him. He fed her, took her on long walks, listened to her howl at night, and did all the rest that comes with the proud ownership of a puppy. He named her Dixie. Dogs seem to exist to wag their tails and make people happy, but Dixie did much more than that. She soon became an important part of the family.

One afternoon when I came home from work, I was met by our oldest boy, who was crying. Dixie had been lost most of the day and could not be found. The search had gone on for two or three hours. My wife had driven several of the children, who had been praying most of that time, to look throughout the neighborhood and in the surrounding blocks. By the time I arrived home, they had lost nearly all hope, as thievery ran high in that area, and the chances were good that someone had stolen our pretty little pup.

However, the faith of our oldest boy was not diminished. He tearfully told me that he had prayed and prayed, but that the Lord had not yet helped him find Dixie. Yet in confidence and faith he said, "Dad, I know if you will pray with the rest of the family, all together in family prayer, Heavenly Father will show us where Dixie is."

As we headed for the living room to have a prayer, my own faith needed strengthening. How I prayed that the Lord would answer this boy and strengthen his faith in prayer! Because the situation was serious, and because it offered an opportunity to teach our children about the power of prayer, each family member (all six of us), from the oldest to the youngest, prayed aloud that the Lord would show us where Dixie was. The oldest boy, guided by the Spirit, prayed that wherever Dixie might be, she would be protected, and that if someone had taken her and would not give her back, they would love her and take good care of her.

After the prayer, we talked about the need to do all in our power to find Dixie if we expected the Lord to help us. The whole family got into the car, and we began backing out of the driveway to begin another search. As the car reached the street, we saw a neighbor girl running toward us. To our great joy, she was yelling, "I have Dixie!" The dog had been trapped in the neighbors' garage all that time. As many little arms reached for her, my wife and I had much gratitude in our hearts that the Lord had honored our prayers, even in the moment when our prayers were being offered.

As things quieted down and we brought Dixie into the house, one of the younger boys said how grateful he was and that we ought to thank Heavenly Father. Thus again, on bended knee, the entire family offered individual thanks to the Lord for having answered our prayers.

As pleased as I was about finding the lost dog, I was even more pleased that when the dog was lost, our son had the natural inclination to pray, and he knew that if he could get the whole family to pray for something, it would happen.

Many families do not think it necessary to pray over such small temporal problems as a lost dog. Perhaps they think prayer should be used only for serious problems or for purely spiritual matters. But I think small incidents like the one our family experienced bring great faith to children (and to parents). Then, when larger problems come, they will better know how to obtain answers through prayer.

Teaching Children to Pray

No other teaching seems to affect young people (and older people too, for that matter) more than individual and family prayer. That should not surprise us, for the scriptures are filled with the injunction to pray. The Lord's direction to parents is, "They shall . . . teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord" (D&C 68:28).

In the Book of Mormon, the Lord instructed, "Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed" (3 Nephi 18:21). What if we do not pray in our families? Then perhaps our families will not be blessed, at least not to the same degree they might be.

Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord gave this counsel to one of his servants: "Newel K. Whitney . . . , a bishop of my church, hath need to be chastened, and set in order his family, and see that they are more diligent and concerned at home, and pray always, or they shall be removed out of their place" (D&C 93:50). Evidently Bishop Whitney, like many of us, did not have his home in good enough order with respect to praying to the Lord.

One of the greatest gifts we can give our children is to teach them to rely more fully on the Lord through prayer. What a blessing it would be for them to know that the Lord lives and will answer their prayers. What a blessing it would be for them to know how to pray to him, and what some of the laws and conditions are to obtain answers to prayer. Such blessings may be the greatest gifts we could give them.

The best way for children to learn how to pray and to know the power of prayer is to see it in action in their own family. If they see parents who humbly kneel and offer prayer, they will do likewise. If they see parents who, when first confronted with a problem, turn immediately to the Lord, so will the children. Our children ought to see us daily give thanks to God in prayer. Again, if children see parents who are truly grateful, so will the children be.

A father ought to take the lead as patriarch in his home in giving an example of prayer and calling upon other members of the family to pray. Perhaps what they say in prayer isn't so important as what they feel. Children need to hear us pray for them by name, when they have a problem with a friend or in school or in work. We should pray over the years that they will be blessed when they go on missions, and then pray for them fervently while they're on their mission. With such an attitude, parents can pray all of their children into the mission field.

I believe we should teach our children to pray over "little things" so that when they have to pray for more important matters that will require a lot of faith and repentance and sacrifice on their part, they will know how to go about it. If they obtain the attitude, the habit, and the skill of praying over all things, then when a crucial answer is needed, they will be prepared to obtain it.

Answers to Temporal Problems

Another experience our family had with prayer helped us realize that the Lord will indeed help us with all our problems, be they temporal or spiritual.

A couple of years ago, one of my sons and his two friends, one in the front seat and one in the back, were driving down the hill in Bountiful, Utah, toward the freeway. Suddenly a car two cars in front of them made an unusual turn, and the man in the car in front of my son slammed on his brakes and came safely to a stop. My boy slammed on his brakes and stopped safely as well. However, a young man behind them was looking down and did not see that the cars in front of him had stopped. He smashed into the back of our 1984 Honda, crushing the back bumper and trunk. The back window exploded into a thousand pieces, filling the back seat with glass and cutting my son's friend in the back and neck. The car in back of ours also pushed the Honda into the car in front, crushing the headlights and the left side of the front of the Honda.

Soon the police arrived. Our son called me, and I drove down to the scene of the accident. There was quite a stir on that busy corner. After taking statements from all concerned, the police cited the other driver and put a damage sticker on our car to permit us to drive it, which we were fortunately able to do. Then everyone departed, leaving the matter in the hands of the insurance companies.

Our car sat in our garage for nearly a week. No appraisers came by as promised. After numerous calls, an appraiser came and spent nearly two hours examining the car from top to bottom. A few days later, we learned that he had declared the car to be totaled. We could hardly believe it! We had thought the dents could be pounded out and painted for under a thousand dollars. The insurance company said they would give us around $3,500 to buy a new car and considerably less if we wanted to repair the old one.

I spent most of the next day checking car lots to see if the amount the company had offered was fair, as it seemed low to us. I found three car dealers who were willing to confirm that the true value of our car was around $4,500. I asked the insurance company to contact these dealers, and I told them we wouldn't accept their offer.

Over the weeks, the idea that we had a wrecked car in the garage and that we were going to have to spend at least another $1,000 to buy another one left us in great anxiety. On our budget, it was simply out of the question.

During that time I also took the car to four or five repair shops to see what it would cost to repair it. Two places said the car was totaled, and they wanted nothing to do with it. Two other places thought they could fix it, but the price was so high that it wouldn't be worth it. One practical man said, "Your car has 92,000 miles on it. It would be better to put your money into another car. This one could go out on you next week, and then all your money would be lost."

My wife and I stewed over the matter day after day. To make things worse, our lawn mower broke down during this time, and we had to buy another one, which was hard on our budget. Both of our vacuum cleaners went out the same week, as did our weed eater and my electric razor. Things were getting downright depressing. Our temporal problems seemed to have a hold on us—something we had seldom allowed to happen.

A couple of days before my wife was to go to girls' camp for a week, she and I were sitting on the couch trying to decide what to do. I didn't want her to leave before we had made up our minds because I knew the insurance company would be calling for a decision. We had penciled out our alternatives—the pluses and minuses of each—but we were still in turmoil. Each alternative seemed a poor one.

As we discussed our problem, it was as if a light turned on. We asked ourselves, "Have we really asked the Lord?" The answer was, "Yes, we have been praying about the problem, but not very specifically, and not with real intent. We have been relying too much on our own strength." We bowed our heads together and prayed fervently that the Lord would inspire us in that very moment, that he would tell us what to do.

At the conclusion of our prayer, the name of a man in our ward popped into my mind. I remembered that on the day of the crash, my son had told me about this fellow, who used to work in a body shop. I called him on the phone. His wife said he no longer did that kind of work but that their son (who also lived in our ward) was as skilled as the father.

I called him, and ten minutes later we were at his house, showing him the Honda and asking him what could be done. Somewhat to our astonishment, he told us that this was not a totaled car, and that with some work and very little money, the Honda could be put back into operation and even look just fine.

When my son got home from work, we went back to our neighbor's home. The young man and his father instructed us in how to bend the dented places back into shape. My son listened with great interest, and that very night he and his friend spent several hours pounding out the back of the trunk. Several days later, after many hours of pounding and bending and counsel from our neighbor, we were able to get the car back into shape.

I also went shopping a number of times for parts at wrecking yards. The Honda dealer wanted $300 for a new back window, but I bought a salvaged one for $53. The dealer wanted $189 for the headlight assembly; I got it for $35. It did take time to look for the parts; in fact, I had to call as many as forty-three places to find some of the parts we needed. But it was worth it; at the completion of the project, we had spent only about $300.

The result of all this was that we got to keep our Honda. We didn't have to spend a lot of money to fix it, and we didn't have to put a lot of money into a newer car. We did receive the money from the insurance company, which we held in the bank until we had to buy another car.

As my son and I looked over the newly cleaned and repaired car, we could hardly believe it was to have been sent to a wrecking yard. It looked as good as it had before the crash and was probably worth almost as much. We truly felt that the Lord had blessed and inspired us, and that we had learned some things of great value. We were so pleased with our work that we took a drive around the block, marveling at our good fortune and feeling grateful for all that had happened.

I bear testimony that in many of our problems, we do not ask specifically enough or with real intent. How badly the Lord wants to bless us, and yet many of us will not ask. Thus he cannot bless us nearly as well as he would like. How beautiful are the words of the Lord as he laments this fact: "What doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift" (D&C 88:33). But if we will recognize the hand of the Lord in our lives, asking for and receiving every good gift from him, then the Lord will respond.

I again bear testimony that the Lord does answer the prayers of his children that are offered in faith. He will answer them on any issue that is of concern to the one praying, for he has great love for each of his children. May each of us pray more specifically and with real intent, that the heavens may more effectively respond to us.

The Lord has commanded us to pray over all things, no matter how trivial they may seem:

May God grant unto you, my brethren, that ye may begin to exercise your faith unto repentance, that ye begin to call upon his holy name, that he would have mercy upon you; yea, cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save. Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him.

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening.

Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies.

Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you (Alma 34:17-27).

The Power of Family Prayer

I have asked various families and individuals around the Church why they do not pray about the kind of things described in this chapter. Some have expressed surprise over the very idea. Some have simply not thought of praying about such things. Others have simply not made much of an effort. But children need to see prayer in action. As they see what can happen through family prayer, they will develop the faith and the knowledge to pray individually for the things they need.

Perhaps our most demanding challenge is to faithfully hold family prayer both morning and evening. Many Latter-day Saints have not yet established that tradition. When I have asked people why they do not hold regular family prayer, I have heard reasons like the following:

Â We don't have time in the mornings.

Â We just haven't gotten into the habit.

Â Our children get up at different times, so we can't be together in the mornings.

Â Our children are all going different ways, so we can't be together at night.

Â Our own families didn't pray, so we haven't been able to either.

Â Our children don't want to have family prayer. They resist, and sometimes we have real contention at prayer time.

Â I hate to admit it, but I don't believe that family prayer can make much of a difference.

I believe all of these answers are just excuses, or, to put it more boldly, they are lies. It is the devil himself who tries to get us not to pray. Nephi taught that principle clearly:

My beloved brethren, I perceive that ye ponder still in your hearts; and it grieveth me that I must speak concerning this thing. For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray.

But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul (2 Nephi 32:8-9).

Clearly, we are to pray over all things; then they will be consecrated for our good. The opposite is also true. If we do not pray over the things we are doing, they will not be consecrated for our good or for the welfare of our souls. It is also clear who it is that teaches us not to pray. I believe that some of Satan's best-trained emissaries offer such simple lies as these: "You're too tired." "You can do it tomorrow." "Prayer doesn't work. Don't you remember the time you prayed and nothing happened?"

In my judgment, all the excuses can be easily solved if we will just believe that prayer will work, decide we ought to be praying, and decide how and when we will do it. If we're too busy to pray, we're just too busy.

Holding family prayer in the morning may require two separate prayers, one with younger children and one with older ones. But the one unacceptable alternative is not to pray. If we are not in the habit, it is time to get into the habit. If we don't believe that prayer will work, it is time to get more involved, to discover the power of the great truths the Lord has taught.

Why Should We Pray?

Perhaps the most important reason we should pray is because the Lord has told us to. Prayer is a way to communicate with our Heavenly Father. When he sent us to earth, he gave us the opportunity to live by faith, and one of our principal ways to receive instruction, counsel, and direction is through prayer.

When Should We Pray?

Families ought to pray, without question, in the morning and in the evening, every day without fail. Family prayers should also be held on special occasions. Sometimes when a family is simply feeling joy and happiness, they might kneel and have a family prayer. When a child is having a difficult time, what a great opportunity to say, "Let's have a word of prayer together." When family members are facing a crisis, a special family prayer could do much to solve the problem while teaching children to pray. When there is contention at home, if one or more of the family members were to say, "Let's have a special prayer," the spirit of contention would immediately leave, and the Spirit of the Lord would enter.

What Should We Pray About?

The Lord has commanded us to pray over all things. Some have the idea that they should pray only over critical matters or over spiritual problems. But the Lord has told us to pray for whatever we stand in need of, and we should be sure to thank the Lord in all things. We should pray for our families, for our neighbors, for personal things, for help in overcoming weaknesses, for help at school, and on and on.

Where Should We Pray?

Some families struggle with something as small as where to pray. Maybe they have just not decided where would be the best. In truth, they could pray anywhere—in their hearts, on their knees, alone, or together. Whenever possible, family members should pray both individually and as a family. Some families kneel around the bed in a quiet bedroom. Others kneel around the table before breakfast or supper. Others find it easier to pray in the living room after reading the scriptures together.

Who Should Pray?

A righteous father will set the example in prayer, as will a righteous mother, but each of the children ought to be given ample opportunity to pray. Most families have found it helpful for each person to take a turn. Even the littlest ones can be helped to repeat after their parents or an older child so they, too, will learn to pray.

Taking turns should not always be required. At times someone who is having problems may need to pray even though it's not that person's turn. The important thing is that all should have the opportunity to pray.

Some parents have found it helpful to remind the family of someone for whom they might pray, or to mention some other special need of which they are aware.

In the long run, how or when or where we have family prayer is not nearly as important as the fact that we have it. Praying together regularly will bring great blessings to the whole family.

A Prayer for Peace

When one of our sons was about ten years old, he was having some challenges trying to get to sleep. Often he would get so keyed up he couldn't sleep at all. One night when he was very excited about the first day of school, he had been in his room for about an hour and a half and was still not asleep by the time I was ready to go to bed. I heard him crying in his room and went in to talk with him.

He told me he was having problems and just couldn't sleep. He was very upset and tense. I asked him if he had prayed about it, assuring him that Heavenly Father would help him go to sleep. He said, "I have already prayed about four times."

I then told him the Lord couldn't help him unless he did his part, and I discussed with him what his part might be:

Â To calm down and not be so emotional.

Â To not be so tense about thinking that he had to go to sleep.

Â To just concentrate on the fact that his body was lying in bed resting. That wasn't quite as good as sleeping, but it was good enough. If he would quit trying so hard, he could go to sleep.

He seemed to receive that counsel well and calmed down considerably. I knelt with him as he prayed, exercising my faith with him that he would be able to go to sleep quickly.

He told us the next morning during scripture reading how his prayer had been answered and that the Lord had truly helped him fall right asleep. Within five minutes of our prayer, he was asleep, and he slept through the whole night.

Clearly if someone will exercise faith, especially a little child or we as adults trying to be as little children, the heavens will respond. The Lord is very kind and anxious to bless his people if, in faith, they will ask.

I was thankful the Lord would respond to our prayer in such an immediate way. Some might feel this was a small thing, but to my son it was not. The thing that was most significant to me was that my son knew that the Lord had directly answered his prayer.

It is amazing how the Lord can give peace and comfort. When the Lord answers prayer, he usually does it through a feeling of peace in our minds and hearts. He told Oliver Cowdery: "If you desire a . . . witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things. Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:22-23).

Having peace is as great a witness that the Lord has answered our prayers as any other thing we might receive. I truly saw that in the case of my son that evening.

Prayers to Find a Home

Let me recount another experience in which the whole family was involved and that greatly strengthened our faith that the Lord hears and answers prayers.

When we returned home from living in South America, our family had grown from six persons to eight, and we decided to sell our small home. First we tried selling it on our own and then with two different real estate companies.

These were difficult times economically. Mortgage rates were up around 20 percent, and almost no homes were selling. To sell our home and buy another one seemed just this side of impossible. Some people came to see it, but for a year and a half no one made a concrete offer of any kind.

Neither realtor brought anyone to see the house, even though we cleaned it from top to bottom to make it more appealing. We re-carpeted, painted, and so on. We prayed off and on about the sale of the home and about finding another one. Nothing seemed to fall into place.

During this time we found a house to buy in our own ward, and then a house in another one. We actually made an offer on both houses contingent on the sale of our own. However, neither realtor would take our home on a trade, and because it didn't sell, the deals on the other two houses fell through. We felt as if all the doors had closed.

About six months later we began feeling strong impressions that we should have another child. Yet we said to ourselves, "How can that be when there's really no place to put a baby except in our chest of drawers?" Although we felt awfully crowded in our home, we decided in faith to have another child.

We wanted a larger house not just because of our growing family. We also wanted a place where we could grow crops and fruit trees and have some running space for teenage children, a place where they could bring their friends. We seriously began to consider moving to another town.

A few months later, my wife and I were driving through another area of the city, and I told her of a strong impression I had had the day before that we should stop worrying about moving to another town, buying a new home, or building a new home. I told her about a dream I had had in which we were living in a large older home with a garden and mature fruit trees, and I felt strongly that it would be given to us in time. These impressions seemed to quiet my wife's heart.

Six months later we again listed our home with the realtors, and this time we began to pray intently, knowing we were just six weeks away from the delivery of our new baby. We and our children prayed morning, noon, and night in our family prayers and in our personal prayers that the Lord would show us a house that we should buy, and that he would bring someone to buy our home. The difficulty with selling our home centered in the fact that we had paid it off before going to South America, and thus there was no mortgage to be assumed. Also, we wanted to be cashed out of the home, and in those days, when almost no one could get a loan, that seemed nearly impossible. Anyone who had that kind of cash would put it into a lot nicer home than ours. Nevertheless, we went on praying intently for two or three weeks.

About this time a home in a beautiful area of our city came to our attention. It had been for sale privately for a couple of years, and it had a big yard and fruit trees. We went over and looked at it two or three times within a few days. After praying about it, we felt strongly that it was the house we should buy, although we felt uneasy about doing so without having sold our old one. But after more prayer, we determined to buy it in faith.

We began bargaining with the owners. Originally they agreed to take our home in on the deal, then later agreed to take just a lot that we owned. Now we were really committed, and our whole family began to pray even more fervently that before the baby came, the Lord would bring someone to buy our old home.

The Lord seems to like close calls. To our delight, just before our new son was born, some Church members moving from California came to see our house. The wife, especially, was impressed with it. They made an offer on the home and paid us in cash, which was almost unbelievable.

We felt that the Lord had directly intervened because of the faith of our children, and in fact the whole family, in helping us find a home with fruit trees, a level lot (which in our city on a hill is hard to come by), ample bedrooms, and all the space we wanted inside and out. It would provide work for the children and enough land that we could be self-sustaining, with plenty of room for the new baby. What more could we have asked?

Without question, the Lord will answer a family's sincere prayers, regardless of their situation. We should never use the excuse that we don't have a normal family or a completely active family. I have a feeling that many of us go on trying to resolve our own problems—spiritual, temporal, or emotional—without turning to the Lord as we should. We can have nearly any blessing we would like from the Lord, but we must ask, and we must do it in faith.

A family united in prayer can have real spiritual power. I believe that if a family is praying for what is honorable and right, they have every right to believe that the Lord will respond, blessing them with what they desire or even with something better, giving them some indication why they cannot have what they want, or indicating that they should quit praying for something they will not receive. It was truly satisfying to our family to have our prayers answered as they were.

Principles of Prayer

The scriptures provide a number of principles that, if obeyed, will help us receive answers to our prayers. They include:

We can learn many other principles from the scriptures and from our own experiences with prayer.

Prayer for a Missionary

As a young missionary in Uruguay, I learned through experience the power that the prayers of others can have, even over great distances. On my mission, I struggled with many digestive problems. They were so bad, in fact, that the mission president considered sending me home. To compound these problems, one day while out walking I experienced a severe pain in my left foot. I couldn't even walk to the discussion my companion and I had planned. We went to the doctor, who told me, "It's just arthritis caused by the damp weather. If you'll stay off your foot for two or three days, the pain will pass."

I did so, and I also had a priesthood blessing, but my foot felt no better. I was a district leader, and my district had just begun to baptize in a city where there had been no baptisms for some time. I couldn't understand how the Lord could allow me to remain down for those days when my district was just beginning to succeed.

A week went by, then two weeks, then three and finally a month in bed. I was still incapacitated, with no change in the pain in my foot. Finally, I was taken to the mission home in the capital city, where more suitable medical facilities were available.

An X-ray showed that one of the bones in my foot had been fractured and then grown back together incorrectly. The doctors talked about breaking the bone again or giving me electrical treatments that were supposed to fuse the bone correctly, but either treatment would take another month. I started going for electrical treatments twice a day, but they didn't seem to make any difference. This problem on top of my other health problems had me somewhat discouraged.

One morning after nearly three months of struggling with this affliction, I stepped out of bed to find absolutely no pain in my foot. I stepped on the foot gently, then stamped on it, then ran with my companion for a mile that morning, totally healed. With great joy I returned immediately to the field to work.

Two more weeks went by. A letter arrived from my parents that said, "Dear son," followed by a paragraph or two of chastisement for not having told them about my ailments. They said they had learned of my problems from another missionary, a friend of mine, who had written home. In great love they wrote, "We have begun a fast and constant prayer for you as a family. We have also placed your name on the temple prayer list and hope that it might be of help to you."

As I tearfully read the letter and examined my journal, I found that the day I had been healed was the very day the letter had been written—the very day my family had placed my name in the temple and begun praying and exercising faith for their distant son and brother.

To me, this showed clearly that the faith of Saints even at a great distance can have a real impact on someone who needs help. The doctors could do nothing, but the Lord intervened. In an instant, largely because of the faith of others, my foot was healed. For the Lord, nothing is impossible. In fact, the more impossible something is, the more he seems to get involved if we exercise faith in that near-impossible thing.

Listening for the Still, Small Voice

When we are attempting to obtain answers to our prayers and to be directed by the Lord, we must surely learn to follow the promptings of the Spirit. Those promptings will come to help us through the problem we are experiencing. They help us know what to pray for. In fact, the scriptures tell us we should pray to have the Holy Ghost in order to know what to pray for: "The Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God" (Romans 8:26-27). Also, notice that the Spirit itself will intercede for us in our prayers.

The promptings of the Spirit will also tell us how much more faith we may need to exercise. We may have promptings come to us about what we need to repent of, and so on. In summary, the Lord will guide us through our experiences if we will seek his direction.

Certainly, if we pray constantly, we will hear the Spirit's voice much more easily. We must concentrate in order to hear the voice. It is felt more than it is heard. Because of that, if we are too busy or preoccupied or hardened in our feelings, we may not feel the words. As Nephi said to Laman and Lemuel: "Ye are swift to do iniquity but slow to remember the Lord your God. Ye have seen an angel, and he spake unto you; yea, ye have heard his voice from time to time; and he hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words; wherefore, he has spoken unto you like unto the voice of thunder, which did cause the earth to shake as if it were to divide asunder" (1 Nephi 17:45).

The voice of the Spirit truly is a still, small voice. The Book of Mormon describes the voice of the Lord in this way: "It was not a voice of thunder, neither was it a voice of a great tumultuous noise, but behold, it was a still voice of perfect mildness, as if it had been a whisper, and it did pierce even to the very soul" (Helaman 5:30).

It surely seems clear to me that the Spirit speaks in a still, small voice, and we have to really listen and expect to be able to hear it or we will not be able to. If we would like to increase our facility to hear the voice, we may best accomplish that by learning how to pray without ceasing. The more we learn to pray throughout the day, in my experience, the more the promptings will come to inspire us about what to do.

I have surely seen that gift manifest many times in my wife, who has had feelings or impressions about things that were needed for our children. When we have followed those promptings, they have led us to additional experiences in faith, sometimes even saving a child from a life-threatening situation. Other times they have been much simpler experiences where the children could have weathered something through on their own, but because we listened to the Spirit, things turned out better than they would have otherwise.

We once learned a great lesson on a trip to Arizona from Utah. After family prayer, we left early one morning in a van and drove for about an hour into Southern Utah. Suddenly we realized we had left behind the bag containing all of our clothes. The only alternative, we felt, was to drive back and get it, which we did. Then we drove south again, losing more than two hours. None of us was upset, although we were a little disappointed as we had lost some of the swimming time we were going to enjoy at Lake Powell. We felt pressed somewhat, since my wife and I were to board a plane the next morning in Phoenix for an international flight. We had to make it on time.

My wife was driving and apparently did not realize that the car was in second gear. When it was my turn to drive, after a few minutes I noticed that the car had overheated. We immediately pulled over, and fortunately (I think it was more than fortunately), we were driving alongside a river. We could have been in a lot of other places when the car boiled over, but we were right there. We tried to pour water into the plastic container that feeds into the radiator, but the radiator didn't take the water. I felt there was no choice but to take the radiator cap off. (I learned later that the radiator won't take the water until it cools down.)

To make things a little more tense, while I was trying to get the radiator cap off, one of my daughters turned on the air conditioning, which unsettled me. Then a son accidentally honked the horn while I was under the hood, scaring me, and I bumped my head. I took a walk so I wouldn't get too upset with him. Then one of my sons dropped a rock on his brother's head and made him cry. Things were going from bad to worse.

I finally got the radiator cap off, losing most of the coolant in the process. Using water from the river, I got the radiator filled and cooled down. Then we tried to start the car, but it was totally dead. There was not even a sound from the starter.

After we calmed down, we had a word of prayer that the Lord would save us and that the car would function. We tried to start it again, but it was still dead.

Just then a man came by in a truck. He "just happened to be in the area" checking the river. He had some jumper cables, but we tried the lights and they were working, so I didn't think the problem could be the battery.

He finally determined he would tow us into the nearest city, about thirty minutes away. He hooked a chain onto our car and began towing us backward up the hill. It was hard going, but he kept pulling. Suddenly he said, "You know, I've heard you're not supposed to tow these automatics." I remembered then that you have to lift the rear wheels off the ground if you're going to tow it.

I said, "Well, my oldest daughter and I will go in with you to the town and come back with the tow truck." Even if we could find a tow truck, the man didn't think we could get a mechanic to look at our car on a Saturday afternoon.

We were just sick about this whole experience and felt that our family trip would be ruined. We imagined losing the whole day or maybe two in this little Southern Utah town. I thought about what we would do if we had to get a hotel and stay that night and miss our plane the next morning.

Just as we were going to drive into town, the man asked, in a moment of inspiration, "Shouldn't we try the jumper cables anyway as long as we're here and we've got them?" (I don't think the Lord gave me that thought because I was still upset about the whole experience. It's difficult to receive inspiration when you're mad.)

I said, "Well, yes, let's do it as long as we're here." We hooked up the cables, and, to our amazement, the van started right up. We thanked the man with the truck for his kind help, and he drove away.

One of our sons immediately said, "We ought to have a prayer of thanks," which we did. Then, instead of spending the whole day and the next day there, we were on our way. The van gradually heated up again during the next hour until the last hill before the next city. It boiled over the last few minutes, but we pushed on anyway. Again, "fortunately" we found an honest mechanic who said, "We'll put the coolant in." Then he noticed that the belt to the alternator was broken, which was why the battery had not been charging. He charged the battery, put on a new belt, and replaced the coolant. It took about forty-five minutes, and we were once again on our way.

We surely felt blessed that the problem was fixed. We drove right on to Phoenix late that night, and we were very thankful that the next morning we made our international flight.

Question: When our car boiled over, why did we just happen to be next to a river? Did the man with the truck just happen to be there? Did he just happen to have jumper cables? Did the mechanic just happen to be honest and to have the right belt for our van? Most important, why did the first man say, "Shouldn't we use the jumper cables before we go into the city?" Had the question not been asked, we would have wasted a whole day or more. It surely shows that the Lord leads people in a variety of ways to solve a problem. He is very kind to us, even at times when we may not deserve it.

The Lord watched over us and blessed us in that experience. The Lord truly does answer prayers, but his answer can be at a first level of blessings, a second level of blessings, or a third level of blessings, depending on how we listen and how we exercise our faith. Things would have been very different if the Lord had not answered the prayers of the family and if the man with the truck hadn't asked the question. We could have stayed all night in that town. We would still have prayed with thanksgiving that night that we didn't have to spend the night out in the wilderness. We could have gone on to that secondary level, never knowing that the problem could have been solved right there the way it was if we had exercised a little more faith. It was an interesting experience.

Hearing the impression to use the jumper cables saved the trip overseas, saved us from going back to the city, and saved an awful lot of money—all from hearing the still, small voice in just a few seconds.

This experience certainly caused our family to be very thankful, and it impressed upon us again the importance of really listening and expecting the Lord to be of help to us. I believe that truly is what faith is, for the Lord said, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you" (3 Nephi 18:20).

Praying for the Prophet

Let me conclude this chapter with one last experience in which we learned a great lesson about getting our children to pray for the prophets by name. It was a rather humorous experience, but President Spencer W. Kimball, in the process, taught us a great lesson about family prayer and specifically about praying for the Brethren.

It was Christmas time in 1973. The traditional excitement was in the air, and particularly in Salt Lake City with the Tabernacle Choir Christmas program and other activities that tend to increase that spirit.

Our family was especially pleased to be invited to a Church employees Christmas reception in the general board room of the Quorum of the Twelve. My wife and I and our oldest boy had entered the room, trying not to be too nervous as we watched the General Authorities assembling to shake hands and give each other Christmas greetings. After we had shaken hands with a few of them, we each took a glass of punch and some cookies and went into one of the far corners to get out of the way and allow other employees the opportunity to talk to some of the Brethren.

We were just beginning to feel secure in our little world of three when suddenly a door in the corner where we were standing opened and in walked Spencer W. Kimball, then president of the Quorum of the Twelve. He greeted us, shook our hands, and then took our son's face in his hands to ask him if he was going on a mission. Our son said he was. President Kimball then told him that he would be a great missionary, which we considered a prophetic statement to be fulfilled through the faith of our son and ourselves.

During the conversation, we told President Kimball of a rather humorous experience that had occurred in our family the preceding week. Our children had been in the habit of praying for the presiding Brethren by name. Our second son was praying and said, "Bless Pwesident Wee, Pwesident Tanno, and Pwesident Womney." He then began to go on in his prayer, having forgotten to bless President Kimball.

His older brother whispered, "You forgot President Kimball," whereupon the second boy answered, "He didn't need it tonight."

President Kimball chuckled at the story but then in dead seriousness pointed his finger at me and then at my son, saying, "You tell your second son that he should never forget me again. We need the prayers of all the children of the Church to sustain us. I could never do what I have to do if it were not for their prayers." He then told me again, "You be sure your children pray for me every night."

We were tremendously pleased with those few moments with President Kimball and even more so for the lesson he taught us about the power of children's prayers. As he literally spoke the words of the Lord to us that night, little did we know that within a matter of days President Harold B. Lee would pass through the veil to the spirit world and President Kimball would be president of the Church, making his words to us even more prophetic.

We did try after that to make sure our children always prayed for the Brethren and to recognize that what President Kimball had told us was true—the prophets, apostles, stake presidents, bishops, and heads of families truly do need the prayers of children. One child's prayer is sufficient to obtain an answer from heaven. Let us therefore pray faithfully for all the Brethren. Let us pray for the First Presidency, for the Quorum of the Twelve, and for the other General Authorities. Let us pray for our stake presidents and for our bishops. I am confident that if we do that, it will greatly bless those priesthood leaders and greatly bless family members as they pray for the Lord's anointed.

Conclusion

Prayer is truly one of the fundamental building blocks of raising up a family to the Lord. If families pray together, the children will learn to pray on their own, and they will then be far more likely to go on missions, obtain the priesthood, and be endowed and sealed in the temple.

Not much has been said in this chapter about individual prayer. Because of their personal nature, it would not be appropriate to share experiences with personal prayer in a book like this. It's difficult even to share many of these things about the family. But all that has been said here about family prayer also applies to individual prayer, which sets the example for family prayer.

Also, fasting was not illustrated as amply as ought to be the case. When there is time, families certainly ought to fast to add to their spiritual preparedness. There is great strength and power in fasting and prayer.

We must teach our children to fast. As they try to solve problems in life, they should see the example of their parents who fast more frequently than just the minimum of once a month asked by the Church. Members of the Church are free to fast as often as they feel a need to do so. We have always felt it important to teach our children early that principle so they could better learn to resolve their problems under the direction of the Lord. We have taught our children some months before they reach age eight to begin fasting one meal, and then at baptism they begin fasting the full twenty-four hours without food or water. It has been a challenge for a few of them at the beginning, but they have quickly learned the principle and can then use it often throughout their life.

Let me remind you again that Satan will do all in his power to keep you and your family from praying. He will try to bring about contention in the family. He will try to make you forget to pray. He knows well that if he can somehow weaken or destroy the spiritual link between you and your Heavenly Father, he will have obtained a major objective.

Lastly, lest anyone misunderstand, our family has had many problems and challenges. Things have not always gone forward smoothly. However I bear testimony that when problems have arisen, prayer has been of great help in solving them. Regular prayer, on the part of children and parents, will bring about inspired solutions to the problems faced in a family.

May the Lord bless all of us to learn better how to use prayer to change our hearts and humble the hearts of our children. The key seems to be to turn the children to the Lord. You will thereby save them and yourself.
