Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Four

Teaching Your Family through Scripture Reading

I will never forget one time when I had been reading stories from the Book of Mormon to our five-year-old son. I told him the story about Nephi going back to Jerusalem to get the plates, trying to teach him the importance of having his heroes be the Lord's servants in the scriptures, men like Nephi.

After having read the story, I thought I should check his understanding. I asked him, "Son, why do you suppose Nephi had to go back to Jerusalem to get the plates?"

He thought a moment and said, "Well, Dad, I guess they didn't have anything else to eat on."

I was flabbergasted. Here I was talking of brass plates, and the only plates this five-year-old had ever heard of were the ones on the table. This father learned a good lesson that day about checking people's understanding and being careful not to teach over their heads.

Some time later when one of my other children heard of the incident, he said, "Dad, I guess you know why the Lamanites always had bruised knees, don't you?"

"Why?" I asked.

His answer: "Because of all the knee-fights!"

Some families seem to think reading the scriptures together must be dry and boring. Nothing could be further from the truth. Reading the scriptures together can be enjoyable and enlightening in many ways.

Benefits of Family Scripture Reading

Just a few of the great benefits that can come from family scripture reading are:

On and on goes the list. We can learn many valuable things through reading the scriptures together. They truly are instructions from heaven to us on the earth. If we will receive them in the right spirit, we will be taught by the Lord how to return to our heavenly home.

The Value of the Lord's Words

How does the Lord feel about the value of his own words? What follows is his answer from the scriptures. These passages explain the purpose and the value of his holy word:

The words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do (2 Nephi 32:3).

From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works (2 Timothy 3:15-17).

[The scriptures] shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the Lord His God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them (Deuteronomy 17:19).

The scriptures are given for your instruction, they contain the fullness of the Gospel; and the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect (D&C 35:20).

They shall pray always that I may unfold the [scriptures] to their understanding (D&C 32:4).

When ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things (Moroni 10:4-5).

It is my voice which speaketh [the scriptures] unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them; Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words (D&C 18:35-36).

They said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures? (Luke 24:32).

Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God (Romans 10:17).

Whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked (Helaman 3:29).

As many of them as . . . are led to believe the holy scriptures, . . . [are led] to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto them—Therefore, as many as have come to this, ye know of yourselves are firm and steadfast in the faith, and in the thing wherewith they have been made free (Helaman 15:7-8).

A Modern-Day Prophet on the Value of the Lord's Words

A modern-day prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson, has often explained the value of the scriptures. Read these statements from him carefully, as they will give you a new and deeper appreciation for the value of word of the Lord:

[We Latter-day Saints have] not been using the Book of Mormon as we should. Our homes are not as strong unless we are using it to bring our children to Christ. Our families may be corrupted by worldly trends and teachings unless we know how to use the book to expose and combat falsehoods ("The Book of Mormon Is the Word of God," Ensign, May 1975, p. 65).

Let us use that standard [the Book of Mormon] to judge what we read, the music we hear, the entertainment we watch, the thoughts we think ("A Sacred Responsibility," Ensign, May 1986, p. 78).

Children, support your parents in their efforts to have daily family scripture study. Pray for them as they pray for you. The adversary does not want scripture study to take place in our homes, and so he will create problems if he can. But we must persist (p. 78).

I bless you with increased discernment to judge between Christ and anti-Christ. I bless you with increased power to do good and to resist evil. I bless you with increased understanding of the Book of Mormon. I promise you that from this moment forward, if we will daily sup from its pages and abide by its precepts, God will pour out upon each child of Zion and the Church a blessing hitherto unknown—and we will plead to the Lord that He will begin to lift the condemnation—the scourge and judgment. Of this I bear solemn witness [p. 78].

Let us not treat lightly the great things we have received from the hand of the Lord. His word is one of the most valuable gifts He has given us. Recommit yourselves to a study of the scriptures. Immerse yourselves in them daily . . . . Read them in your families and teach your children to love and treasure them. Then prayerfully and in counsel with others, seek every way possible to encourage the members of the Church to follow your example ("The Power of the Word," Ensign, May 1986, p. 82).

There are three great reasons why Latter-day Saints should make the study of the Book of Mormon a life-time pursuit.

A. It is the keystone of our religion.

It is the keystone in our witness of Christ.

It is the keystone of our doctrine.

It is the keystone of our testimony.

B. The Book of Mormon is written for our day.

It gives the pattern for preparing for the Second Coming. The major portion of the book centers on the few decades just prior to Christ coming to America. It tells why some were destroyed and others were standing at the temple when Christ came.

C. It will help us to draw nearer to God (See "The Book of Mormon—Keystone of Our Religion," Ensign, November 1986, pp. 5-7).

If [the Book of Mormon writers] saw our day, and chose those things which would be of greatest worth to us, is not that how we should study the Book of Mormon? We should constantly ask ourselves, "Why did the Lord inspire Mormon (or Moroni or Alma) to include that in his record? What lesson can I learn from that to help me live in this day and age?" (p. 6).

In the Book of Mormon we find a pattern for preparing for the Second Coming (p. 6).

It is not just that the Book of Mormon teaches us truth, though it indeed does that. It is not just that the Book of Mormon bears testimony of Christ, though it indeed does that, too. But there is something more. There is a power in the book which will begin to flow into your lives the moment you begin a serious study of the book. You will find greater power to resist temptation. You will find the power to avoid deception (p. 7).

These two great books of latter-day scripture [the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants] are bound together as revelations from Israel's God for the purpose of gathering and preparing His people for the second coming of the Lord ("The Gift of Modern Revelation," Ensign, November 1986, p. 79).

The Book of Mormon title page declares its purpose is threefold: to show what great things the Lord has done, to teach of the covenants of the Lord, and to convince both Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ.

The Doctrine and Covenants is the only book in the world that has a preface written by the Lord Himself (p. 79).

We must honor [the Book of Mormon] by reading it, by studying it, by taking its precepts into our lives and transforming them into lives required of the true followers of Christ (p. 80).

No member of this Church can stand approved in the presence of God who has not seriously and carefully read the Book of Mormon (p. 80).

The Book of Mormon is the instrument that God has designed to "sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out [His] elect" (Moses 7:62). This sacred volume of scripture needs to become more central in our preaching, our teaching, and our missionary work ("Flooding the Earth with the Book of Mormon," Ensign, November 1988, p. 4).

One of the most important things learned in reading the scriptures is how to hear the voice of the Lord to us. Instruction comes not only from reading the words; when we prayerfully ponder them, the Lord can speak "between the lines" to us. In other words, he can speak to us about our current problems while we are reading the content of the scriptures. In fact, the very act of reading them (it almost doesn't matter where) seems to open the door to direction from the Lord if we approach our reading humbly. The scriptures are one of the greatest tools we have for communicating with the Lord. Elder Bruce R. McConkie once told me he had received more revelation while reading the scriptures than in any other way. I bear testimony that the same is true for me.

What parents would not want their children to learn and apply the principles discussed above? I'm sure we all desire that for our family members. And of course, the best possible way to teach those skills to our families is through example. We need to work and learn how to read the scriptures ourselves; then we will be in a better position to teach our families. However, if we are not sure about how to do it, one of the best ways to learn is just to do it.

The best way to make sure children learn those skills is for faithful parents to model them in family scripture reading. If children day after day learn from personal experience to read the passages, to understand them, to cross-reference them, to learn from the Lord, to believe in the standards taught, and to apply them in daily life, then when they are on their own they will almost automatically know how to do those things. The Lord said in D&C 98:16: "Seek diligently to turn the hearts of the children to their fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the children." If parents want to have the hearts of their children turned to them, and to have their own hearts turned to their children, I know of no better way to accomplish that than through family scripture reading. In that process, both generations—parents and children—assimilate values from heaven, and thereby their hearts are drawn together. The promises to parents and children before they came to this world begin to bear fruit in this life.

Testimonies knit together in love, with the Spirit confirming to parents and children the pure message of heaven, will truly turn the hearts of parents to their children and the hearts of children to their parents. When parents study together with their children, their gospel understanding, love, and unity will grow geometrically.

Plainly the Lord feels strongly about our studying his words. Doing so may be one of our most important tasks in learning of the Lord and how to return to him.

Excuses for Not Reading the Scriptures

Despite inspired counsel to the contrary, many families in the Church still do not read the scriptures together regularly each day. As I have traveled around the Church, I have estimated that perhaps 10 to 15 percent of the members read the scriptures together as families. Why is that so? As I've talked with a number of families, I've heard things like:

* We're just too busy as a family.

* We're all going different ways and can't ever seem to get together.

* We've tried it many times and have gone for a few weeks and then given up.

* We're just not sure where to start or how to go about it.

* I'm not confident enough to read the scriptures knowing that I'll have to explain them to my children. I might be embarrassed.

* We've just never made the effort to get our children their own books of scripture.

* I guess we just never really decided that we would do it.

* When we've tried to read the scriptures together, it's just caused contention.

* Our children have just rebelled against it. They don't like to read the scriptures.

* Our children complain that they can't understand what the scriptures are all about.

Speaking to the youth and children of the Church, President Ezra Taft Benson gave great counsel concerning family scripture study: "Children, support your parents in their efforts to have daily family scripture study. Pray for them as they pray for you. The adversary does not want scripture study to take place in our homes, and so he will create problems if he can. But we must persist."

The list of excuses seems to go on and on. I think we would have a difficult time giving any of those excuses to the Lord. Do we really think he'd say, "Well, I suppose I understand. It's okay, then, that you didn't read the scriptures."

Some people seem to have a problem with pride or lack of humility. Sometimes they are afraid to admit they don't understand the scriptures and begin working forward from there. They don't want others to know they don't know. But then their growth is stymied. People must truly humble themselves before they read the words of the Lord or they will not understand them, enjoy them, or grow from the experience.

I believe that one of the main reasons families have not regularly read the scriptures together is that they have just not decided in their hearts that it was important enough to do. They have not made the decision that they would find out how to do it at all costs. If they understood the importance of this family activity, they would surely do all in their power—both husband and wife or single parent—to make sure that this family practice became a foundation stone of their family traditions. It might very well do as much as any other thing to help exalt their family.

Learning from One Another in Scripture Reading

I will never forget one time when we were reading in the Book of Mormon about the importance of having a testimony. We stopped and asked the question, "Are there different kinds of testimonies?" We discussed that thought for a little while.

Then I asked the family to take turns telling how they knew the gospel was true. I asked, "How do you know that for sure?" We closed our eyes and prayerfully pondered the answer to that question. The answers from the family surprised me because of their great variety.

One daughter, age twelve, said: "I know the gospel is true because I have seen the Lord answer prayers. He has answered our family's prayers. He has answered my prayers. The Lord truly does answer us when we ask, and he will help us with our problems. My testimony is based heavily on that knowledge."

A seventeen-year-old boy said: "I believe my greatest testimony is that the Lord will heal people through priesthood blessings and that faith really works." He then related an example or two that had strengthened his testimony in those things. He concluded, "I could never be convinced now that the Church is not true. I have seen the power of the priesthood in operation. I know that faith is a real power and that it works."

Another boy, a recently returned missionary said: "I know the Church is true because of the Book of Mormon. I have come to know, as Joseph Smith said, that 'The Book of Mormon [is] the most correct of any book on earth and the keystone of our religion and that a man will get closer to God by abiding by its precepts than by any other book.'" He then bore testimony of how he had obtained his testimony through a personal revelation while reading of the Savior's visit to the Nephites.

A fifteen-year-old daughter said: "I know the Church is true because of Jesus Christ. Above all else, I know that he is the Savior of the world. I know that he loves me. I know that he has power to help me if I pray to the Father in his name. I have received a personal witness about Jesus Christ and thereby I know that his gospel is true, as is the Church."

My good wife then added: "I suppose all I have heard this morning teaches me that the Church is true. I would add one other thing: giving service to other people. To the degree I have lived the gospel through service, I have had witness after witness come to me that these things are true. My first testimony came through leading the music in Sunday School as a teenaged girl. As I memorized the words of the hymns and sang them with all the people, I felt the Spirit of the Lord come into my heart."

As she spoke, I could not help but think of Jesus' teaching: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:16-17).

I learned a great lesson that morning as I listened to my family members share how they knew that the gospel was true. It showed me that testimonies can come in a variety of ways, that the Spirit will work upon people in different ways, but the result is the same: They come to know the gospel is true. It made me think of the passage in John 3:8: "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit."

What a choice experience would have been lost to the Cook family if we had not been reading in the scriptures that morning about the importance of testimonies!

Why We Should Read the Scriptures as a Family

The Lord gives many reasons for reading the scriptures, and I believe those reasons are true for both individuals and families. Some of the blessings I have seen come from family scripture reading include the following:

* Reading the scriptures together creates a family worship time, a way to effectively worship God together.

* Scripture reading will give children a "new heart"—one of the most important blessings of all.

* Scripture reading builds faith in and among family members.

* Scripture reading makes it possible for the Lord's servants in the scriptures to become young people's heroes.

* Scripture reading allows families to be together. In today's busy world, that alone is a wonderful blessing.

* Scripture reading engenders humility and love in the family.

* Scripture reading helps the family get up in the morning and start the day, or, if they're reading at night, to conclude the day on a spiritual note.

* Scripture reading brings about a daily focus on God, on others, and on self, thus bringing about repentance and a desire to change.

* Scripture reading allows time for loving, sharing, understanding, and listening.

* Scripture reading gives children an opportunity to raise some of the concerns they face in school or with their peers and then to have those items discussed by the family and related to the words of the Lord.

* Scripture reading promotes the sharing of values between generations.

* Scripture reading provides the opportunity for testimonies to be gained and borne.

On and on go the benefits. Why then, do so many families have difficulty trying to read the scriptures! Surely Satan is working hard to prevent it.

President Benson made a powerful statement about the impact scripture reading can have in our lives:

I bless you with increased desire to flood the earth with the Book of Mormon, to gather out from the world the elect of God who are yearning for the truth but know not where to find it (Ensign, May 1987, p. 85).

Elder Marion G. Romney said:

I feel certain that if, in our homes, parents will read from the Book of Mormon prayerfully and regularly, both by themselves and with their children, the spirit of that great book will come to permeate our homes and all who dwell therein. The spirit of reverence will increase, mutual respect and consideration for each other will grow, the spirit of contention will depart, parents will counsel their children in greater love and wisdom, children will be more responsive and submissive to that counsel, righteousness will increase, faith, hope, and charity, the pure love of Christ will abound in our homes and lives bringing in their wake peace, joy, and happiness (Conference Report, April 1960, pp. 112-13).

We should not be surprised that the Lord's servants would so testify about the power of the scriptures. In his great intercessory prayer the Lord said: "Sanctify them [his disciples] through thy truth: thy word is truth" (John 17:17).

I bear testimony that family scripture reading is of great importance.

Our family had difficulty for many years in holding scripture reading. We would be faithful for a few days or a few weeks but then slip back into our old routine. We would then try to start all over again. We never could quite decide that we were going to hold it and have enough fortitude to do so. Finally, my wife and I fasted and prayed about it, and we determined, resolved, and decided that we would start scripture reading as a Cook family tradition—that we would do whatever it took, that we would pay whatever price it cost.

We called a family council meeting and discussed it with our children. We bore testimony of its importance. Their hearts were touched sufficiently that we all agreed we really ought to do it. We discussed how we could put it into practice and laid out a plan to begin in the mornings.

It wasn't easy. We went through difficult times with some children not wanting to get up or coming late. At times we wondered if we would be able to continue, but we did, and our family began to see the results. After those initial months of difficulty, we finally established it as a Cook family tradition.

As I write this book, it has been seventeen years since that decision was made. I bear testimony that I know of no other thing that has had a greater impact on our family than being up nearly every morning praying together, reading the scriptures, loving one another, and trying to assimilate the doctrines of Jesus Christ. It has truly been of great benefit in helping us raise up a family to the Lord.

When to Read Scriptures as a Family

When should we read the scriptures together? Some families have found it best to do it early in the morning. That way, they can start their children off on a spiritual note and prepare them for the challenges they will face that day. If it is done early enough, generally everyone can be together. Other families have found it best to read in the evenings around the supper table or later before bedtime. I suppose it doesn't matter much when scripture reading is held as long as it is held, with a regular place and time set so it can occur each day.

Some families have to arrange their scripture reading around early morning seminary. Seminary, as important as it is, should never take the place of family scripture reading. Some families have had the idea that their children were learning the scriptures sufficiently at church and in seminary. That is not the case. Family scripture reading takes first priority. Some families have found it necessary to hold two brief scripture readings (and two family prayers) to accommodate all their children.

Our family has found it best to hold scripture reading in the morning, typically between 6:00 and 6:30, depending on when the children have to be at school. Our scripture reading has normally taken about twenty or thirty minutes. Getting up that early has always been a great blessing to our children. In fact, one of my sons said when he went on his mission that he obeyed the rules but still got to "sleep in" half an hour later than usual.

Some families have difficulties with children who do not want to get up early. When our children were young, we tried singing to them, tickling them, rewarding them, and punishing them. We even tried dragging them out of bed. Sometimes when a child missed scripture reading, I would have the rest of the family talk during breakfast about what a wonderful time we had had, trying to make the person feel a bit remorseful that he or she had been left out. Although we did this in a humorous way, it didn't work either, as the children saw it as a subtle form of manipulation, which I suppose it was.

One time one of our little daughters invented a punishment that if we couldn't get up for scripture reading early in the morning, it meant that we were too tired, so we had to go to bed an hour early. That seemed to work for a few weeks to get everyone up, but sooner or later Dad or Mom became "the sheriff" or "the enforcer" to try to get them to go to bed early, which was always difficult and caused hurt feelings.

We soon learned that such tactics ultimately create resentment, ruining the spirit of scripture reading for everyone.

When children are small, they may need to be awakened, but we realized that if we were going to have the right spirit in scripture reading, it had to be because each person wanted to be there. It couldn't be just because Dad and Mom wanted them there. Thus, we finally got each child an alarm clock and gave them the responsibility to get themselves up and come to scripture reading. Some of them tried us, thinking we would wake them anyway, but we didn't, and they slept through scripture reading. This went on for a number of days until they learned we really meant it. If they did not get up on their own, we would go forward without them. Then they began to set their alarms and get themselves up.

That has been a great side benefit of scripture reading. Our children have learned to get themselves up early in the morning. Some young people don't learn that until they enter the mission field. Waking children up every morning only makes them dependent upon their parents. But they need to learn independence and self-reliance and to be disciplined enough to get themselves up.

The key to getting children to come to scripture reading is to make the experience good enough, sufficiently full of the Spirit, and enjoyable enough that they will want to be there and will feel bad if they miss. When we first started reading the scriptures together, if someone missed we would announce it to the whole family or kid the person about it. But later, when we were a little wiser, we would privately ask if the person was sick or had other problems. Usually the child had simply slept through the alarm or forgotten to set it. If the problem continued, my wife or I would usually talk with the child in private, encouraging him or her, praying with him or her, and generally doing what we could to touch the child's heart. Our children soon developed the true intention to be with the family every morning.

In the past few years, because the tradition has been firmly set, scripture reading has become truly enjoyable, and everyone wants to be there. We have learned much as a family as a result.

Where to Hold Scripture Reading

Each family will need to decide where to hold scripture reading. Some have tried holding it around the parents' bed. However, the temptation to fall asleep is too great if this is done early in the morning. Some have done it around the breakfast or supper table, although this makes it a little more difficult to manage your scriptures and to mark them. Some have tried reading while seated on the floor or around an empty table. Some have sat in the family room on the couch. I suppose it really doesn't matter where it is held if the environment is comfortable, inviting, and conducive to learning.

In our scripture reading we've tried to teach the children to have a red pencil, to mark important passages, to cross-reference things, and so forth. Thus, we've tried sitting around the kitchen table in the mornings, but for us that's a little bit formal. The children have enjoyed more sitting on the couch in their bathrobes or snuggled up under a blanket.

How to Hold Scripture Reading

One of things a family has to decide is what to read. We have found, especially when the family was younger, that the Book of Mormon is by far the easiest book of scripture to understand. The Old Testament seems to be the hardest. For a number of years we just read the Book of Mormon three or four times until our family was a little older. Then we began to read in the New Testament and the Pearl of Great Price. We also read some of the stories in the Old Testament.

Families will have to decide whether to study the Book of Mormon from beginning to end or to study it by subject. We have found that both are important ways of learning. We tend to read from beginning to end, but we stop anyplace we are interested in a particular concept. Then we may study that subject for a number of mornings, using the Topical Guide and Bible Dictionary, until we understand it.

Whether it takes us one morning or five or six mornings, we do what we need to do to understand what we are reading, without feeling the need to rush on to continue a certain reading pace. One man said it well: "You ought not read for mileage." Thus, we read by subject as well as by sequence.

We have found it important that each family member have a set of scriptures. Our little ones, especially, have taken great pleasure in having their own books with their own names on them, their own marking pencils, and so on. This seems to add to the importance of the scriptures and of scripture reading. Then the little ones are much more prone to say, "Wait, it's my turn to read" or "Can I read another verse?"

In our scripture reading, we always start with a word of prayer. We try to remember to ask the Lord to bless us that our understanding might be quickened as we read the scriptures. We have learned, as I'm sure you have, that we cannot read the scriptures as we do other books. They must be prayed over, and we must humble ourselves if we really want to understand what the Lord is telling us. That thought was surely taught clearly in D&C 32:4, which says: "They shall give heed to that which is written [the scriptures], and pretend to no other revelation; and they shall pray always that I may unfold the same [the meaning of the scriptures] to their understanding" (D&C 32:4).

We have learned over the years that having a prayer is not just something traditional that we ought to do. In truth, to the degree we humble ourselves in prayer and ask for understanding, the Lord enriches our reading of the scriptures.

I have found that I need to be up earlier than my family to have my own personal scripture reading. If I've had a spiritual experience with the scriptures before my family joins me, it is much easier to lead scripture reading with the Spirit so that each person can have a spiritual experience.

After we have prayed, we usually call on one person to begin reading, and the person will read one or two verses after the place we last stopped. That person then calls on one of the others, without notice, to explain what was just read. That keeps all of us awake and alert, and it has been very effective in helping us listen a little better.

After the person has explained the content of the verses, the reader tries to ask at least one question about the text that the whole family can answer. The reason for having children ask a question is to teach them how to read the scriptures, asking questions as they go. I am convinced that the scriptures are largely a book of answers. The problem is that we do not know the original questions. If we will get into the habit of asking questions verse after verse, we will understand much more. I've found that even little children are able to ask good questions. In fact, sometimes they ask questions that really surprise me. Parents should help children and each other to focus their questions on what their family needs to learn that day. We should always be thinking, "What does this mean to me personally?"

In the beginning children tend to ask knowledge questions like "What was Nephi's brother's name?" Later they begin to ask "feeling" questions like "How was it that Nephi had faith to be able to do that" or "Why did Alma believe the words of Abinadi? How could he have had so much faith when all he heard was Abinadi's preaching?" Still later they begin to ask more important questions like "How could we obtain faith like Samuel the Lamanite had?" Asking questions is very important.

The parents may also ask a question or two to direct the children's thinking to the more important parts of what was just read. We have felt no desire to hurry through any particular verse. Many times we have stopped on a verse and related an example from our own lives that illustrates the verse, or we have borne testimony about the verse. Many times we ask questions like, "Who can explain this verse in such a way that it will apply to what we are doing today?" or "How does this verse affect you personally?"

Many times we look up references in the Topical Guide, refer to the footnotes, or use the Bible Dictionary to gain further understanding. If we know a particular verse is important, we usually help the children cross-reference it to some other verse that may help them later when they are studying on their own. With my older children, many of the cross-references they wrote when younger have become more valuable to them over the years. Many times they've wondered how those references got into their books, having forgotten it had occurred during family scripture reading.

When we're concluding our scripture reading, sometimes we ask what the most important thing was that anyone learned that morning. An even better question is, "What is the most important thing any of you have felt this morning?" We then give the children a chance to respond, if they desire. Usually one or two do. Sometimes we try to take the most important idea and apply it that day, such as praying more frequently, humbling ourselves more, reaching out to other people more, and so on.

After our scripture reading, we sing a verse of a hymn (many times a Primary hymn), or someone is called on to share a scripture they have memorized. These things have had great impact on the family over the years. Singing, especially, helps quiet the little ones and puts them in a spirit to pray. Every week or two, family members, voluntarily and on their own, learn a new scripture to share with the family. This sets a great environment and allows parents to teach concepts that may not have been covered in scripture reading. Our children four years of age and up have begun learning the Articles of Faith this way.

After the song or scripture, family prayer is offered by the one called upon. Then, after the prayer, my wife and I throw our arms around each of our children, saying, "I love you. Have a good day." This is truly a great way to begin a morning. Many times our discussion of the scriptures carries over to the breakfast table and helps each of us again focus on the Lord as we begin our day.

We have never felt committed to read according to schedule, such as reading one chapter each morning. We have always read just a few verses, seeking for understanding, feeling, and application. I have always felt it was much more important for my children to love Alma, for example, than to know the names of his sons.

President Marion G. Romney illustrated this idea most clearly. Whenever he was not on a Church assignment, he would sleep out on the lawn in a tent with his son, George, on hot summer nights. Part of that experience usually included reading and discussing a chapter in the Book of Mormon. Once when George was sick and confined to the upper bunk of his room, President Romney quietly went in, lay down in the lower bunk, and offered to continue the practice that had come to mean much to both of them. George began reading aloud. While he was reading, he hesitated a bit. Then he asked, "Daddy, do you ever cry when you read these things?"

President Romney was touched, answering that indeed tears did come to his eyes when the Spirit bore witness of the truthfulness of what he was reading. George said, "Tears came to my eyes tonight, too" (See F. Burton Howard, Marion G. Romney: His Life and Faith [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988], p. 154].

Brother Romney understood the real importance of reading the scriptures together.

Other Activities for Scripture Reading

Sometimes variety is needed during scripture reading, particularly if the family is a little sleepy or slow to respond. In such cases, you might call on one of your children to give a short talk on a certain topic. Give the child a minute or two to look up some scriptures, and that will be the scripture reading. Sometimes you might do some scripture chasing to teach the location of scriptures instead of reading. We have sometimes worked on learning the locations of books within the volumes of scriptures. All these things help add some variety.

All of our eight children have learned to read through following along in the Book of Mormon during family scripture reading. The memory of doing so will stay with them throughout their lives, influencing them for good.

At times we have found it important not to read the scriptures every single morning. Sometimes we read Monday through Friday. Then, on Saturday, the children sleep in, and we ask one of them to share a spiritual thought or scripture at breakfast. After family prayer on Sundays, we normally hold our devotional, and that becomes our scripture reading.

Sometimes, instead of reading the scriptures, Dad or Mom may share an experience. Perhaps one of the children has had a special experience the night before, and we have him or her tell about it.

After general conference, for a week or two, we will read the conference talks from the Ensign. Sometimes we will assign specific talks to the children to report on in scripture reading. This gives us a chance to have a child learn more about a particular topic for which he or she has a need.

Reading the conference talks has been very effective in teaching the importance of relying upon the words of the living prophets. We usually do not read all the talks to the family but only those that best apply to our children. This has helped strengthen our family according to our needs as well as teaching the whole family more about the doctrine of the kingdom.

Another benefit that has come from reading the words of the living prophets has been to give our children some modern-day heroes. Telling the children stories about some of our modern prophets helps the children want to be like them. This practice counteracts the natural tendency of some young people to set up worldly heroes whom they may desire to follow.

Some mornings we have even used the time to plan a vacation or to schedule a particularly difficult day or week. When the children were younger, we marched around the house to some good music. We also occasionally share important news events. Sometimes we listen to beautiful music or even do fifteen minutes of exercise. We might read an article in the New Era or the Friend; the Church magazines provide many opportunities to teach gospel principles while providing lighter reading for children. Our children have always delighted in receiving the magazines, especially the Friend. Parents can relate some of these articles back to the scriptures.

The most important thing about scripture reading is that it brings the family together for learning, loving, and sharing. If we can center on the Lord, we can make all our days more effective. I have always assumed it was my responsibility as a father to leave my family happy as I leave for work in the morning, thus making it easier for my wife to handle the children through the day.

Things Learned through Family Scripture Study

I have surely come to believe what was said by Mosiah: "It were not possible that our father, Lehi, could have remembered all these things, to have taught them to his children, except it were for the help of these plates; for he having been taught in the language of the Egyptians therefore he could read these engravings, and teach them to his children, that thereby they could teach them to their children, and so fulfilling the commandments of God, even down to this present time" (Mosiah 1:4).

Doesn't a parent feel that way? Except for the plates, except for the scriptures themselves, we would never be able to remember all the things we should teach our children. However, when we read through the scriptures systematically, all of the doctrines are treated in a balanced approach, those with greater importance receiving the most attention, the Lord himself having prioritized the content. How thankful I am for these scriptures. Mosiah surely spoke the truth.

The holy scriptures represent humanity's spiritual memory. When our connection with the scriptures is severed, we are tragically denied an awareness of the spiritual history that has come to us from the very beginning, even from the premortal life. The scriptures truly preserve the great doctrines of the kingdom.

How Prayers Are Answered

I will never forget one experience when we were reading through the wars in Alma. One of my children said, "We've read so many chapters. We're not getting much out of the wars. I wonder why they're in here." We talked a little that morning about the importance of the Lord having those chapters in there and that there might come a day when we would really need to know some of the specifics about war. We also said there were many jewels buried in those chapters. That very morning we began reading in Alma, chapter 58. For the first time we took notice of these powerful verses:

We did pour out our souls in prayer to God, that he would strengthen us and deliver us out of the hands of our enemies, yea, and also give us strength that we might retain our cities, and our lands, and our possessions, for the support of our people.

Yea, and it came to pass that the Lord our God did visit us with assurances that he would deliver us; yea, insomuch that he did speak peace to our souls, and did grant unto us great faith, and did cause us that we should hope for our deliverance in him.

And we did take courage with our small force which we had received, and were fixed with a determination to conquer our enemies, and to maintain our lands, and our possessions, and our wives, and our children, and the cause of our liberty. (Alma 58:10-12; italics added.)

Just as Satan tries to influence us for evil, the Spirit of the Lord influences us to choose what is right. Let us look for a moment at the way the Lord influences those who humble themselves and pray to him. He is able to place feelings and thoughts in their minds to help them.

Verse 10 describes what we desire when we are struggling with a problem: to have the Lord strengthen us and deliver us from evil. And how do we accomplish that? We pour out our souls to God in prayer. Verse 11 probably provides one of the best descriptions of how the Lord responds to us, again through thoughts or feelings. He seems to do these four things:

What a tremendous way the Lord has of blessing us! He doesn't just solve our problems but he gives us assurance, peace, faith, and hope so that we will move forward to resolve our own problems under the direction of the Lord. Thus he makes us strong.

He helps us grow, and if we pursue the process over the years, we will ultimately become as God is. The effects of the influence of the Spirit are described well in verse 12. After we have been filled with assurance, peace, faith, and hope, we are then willing to take courage and have a fixed determination to conquer our enemies, our problems, our sins. Where does that courage and determination come from? From the Spirit of the Lord. The Lord actually provides additional power and strength because we have humbled ourselves and sought God.

Every time I read those verses or teach them to others, I think about where I learned them—during family scripture reading.

Two or three years after that experience, one of my sons was having a difficult time understanding an answer to prayer and was asking me about it. I opened up Alma 58, read those verses to him, and explained them. It was like a light turned on in his mind. He was so excited about these verses because they perfectly described his feelings and told him more clearly how the Lord answered prayers. Then we bore our testimonies to each other, and he said, "Dad, I'm surprised. Why haven't you ever shared that with me before?"

I just smiled and told him I had learned it with him three years before. It seemed that maybe just one of us had learned it, and we had a good laugh about that. A particular passage may not mean much to any of us unless we have a specific problem or need and then find the answer. That was a case where he read the answer with the family but really didn't understand the question. He had no personal need to know the answer.

It's difficult to be in tune with the Spirit day after day. Not all of our scripture readings are full of the Spirit, nor do we have great experiences every morning. Some mornings things are quite routine, but our scripture reading is consistent, and we have a good spirit together. When we find ourselves struggling and not having the Spirit, we have suggested to our family that we recount the mercies and blessings of the Lord to us. By so doing, many times we get the Spirit back. The effect of that is recognizing the hand of the Lord.

We ought not to forget the seven principles discussed in chapter 2 about inviting the Spirit of the Lord. If things are a little slow in your scripture reading, consider singing, having another prayer, bearing testimony, expressing love to one another, or sharing a spiritual experience. All of these things will bring the Spirit of the Lord back into your meeting so you will not have such a routine scripture reading.

Influencing Others through the Scriptures

A number of times when we have had serious sickness in our family, we have found great strength in reading the scriptures on such topics as faith, healings, priesthood blessings, and so on. I know of nothing greater that has helped us obtain healings and blessings in our family than reading the words of the Lord.

Whenever we doubted whether we could obtain such a blessing or healing, we just read and re-read the accounts of healings in the modern-day scriptures as well as in the New Testament. The words of the Lord fortified us to believe that anything is possible to "him that believeth." The scriptures have had as great an impact on our family in instilling faith and confidence in the Lord as any other thing of which I'm aware.

Joseph Smith's family seemed to understand that principle as well. The History of the Church records:

Notwithstanding the corruptions and abominations of the times, and the evil spirit manifested towards us on account of our belief in the Book of Mormon, at many places and among various persons, yet the Lord continued His watchful care and loving kindness to us day by day; and we made it a rule wherever there was an opportunity, to read a chapter in the Bible, and pray; and these seasons of worship gave us great consolation (1:188-89).

Clearly Joseph Smith did not read James 1:5 by accident. He had been taught by his family to read the scriptures faithfully and to obtain answers therefrom. Had his family not taught him about the importance of the word of the Lord in the Bible, perhaps he would not have read the words nor believed them nor had the experience of the First Vision. What a great lesson that is to us from the parents of the Prophet Joseph Smith! They tutored their son to have faith in the words of the Lord. As a result, he had one of the greatest visions ever given and eventually brought more scripture to the world than any other prophet who has ever lived.

Sometimes when we've been upset with one of our children at night, they haven't wanted to come to scripture reading the next morning. I remember one such occasion when one of our sons didn't get up for scripture reading. I was tempted to really get after him for not coming, but fortunately I felt that would make him have negative feelings about me and about scripture reading. I think he was depressed about the negative experience he had had with his parents the night before when he had to sit in his room for half an hour for speaking harshly.

I knew he was discouraged, so before I went to work I called to him in his bedroom, "Son, what do you say we pray together. Do you remember the day I was having such a hard day and you prayed for me five times during the day?"

He said he did.

I said, "Well, I'm going to do that for you today. I'm going to pray my hardest that you'll have an excellent day. Why don't we start off with you praying right now, and then I'll pray." This approach totally softened his heart and changed his feelings about the day. The fact that he knew I was going to pray for him meant a lot to him.

I did pray for him six or seven times during the day. When I got home from work, the first thing I asked was, "Son, how did your day go?"

He answered, "Just great. It's been one of the best days I've had."

Not only in school was it great, but when he came home he wanted to clean and work for his mother. Everything was in good order. It gave me a chance to teach again the idea that the Lord really will help us if we will pray to him. I was not surprised to see him up and ready to go the next morning for scripture reading without our having to say anything to him.

Be careful when your children are resisting spiritual things, such as coming to scripture reading or prayer, that you don't bring in the Church or the gospel. If parents say something like, "You are going to offend the Lord" or "The Church teaches this or teaches that," it may influence the children to reject the Church or the gospel just to win the argument. They don't really intend to, but the parents set it up so that is their children's only choice, and thus they will.

At times one of our children will say, "I'm not going to church" or "I don't know if I believe that or not." Instead of trying to argue or defend the Church, we have often said, "Well, you will have to seek the Spirit of the Lord to determine what is really right. We are not going to argue about the Church or about going to meetings. That has nothing to do with it. That's between you and the Lord. We are talking about some things that are right. If you turn your heart to the Lord and have a prayer about it, you will know for yourself." In other words, don't allow the subject of the Church into an argument between you and your children. If you do, you may lose, your child may lose, and certainly the Church will lose.

Some parents wonder if it is more important to go to school and other activities with their children than to read the scriptures together. Of course, both are important, but there is no question about priorities. Some parents might be very good at camping and fishing and do nothing with the scriptures. But I believe that many mistakes we make in raising our families can be softened if the children have been involved in the scriptures. If you have to choose between reading the Book of Mormon with your family or doing other activities, remember that all the Scout outings, fishing excursions, athletic events, and so on will not even come close to what can be gained from the scriptures. While much can be learned from various activities, studying the word of the Lord has eternal consequences.

The Scriptures Bring Peace and Remove Evil

The scriptures can comfort us, give us peace, and even remove evil from us if we humbly read them. One friend of mine told me of an experience he had after an exhausting day of work away from home. In his hotel room, he flipped on the television. This is the story he told:

For a while I watched a good show about the history of Will Rogers and what a great humorist he was. Afterward, an interesting movie came on. Unfortunately, part way through the movie a very bad scene came on. I should probably have turned it off but, feeling that I really needed to relax, I kept watching it. Then some other bad scenes came on. The movie had an excellent plot, but unfortunately these evil parts were in it.

After I turned the television off, I had my prayers and tried to go to sleep, but I lay there with my eyes wide open. Every time I closed my eyes, the evil thoughts of the movie came in. The power of Satan became very real to me, and I could not go to sleep. Again I closed my eyes and tried to sleep, praying that this evil spirit would leave me, but all that came into my mind were scenes from the movie. I repented of not having turned it off earlier. It became evident to me that the spirit of the devil had entered into my heart the moment I gave in to the temptation of watching the show. I struggled for over an hour praying and trying to get back the Spirit of the Lord. I could not do it. In fact, the evil feeling seemed to increase.

Finally, while praying, I felt I should read in the scriptures. Before opening the Book of Mormon, I prayed that it would open to a place that would teach me and give me relief. I opened the book to Alma 40:13: "The spirits of the wicked, yea, who are evil—for behold, they have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did enter into them, and take possession of their house—and these shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil."

I was so impressed with this verse, which described what had happened to me. I began to feel better, and as I read the rest of that chapter and part of the next, the Spirit of the Lord returned. I felt the evil spirit leave. I closed my eyes and fell asleep.

How thankful I am to the Lord for his great power that is capable of overcoming that of Satan. How true the words the Lord taught: "It came to pass that the devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he became subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto temptation" (D&C 29:40; italics added).

My friend learned a great lesson that night about the power of the scriptures over the devil. (It was similar to the experience of Christ quoting the scriptures in the three great temptations placed before him at the beginning of his ministry.) He also learned that he became subject to the will of the devil only because he yielded to temptation.

The Scriptures and Good Health

When one of my sons was thirteen, I had fractured three of my ribs and was suffering somewhat from that. We had read one morning in scripture reading about the effect of praying for one another:

Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much (James 5:14-16).

We talked about how prayer can reach across time and distance. That afternoon as I arrived home, this son said to me, "Dad, I prayed for you about five different times at school and at lunch that you would have a better day. You've had such hard days lately. I prayed really hard that you would get all your work done and that things would go better for you. I also prayed that your ribs would feel better." I was quite moved by that, as it really had been the best day I'd had for some time, and my ribs were feeling much better.

I think the faith of a child or a young man or woman has great power. That son, particularly, seems to have a lot of faith, and he is willing and happy to believe and to cause things to happen.

As a result of scripture reading, my son was reminded of the importance of prayer and saw it work with his dad. That's how children learn the truth of the gospel. Little by little their lamps are filled with faith through fasting, repentance, and prayer. In the process, their testimony becomes unshakable.

Another time we were reading in Alma about the Lord's having provided plants and roots as medicines: "There were some who died with fevers, which at some seasons of the year were very frequent in the land—but not so much so with fevers, because of the excellent qualities of the many plants and roots which God had prepared to remove the cause of diseases, to which men were subject by the nature of the climate" (Alma 46:40).

We were led in the scriptures to the Word of Wisdom, and we discussed the importance of having our bodies function well physically as a result of what we eat.

Over a number of mornings, we discussed ways to restructure our eating habits to focus more fully on plants, grains, and fruits and to include meat sparingly only in times of winter or cold. As the years have gone by, we have truly counted our blessings as a result of our good health from living these principles taught in the scriptures.

Once again, this great blessing came not only from reading the scriptures but from the confirmation of the Spirit of the Lord that that was the thing to do. After a period of time of living this way and having readjusted our eating habits, the real evidence of the truthfulness of the words of the Lord was found in the great health that our family has had since that time. We thank the Lord for the revelations he has given. They are true, and they will make us happier and draw us closer to the Lord.

The Scriptures and the Lost Cables

Upon moving from Mexico City at the completion of a Church assignment, we made ample preparation to safely transport the two personal computers we were bringing, with disc drives, printers, and so on. We planned to hand carry most of the delicate equipment. We did put a few cables in our big suitcases, but most of it was in our carry-on luggage.

Back in the States, when we tried to set up our computers so we could print out our diaries, we realized that we were missing three computer cables, so we were unable to print anything. Over several days we did our best to search and pray for the return of those cables. We knew we could buy some more, but we hated to spend the money because we felt certain they were somewhere in the house.

We speculated that one of the children had put the cables in an unlikely place, and we hoped they had not been placed in an empty box and thrown in the garbage. As the days passed, all the boxes were finally emptied, but we found no cables. We searched again and again. Finally we borrowed some cables so we could print the things we needed.

After nearly two weeks, I felt impressed as I was reading the Book of Mormon to tell the family that we should search to make sure we had done all in our power. We should have a family prayer and then check in every corner, as I felt confident we would find the cables. As I read the scriptures, the impression came to me to look again. Reading the scriptures is one of the best ways to hear the voice and direction of the Lord. I went to work early that day, so my wife and children prayed together. Most of them prayed throughout the day while they searched, but they found no cables. They searched in every cabinet, behind every curtain, in every drawer—in the bedrooms, the kitchen, the family room, and the garage. When they finished, there were still no cables. When I came home from work that night, I felt quite disappointed, because I had felt certain they would find them. The family was disappointed as well.

The next morning, doubts filled my mind: "The family searched the whole house. The cables are lost in the hotel, and you'll never get them." "You left them in Mexico. You can't possibly find them. You've searched every piece of furniture, every closet, every room, and they are not to be found."

To me, situations like this one where what is needed seems impossible are always a great sign that they are possible. The Lord seems to work best in those things that are impossible for us.

But my dominant thought that morning was, "Your family has prayed, they have believed they would find those cables, and they have not. As a result, will they not lose some of their faith?" This concerned me, since developing faith in my family has always been one of my greatest desires.

The thought came to me strongly, "Why do you want to find the cables? Are you looking for a sign to prove to the family, 'See, here are the lost cables; the Lord has done it again'?" There seems to be a very fine line between obtaining answers to prayers like that and seeking for a sign.

As I recognized that, I tried to humble myself more and intently prayed that the Lord would return the cables. I also believed they would be found, in spite of the fact that this now seemed impossible, since my family had searched every single place. The previous night, I had even searched some more myself, asking, "Did you look here? Did you look there?" They had truly searched every single place.

After I had prayed intently and before continuing with my list of things to do that day, a peaceful feeling descended upon me, a feeling of confidence that the cables would still be found. When that feeling came, I prayed that the Lord would show me in my mind where the cables were so I could go find them. I did feel they might be in the garage or in a certain place in the house, but the Lord did not answer my prayer in that manner.

When I returned from work that day, I went downstairs into the boys' room to find the newspaper. While there, I noticed a suitcase that was on the bed, ready to be put up in the attic. We had already put up the other thirteen suitcases.

I opened the suitcase. It felt a little heavier than usual, but it was empty. Then I realized there was a zipper along its side. I opened the zipper, and sure enough, there were the three cables. I was overjoyed, and I immediately went up and told my wife.

The whole family had searched the suitcase, but apparently no one had thought to unzip the side because it was level and straight, and it was hard to see that anything was in there. If someone had spent thirty seconds to carry the suitcase to the attic, the cables would have not been found—at least not for many months to come.

Why were the cables not found when the family searched so thoroughly? Perhaps the reason is that the Lord really does, because of love, test us over and over again. Many times the answers to our prayers are delayed or brought about in unusual ways to see if we will still believe. After the test of not finding them, the real test was, "Do you still believe?" If we could pass that test, then we would receive an answer from the Lord.

I feel that the pertinent point in this experience was when I determined I still believed in spite of what seemed to be the impossibility of finding the cables.

Some have asked, "Do you mean to say the Lord actually tests people in that way?" My answer is, "Yes, he does. Did he not know that he would never require the sacrifice of Isaac by Abraham? Yet he tested Abraham through all of that to the very last moment to see if Abraham would still believe. Before the Lord answered Abraham and Sarah's prayer for a son, years passed by. The Lord seems to have been saying, "Abraham and Sarah, do you still believe in the promise that you will have a child?" The testing in life is real. The Lord will test us over and over again to the ultimate degree to be sure that our unbelief is removed.

Why were the cables found? Perhaps for several reasons:

Through such experiences, the words of Isaiah take on greater meaning: "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord" (Isaiah 55:8).

The Lord will surely choose how he will answer prayer. Our challenge is to find out how to present an adequate offering in faith, humility, and prayer so that the Lord can respond.

I find it interesting that reading in the scriptures is what really brought about this great experience. It was the "cause" that finally brought the result. We all learned much from this experience.

The Impact of Scripture Reading on a Family

A family that is close to me struggled for many years to get started in reading the scriptures. In fact, some of their boys were already raised when they finally decided they would begin trying to read the scriptures with their last two children. What follows is their account:

Mother: "Arriving home from general conference, my husband and I talked about how we could start, once again, to have regular family scripture study.

"After being in conference and receiving encouraging words from our BYU son and some extended family, our consciences had been pricked or rather pierced. We knew we needed to repent. This was very important to me, and I felt a great urgency to have this take place.

"We decided to present this idea to our two daughters, one Primary age and one teenager, at our next family home evening. I was worried about how the girls would accept it. One wasn't too fond of scripture reading, and both hated to get up early. We fasted and prayed and tried to invite the Spirit to witness that what we were saying was true. We also used scriptures and quotations from President Benson's conference talk.

"Well, it went beautifully. We expressed our love to the girls and to our Father in Heaven and the Savior. We said we needed to repent of not having had more spirituality and scripture study in our home. The Spirit was there and touched their hearts and ours as we bore testimony to the truthfulness of what we had said. The girls agreed, and we are now having scripture study early each weekday morning. I also want to tell you that we have had a wonderful spirit of peace and love come into our home that wasn't there before. I can see it is solving many of our problems without addressing the problems individually. The children are more patient and loving, and I also find myself being more considerate. More important, testimonies are growing, and there is a greater desire and effort to live the gospel.

"We are reading slowly and discussing each verse and how we can apply it to our lives. That is an important key. We are also trying hard to have the Spirit with us, as we realize that without the Spirit's bearing witness, real learning and doing do not take place."

Daughter, age twelve: "The night Mom and Dad gave us the lesson on their strong feelings that we should start family scripture study, I knew immediately they were right. My eyes were watering, and I felt all warm inside. The Spirit came so strong to me that night. I was afraid if I heard one more word about it, I would burst into tears. I don't know why except that my mom's words really touched my heart. Everything went smoothly that first morning. We decided on 6:00 A.M. Each morning I have a hard time getting up. I like reading in the scriptures. I just hate getting up in the morning. Although it's not easy, I go with the best attitude I have because I know it will save our family from the outside world, and I know it's right."

Daughter, age fifteen: "For family home evening my mom and dad fasted and prayed for the Spirit. They told us that they wanted to repent for lacking the spirituality in our home and family. They said they wanted to start having scripture study. So we planned to start the next week. It was hard getting up that early but I got used to it. We read a little and discussed it. I felt really good that whole day. Everything went really well. I didn't think I'd be ready on time for school because it took up part of my getting-ready time. But I was, and even a little early. I was in a happy mood the whole day. I went home from school that day feeling really good about this neat thing we started. And now I'm really grateful for it. It makes each day better."

Father: "I certainly agree with what my wife and daughters have written. Several weeks have now passed. It hasn't been a "flash in the pan" attempt and failure because the successes have continued. We have never missed holding our scripture reading. One daughter has missed two days in that time, one daughter missed one day, and the parents are full attenders.

"We do not force anyone to attend, although strong encouragement is given, such as turning on lights and giving "good morning" greetings. We sing a hymn promptly at 6:00 A.M. Some straggle in during or at the close of the hymn but always in time for a short beginning prayer.

"An important part of our success is that we are studying and experiencing the scriptures together, not just reading the Book of Mormon. We are not trying to complete the reading of the book. Rather, we are trying to have more family togetherness. We try to relate our family to Nephi's family: pride, murmuring, family contention, the importance of records (journals and genealogies), having a goodly family, and so on have all furnished interesting discussion topics. We have also drawn pictures of Lehi's vision of the tree of life and talked about its various elements, and we have discussed Nephi's revelation in relation to American history.

"We try to do more than just understand what the verses mean or how they should be interpreted or how to use the footnotes and cross-references. More important, we try to understand how it all relates to us. Have we had similar experiences to those in the scriptures? Have we thought as those people thought? Have we recognized the Lord's hand in our lives? Are we holding to the rod of iron? What do we observe at school and work in the lives of others as well as ourselves that relates to what we are reading? Are we pursuing the course of Lehi's older sons or younger sons? Are we really praying and living in the way the scriptures direct us? I believe these are the things that keep us on track.

"We always close with a family prayer, a hug, and kiss. We never go over twenty minutes. It doesn't matter whether we read one verse or one chapter. We sit at the breakfast table and use felt markers and scratch paper freely. The most important thing is spending this time together, sharing, and having Heavenly Father and his words with us.

"So far we feel successful and optimistic. We know that each day and week will offer more challenges, but we feel that we will be up to them because we are united, and all of us are now in tune with the good things taking place in our lives and family relationships. As our sons return from mission and college, they will fit in and add more because they have constantly challenged us to hold our daily scripture reading and are extremely happy that we are doing so. Our married son and family are also eager to hear of our experiences. What a tremendous influence the scriptures are working on us!"

After four years, this family is faithfully going forward with their daily scripture reading. No matter your experience or your situation, it is never too late to begin reading the scriptures with your family.

The Impact of Scripture Reading on a Child

Let me conclude this chapter with one last story that reflects the impact of scripture reading over a period of years.

Our son, nine years old, was asked to give a talk in Primary. His mother had helped him prepare it, and he had practiced it with me two or three times. Instead of his mother choosing the topic, she asked him to do so—to ponder and think of a story or one of the scriptures he loved the most, or something else he might want to tell. He finally settled on the story of David and Goliath.

In his talk he spoke of the faith of David and how he went to face Goliath. I was very touched by the Spirit as he read from 1 Samuel 17:46-47:

This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.

And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the Lord's, and he will give you into our hands (1 Samuel 17:46-47).

He bore his testimony of those verses and then told a story of his own faith in fasting and studying for a test on which he got an "A." The talk was about four minutes long. I could tell when he gave it to me that there was a lot of spirit in it and that it was from the heart. He was very moved by it because it was truly his own talk.

The day after his talk in church, my wife received a call from a sister in our ward who rather emotionally told her that she was overwhelmed by this young son's talk. She had sat through his talk weeping. In fact, my daughter, who heard part of the conversation on the phone, afterward said, "I know who it was that cried through his talk because I saw her crying." This was truly an indication that she was just totally taken aback by the spirit in which the boy had given his talk. It wasn't so much the content as the spirit in which it was conveyed. Somehow he had actually invited the Spirit of the Lord into the meeting.

"You could tell he really had a testimony of the scriptures by the way he read those verses," this sister said. "He read the passages with the Spirit of the Lord. When I saw that your son had such a sweet feeling and testimony about the scriptures, I had a great desire settle over me that that was what I wanted for my children. I talked over all these feelings with my husband and described the spirit I had felt. We want you to know, Sister Cook, that we had our first family scripture reading this morning."

She continued, "I just want you to know that your boy has affected our family tremendously. He has a special spirit. He is a very spiritual boy, and because he was touched by the Spirit so much, it touched us and has ended up blessing our whole family. We just want to thank you for having such a good son."

Yes, even a nine-year-old can speak with the Spirit of the Lord. What a great tribute to this boy that through the Spirit he was able to influence this entire family to have scripture reading. I think there is no question that the power of example, as he showed in reading the scriptures, is what truly conveys the Spirit to others. By true testimony and spirit and by our acts as Latter-day Saints we will truly be known.

No wonder Jesus did so much service by example. It conveyed, it taught, it made an indelible impression on the minds of those around him. We can do likewise. Even a child can do it.

Scripture reading truly has great impact. If we have not been as faithful in holding scripture reading as we ought to, this is a good time to change our habits and to begin holding it as a family tradition. The Lord has said:

I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth . . . .

You have not taught your children light and truth, according to the commandments; and that wicked one hath power, as yet, over you, and this is the cause of your affliction.

And now a commandment I give unto you—if you will be delivered you shall set in order your own house, for there are many things that are not right in your house (D&C 93:40, 42, 43).

Clearly, the Lord expects us to bring up our children in light and truth. One of the best ways is by teaching them through the scriptures. May the Lord bless us to faithfully read the scriptures as individuals and as families. We will then be able to hold to the iron rod and ultimately be guided back to our heavenly home.
