Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Five

Teaching Your Family to Live by the Power of Faith

At the turn of the century in Southern Utah there came a great drought. In the ward in a small town, the people had gathered together, and the bishop told them if rain did not come within the week, all of their crops would die. He asked the members to pray fervently that the Lord would send rain, and on a given day, after having fasted, they would gather at the church to offer a final prayer to break their fast.

After fasting, one family was leaving for the prayer at the church when their five-year-old daughter said, "Dad, I forgot something." She went back into the house and came out with something in a bag. Off they went to church. When the people had all arrived, they gathered in the courtyard behind the chapel to ask the Lord for help. The entire ward knelt and began to pray fervently, the bishop being voice, that the Lord would send rain upon their crops.

Before the final amen had been uttered, the drops began to come, first a few, then buckets full. The people ran to the chapel for shelter, except for the bishop and the little girl, who, reaching into her sack, said, "Bishop, would you like to share my umbrella?"

In this true story, what faith this little girl exercised—the faith of a child to know that if she would but pray, and all the ward members as well, the Lord would answer. And he did so. Who knows but what it was her faith, in good measure, that brought the rain?

How true are the words of Alma when he said, "Faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true" (Alma 32:21).

Alma also said, "If ye will not nourish the word, looking forward with an eye of faith to the fruit thereof, ye can never pluck of the fruit of the tree of life" (Alma 32:40).

It is true that if we will look forward with faith to the fruit, having hope in the Lord in something not seen but true, according to our faith it will be done unto us.

Without question, we are here on earth leading our families in faith. President David O. McKay said it clearly:

The most effective way to teach religion in the home is not by preaching but by living. If you would teach faith in God, show faith in him yourself; if you would teach prayer, pray yourself. Would you have them temperate? Then you yourself refrain from intemperance. If you would have your child live a life of virtue, of self-control, of good report, then set him a worthy example in all these things. A child brought up under such home environment will be fortified for the doubts, questions, and yearnings that will stir in his soul when the real period of religious awakening comes at twelve or fourteen years of age (Conference Report, April 1955, p. 27).

Truly, we must not only teach our family the principles, but we must also teach them to live the principles. So many of life's experiences, if handled correctly, can be turned into spiritual experiences. There is no question that the Lord has set things up so that, if we would, we could live better by faith than some of us now do. The Lord has not left us without instruction. Surely he might say to all of us: "Hearken all ye families of the earth—immediate and extended families—yea, every living soul, and the Lord will teach you of the sacredness of that heavenly organization called family, called home."

Large Families

There are some in the world who make fun of large families and family life. Yet if we will live the principles of truth, we will fare well and in the process be able to teach others of the importance of families. I will never forget an experience we had while in a city in northern Arizona.

We had gone to one of those family restaurants that are not too expensive. With the size of our family, that was all we could afford. It was cafeteria style, and the family started through the line—all ten of us. I was the last one through. Just two people were managing the restaurant—the cashier, who was about eighteen years old, and the owner, who was about sixty. The cashier kept watching the children go by: one, two, three, four, five . . . She kept looking to see if there were more. By the time I finally got to her, I could see that she was really unsettled but was not brave enough to say anything. I paid the bill, and we sat down to eat just ten feet or so from where they were.

Then she and the manager began whispering. I knew they were talking about us. Not many people were in the restaurant, so I finally said, "May I help you?" They were a little embarrassed, but the manager finally asked, "Are all those children yours?" I paused a minute and then said, "Well, these are just the ones I brought with me today!" We all laughed. However, one of my older teenage boys said with some embarrassment, "Dad! Quit clowning around!" The owner even asked us if he could take our picture to promote his restaurant. We declined.

Families can really be fun—even in embarrassing moments and in trying times. However, there always seem to be times when we can teach true principles.

The Lord is the Leader

One of the most important principles President Spencer W. Kimball taught me was to be more reliant on the Lord as the true leader. Even though President Kimball was the Lord's prophet, he would always, in his humble way, stay away from "center stage," seeking always to put the Master there. One of the most important things about leadership is to magnify the Lord in the eyes of the people. If we will lead that way, the Lord will give us power to lead. In my mind, the greatest thing leaders can do is turn the people over whom they preside to the Lord. Leadership, in the Lord's view, is the saving of souls. If a leader can turn a person to the Lord, the leader may have given the greatest gift possible. That is also true in families.

I will never forget a time when the presiding brethren approved the calling of a temple president. As I remember, President Kimball called this good man on the phone to inform him that the Lord had called him to be a temple president. The man was totally overcome. President Kimball told him he would arrive in his city on a certain day and that if the man would meet him in the temple, he would be pleased to set him apart as the temple president.

Some days later, President Kimball arrived at the temple. He bore testimony that the Lord had called the man, and he set him apart as the temple president. After he had finished, he told the new temple president that he loved him and that the Lord would bless him. Then he began walking toward the door. The man panicked and said, "Wait, President Kimball, what instruction do you have for me?"

President Kimball said, "Well, the Lord will bless you. You will do just fine," and began walking down the hall.

The man, now with great urgency, came trailing after the prophet, begging him, "President, what do I know about the temple? What if I have a problem with the cafeteria or the sprinkler system or with some of the temple workers?"

President Kimball said, "Well, if you have any problems like that, feel free to call the Temple Department."

This man now realized that President Kimball really was going to leave. In the parking lot as the prophet was stepping into his car, the man pleaded, "President, please, I don't know what I ought to do."

President Kimball said, "The Lord has called you and the Lord will assist you. Seek him and you will know what to do."

Not satisfied, the man continued, "Don't you have any specific counsel for me?"

Finally President Kimball said, "All right. If you want some specific counsel, I will give you some. It wouldn't hurt you to lose about thirty-five pounds. May the Lord bless you, president." Then he got into his car and drove off.

This new temple president was just flabbergasted. He went back into the temple struggling with his feelings and wondering why President Kimball had handled the situation that way. The man had no alternative but to do what he should have done in the beginning—fall on his knees and plead with the Lord for help. This good man, this humble man, did exactly that and became a most effective, loving, and spiritual temple president.

Could President Kimball not have given him much instruction about temple work? Surely he could have. Could he not have taught him much about leadership? Yes. But can you see that what President Kimball really did was turn this man to the Lord? If we can teach our families in that same manner to rely upon the Lord, who knows what blessings may come into their lives? Then they will know to whom they must look for the resolution of their problems.

When I was called as president of the Uruguay/Paraguay Mission, I might have done some things differently if I had known about that experience with President Kimball. But I didn't. I just knew I was to report to President Kimball's office to be set apart.

On the appointed day, I went with my wife and two of my young sons to the Church offices. After President Kimball had set me apart, I was anxious to receive any training he might to give me, so I said, "President Kimball, you know I'm going among the Lamanites. You've spent much of your life among them. Do you have any counsel for me, any suggestions you would like to give me before I go?"

He said, "Well, I'd just suggest that you stay close to the Spirit of the Lord, and he will tell you what to do."

I was a little disappointed that there wasn't anything else, so I pursued it further, saying, "President, I'd sure be pleased to have you teach us or give us some additional instruction."

Finally he said, "Gene, do you hold the Melchizedek Priesthood?" (I knew then I was in trouble.)

I said, "Yes."

He said, "Haven't you been set apart as a General Authority?"

I said, "Yes."

Then he said, "Adios."

I had the feeling he was saying, "Don't call us; we'll call you when it's time to return."

I testify that the effect President Kimball had on me as a new mission president was the same as the effect he'd had on the new temple president. What a powerful example of leadership training! "Rely on the Lord!" is what President Kimball was saying. He didn't want to get in the way between me and the Lord in terms of the training the Lord would give me. He didn't feel obligated to give me his best counsel or anything like it. He could have kept me there for days, teaching me about missionary work. Who among the Brethren knew more about it? No one. He was not diminishing the importance of our teaching one another in mission presidents' seminars and so on; he was just directing our attention to our first priority. He was a real example of a leader teaching people to rely on the Lord.

I had no alternative but to do what I knew I should have done—to humbly seek the Lord to find out how to be a mission president. I don't know of any principle President Kimball could have taught me that would have been more important. That single act of leadership helped me start my mission the right way, with more power and reliance on the Lord than would have ever been the case otherwise.

What President Kimball was teaching us was that we must learn to live by faith, to depend upon the Lord. We must remember that our children were Heavenly Father's children before they were ours, and that if we will faithfully turn to him, he will teach us how to lead them in righteousness.

If parents begin to teach as if they are the teacher instead of the instrument in the Lord's hands, things will not work as well. The Lord is the true teacher and we are here to assist him, not the other way around. How the Lord will work with us if we are faithful!

It is important to recognize that the responsibility for each family member rests:

Â first, with the person;

Â second, with the family;

Â and third, with the Church.

If we will take the responsibility to learn for ourselves what our responsibilities are, we will learn much more quickly from the Lord. And we will be taught much more by the Lord. Let us as parents be sure we follow this counsel from President Spencer W. Kimball: "The gospel gives purpose to our lives. It is the way to happiness. Our success, individually and as a church, will largely be determined by how faithfully we focus on living the gospel in the home" (Conference Report, April 1979, p. 115). Let us follow his advice, teaching through precept and example.

Faith to Find a Home

While we were living in Ecuador, we had a terrible problem with rats in our home. The first day we saw one, we realized what we were up against: they were nearly a foot long—not including the tail! They had a habit of chewing on the cantaloupes and bread in the pantry. They would even terrify us by coming up through the commode. We tried poisoning the rats. We tried catching them with traps. But nothing seemed to work. Soon we began looking for a different place to live, but we had about as much success in finding one as we had in getting rid of the rats.

Weeks went by, then months. My wife searched for a home nearly every day, although it was becoming most disheartening for her. House after house fell through. A number of houses were for sale, but because of our assignment, we could only rent. Finally we located a house and made an offer to rent, but it was sold out from under us. After general conference and a trip I had been on, I arrived home late one evening to find my wife in tears. She had gathered the family together for family home evening, and a big rat had come in and sat down to listen. "That's enough!" she had said to the children, and she chased him into the kitchen, bolted the doors, and for forty-five minutes fought the rat with a broom until she finally killed him. All the children were looking through the window and yelling, "Get him, Mom! Get him, Mom!" It was a real fight to the death.

After my wife finished the story, I sympathized with her and said we would do our best to solve the problem. As it was late, we decided to go to bed and talk more about it in the morning. I had just gotten to sleep when she awakened me to say, "There's a rat in our room."

I said, "No, honey, you're just imagining it. A rat wouldn't be in here."

Then we heard rustling in the paper in the waste basket. She jumped up and turned on the light, and, sure enough, there was a big rat right at the foot of our bed. She slammed the door so he couldn't get away, and I said, "You have experience in these matters, you get him." We both laughed. She got the broom and ended up killing that rat in our bedroom.

After that episode, we knelt down and fervently prayed to the Lord for help. We told him we had searched three months for a home, that my wife had looked almost daily, but that we had not been able to find anything for our family. In fervent prayer, which I realized later was truly a prayer of faith as described in the scriptures, we pled with the Lord for help.

The next morning we awakened the children early and told them of our experience. We then told them that as a family we would all have to pray fervently, and if we would, we were confident the Lord could provide us a house immediately, even that very day. After praying together, we got into the car and drove out to a nicer part of the city where we wanted to live.

We knew it might be difficult to find a home because owners of rentals avoided putting signs in the window; if they put up a sign, thieves would know the house was unoccupied. We asked a few people in the street if they knew of any homes to rent, but they all said no.

About half an hour after leaving home, we stopped in front of a house where a woman was standing out on the curb. We asked if she knew of any home for rent. She answered, "Well, no I don't. But frankly, we have been thinking of renting out this very home, although we have not posted it with a realtor or done anything about it. It is my son's home. He's having some financial problems and might be willing to rent it."

We looked at the home from the outside and thought it would never meet our needs. Nevertheless, she began to describe the interior, and we finally agreed to go in and take a look. The home was the best we had seen in three months. The rent was very reasonable, and, to our surprise, she said, "I think we could move within the week if you really want the home."

We told the woman we were very interested and would be back in touch. After a few hours, we decided to rent that home, and within twenty-four hours we had made an agreement with the couple to do so. We moved in about a week later. We were very impressed that in that one morning, in about forty-five minutes, the Lord had directed us to our new home.

My wife was a little disturbed to think that we might have gotten the house sooner if we had relied more on the power of the Lord and less on our own efforts. There seems to be a limit to what we have to endure before God will act. It is something like the principle that those who have faith to be healed can be healed; if not, we are to bear with them in their afflictions (see D&C 42:43-52). In other words, a better way exists if we have sufficient faith. Otherwise, the Lord will let us bear it on our own for a while. That is not to say that our family had not prayed about the house, but we had not done so as sincerely and strongly as the impression came to us that morning to do it, in a real prayer of faith.

It is amazing to me how the Lord, in a few hours, could solve a problem with which we had struggled for many months. It is a testimony to me that the Lord is willing to help us with any of our problems—spiritual or temporal. But the greatest blessing that comes from answers to prayer is an increase in faith, an actual spiritual blessing that the Lord gives us. No wonder the Lord said: "If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?" (3 Nephi 14:11).

It's beautiful to see that greater gifts, many times, are given beyond what we are seeking while praying for a temporal blessing as we were on that occasion.

What has always impressed me in these experiences with faith is the impact they have on children. As children see, time and again, that the Lord will answer prayers, their own confidence in him is greatly strengthened. In each experience we learn something new about how to exercise our faith and obtain answers. That spiritual reward many times may be much greater than the specific answer to a prayer.

As we look back, we can see more clearly the impact of such spiritual experiences. It isn't that they have taught us more faith and reliance on the Lord or even how to better obtain answers to our prayers. Perhaps more important is that they have had a direct impact on the way we live the gospel. When family members really try to live by faith, they step up a level or two in their gospel living. They begin to set standards that are higher than some around them might be living. They tend to have a resolve that they will live these higher gospel standards. All of that seems to come not only to the parents but to the children as well.

Setting Family Standards

We have had an unusual experience as a family; three different times we have lived outside the United States for a total of just under eight years. In a way, it was a great blessing to be away from the customs, culture, and traditions of the United States. We were pressed to live in another culture and to provide most of the gospel teaching and activities for our family. We could also see more clearly the strengths and weaknesses of the society from which we came. When it was time for us to return to the United States the second time, we determined that we would do our best to maintain the closeness we had experienced while living away from the U.S. culture, which tends to divide families and send children off with friends.

We wanted to maintain the good we had learned by living in some third-world countries and also the good found in the U.S. culture. We had tried not to absorb any of the evils of the third-world countries' cultures and were determined that we would not absorb the weaknesses of the culture in the United States. Because we had lived in areas with such dire poverty, we were somewhat overcome by the great material blessings the Lord had given to Latter-day Saints and others in the United States.

We determined in a family council that we would maintain the following four goals:

We determined we would set some family standards so we could monitor these objectives. It should be stressed that these are not meant to be Church standards but just standards for our family:

It is all-important that young people select good friends. If they do, they will be influenced to keep the commandments. They will be involved in wholesome relationships that will help them grow and develop. If they choose bad friends, they will quickly become involved in bad activities and fall under the influence of Satan. He will teach them to be disobedient to parents, to break the family curfew, to use bad language, to watch bad television programs, and much more. They will then be much more receptive to unrighteous peer pressure.

Â They could not date before age sixteen.

Â They could not go out with the same person several times consecutively.

Â There could be no steady dating.

Â They could not go out alone with someone of the opposite sex but had to go out in groups of four or more.

Â They could not typically be out beyond midnight.

Â They could not date nonmembers or even members who were not worthy.

Lest anyone misunderstand, to come to an agreement on all of the above, we first discussed as a family the great blessings that had come to us individually by living as we had in Latin America. Each of us listed the things we liked best about it. We then felt such an overwhelming commitment to keep these things that it was relatively easy to come up with a list of standards we could all agree on.

Back in the United States, we faced some real challenges over two or three years. However, as we look back, we can see we were able to keep about 90 percent of our standards in place. While this is not perfect, think of the blessings it has provided as compared to the problems we might have had if we had not developed the standards.

Even with our standards, we have faced many of the same challenges you have in your neighborhood: children who feel they have to be doing something exotic all the time or they're not "having fun"; adults who want to sit on the back row of the chapel; people who don't want to sing in church; Aaronic Priesthood young men who don't wear white shirts and ties while officiating during the sacrament; adults who do much in the church that the youth could do; an inordinate emphasis on style, hairdos, and dress; lack of reverence in the chapel; young people staying out until 2:00 in the morning for parties and roaming the street; summer dates and parties nearly every night; lack of Sunday observance; casual dress and TV sports on Sunday; some who watch soap operas daily and PG-13 or R-rated movies; parents with loose rules; teens whose parents have bought them their own car; all-night marathon dances to raise money; girls wearing immodest clothing; a general attitude of play, fun, and leisure but no need to work at home or have a job; families not doing things together but largely letting their children go with friends where they are exposed to inappropriate music, swearing, bad language, vulgar jokes; and so on.

With problems like these around us, how can we maintain standards like those mentioned above? I don't believe it is possible unless the relationship between parents and children and the Lord is strong. If the standard in the family is to be the Lord's standard and it is witnessed by the Spirit to all, then it is not difficult to set those kinds of standards.

Responsiveness to the Spirit in Dating Standards

When one of our daughters was fifteen, a budding romance began between her and a young man from a good member family who lived nearby. He was actually a fine young man, and thus we were pleased about their friendship, but she was only fifteen and could not date.

They sat on the bus together day after day on the way to school, talking and having fun. It was a healthy, wholesome relationship. However, as the months went by, we realized it was becoming more serious, culminating in the fact that this young man, whom we will call Bill, held hands with our daughter at a dress rehearsal for a talent show at the church.

She was quite embarrassed because all the other kids saw them and teased her about it. But secretly she was very happy, because she really liked this young man. Fortunately she had a close enough relationship with us that she told us about it that very evening. She wasn't sure what she should do. Janelle and I talked with her about it that night, since we were leaving the next day for a church assignment that would last three or four days and did not want to leave the matter unresolved. We also knew that there was going to be a church dance that night and the next day a youth activity where they would be going on a hike. Thus, she would be spending a lot of time with this young man.

We had talked a lot about these kind of things before, so we just reminded our daughter of the seriousness of things if they continued to go along, and that it really wasn't right at that age. We further suggested that it could cause others to have an image of her that she would not want them to have. She said, "But I like him so much, I don't want to hurt his feelings."

We gave her a few ideas of what she might say and told her that we were not going to tell her what to do. She should follow the Spirit, and then she would know what to do to handle the situation correctly. We were confident because of her closeness to the Lord and felt certain that she would know what to do.

We were very pleased when we got home a few days later to find out how things had turned out. At the dance that night he took her hand again while they were sitting together. She said to him gently, "You know, Bill, I really don't think we should do this."

"Why?" he asked.

"Well," she replied, "I'm too young. I really do like you, and we do have a fun time together, but I think we should wait and not do this now. I just don't think that it is right."

He said, "Are you sure?"

And she said, "Yes, I really am."

Thus, she had nipped something in the bud that could have grown into some difficulties for her later. She told us how bad she felt to have to tell him that, but she knew it was right and was relieved that she had done it.

He was still very nice to her the next day on the hike, and she tried to be attentive and speak kindly so he wouldn't be offended. Because she followed the Spirit and kept the gospel standards in faith, she may have prevented problems that could have come later, not only with this young man but with others who would court her in the future.

Our daughter learned, I think, that it was best to choose the right even when she would rather not. Children need to learn to act in faith, following the promptings of the Spirit, even when there is pressure from others to have relationships like this one, and even when many of their peers are doing much more than that.

We must teach our children in the home to choose the right, to follow the promptings of the Spirit. If parents have properly planted the gospel seed in the hearts of their children, many problems will resolve themselves.

Parents need to remember that being home isn't just a time to rest and take it easy, although that is a part of being at home. Rather, it is mostly a time for faith, a time to search for ways to strengthen the family. We may struggle sometimes at work and other places to exercise our faith fully and keep our priorities in place, but if some priorities have to suffer, let it not be at home. With the family is where we really must be at our best. We must not let our guard down. We must truly show our children how to live by faith.

The average family faces many challenges at home. Some surveys show that in the United States people are watching television seven and a half hours a day. Videos and television shows actually bring the world into the home. Thus, if we are not on guard, the faith of the family may be destroyed through these worldly influences.

Having experiences where all the family is united in faith helps prepare children for the time when they will need to act on their own, to exercise their own faith in resolving a particular problem. I suppose we all take great comfort in the words of the proverb: "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it" (Proverbs 22:6).

Many experiences with faith come by heeding the promptings of the Spirit, which we must sincerely desire to receive. If we simply expect to receive instruction from heaven and are prayerfully going about our lives, many times promptings will come that will be of great benefit in raising a child or even protecting the family from danger.

Listening to the Promptings

Some years ago on a Sunday morning a husband was berating his wife for making the family late for church again. That had been a common theme in their marriage for some time: "Honey, are we going to be late again? Can't you get ready earlier? Why can't you assign out more responsibilities to the children so they have something to do? Why do you have to do it all? We're late every time. It embarrasses me to go marching in to church late. We ought to be setting a better example." On and on went the husband's chastisement.

Finally they were in the car on the way to the chapel, but the chastisement continued. As they prepared to enter the chapel, the wife said, "I know this is going to make you mad, but I've got to return home."

"What?" responded the husband. "We're already late. Why do you have to go home?"

"I don't know," she responded, "I just have to go." And she left before he could respond any further.

As the husband sat through the meetings, his irritation increased. He had to tend the kids, and his wife never did come back to the chapel.

He finally got home after the meetings, ready to chastise his wife further, until he saw her sitting in the kitchen weeping. The kitchen had nearly burned down. Had his wife not returned home when she did, their house would have burned to the ground. He was greatly humbled that his wife had heard the voice of the Spirit and he was repentant that he had not and that he had chastened her so. Why had the husband not heard the Spirit? I suppose because he was angry and argumentative.

One of the problems for many of us is that we are just too busy to listen for the voice of the Spirit. We're too busily engaged and thus fail to notice some of the significant things that are occurring around us. I have always loved the words in D&C 5:34: "Yea, for this cause I have said: Stop, and stand still until I command thee, and I will provide means whereby thou mayest accomplish the thing which I have commanded thee."

This is the only verse I know where the Lord has told us to stop and stand still and that then he will command us and provide means to help us accomplish what he has told us to do. In other words, at times we've got to stop and stand still and ponder and determine where we really are. Then we will be more susceptible to inspiration from the Lord.

The voice of the Spirit really is a whisper. If there is any kind of contention, pride, or other sins, we will not hear the voice. How many times have instructions been given us from the heavens and we have not heard them? If we will follow the impressions and do as the Lord prompts us, we will have greater guidance in our families.

Faith and Unemployment

An earlier chapter included a story of one of my sons who prayed for employment at school. On a different occasion he had a similar experience that more fully taught us the kindness of the Lord in responding to our faith. This son had worked hard during the spring to have enough money to attend Ricks College during the summer and fall semesters. He did so, and all went well until the end of December, when he found himself running out of money. He had been able to do some work at Ricks to help sustain himself, but by Christmas vacation, he was pretty much broke. He was worried about how he would be able to go to school the next semester. He wanted a loan from his parents, I think, but we did not give him one. Instead, we told him we were sure the Lord would provide if he would be faithful.

He came home with about two weeks of vacation before Christmas and wanted to find a job. He made a number of contacts. He went to personnel department after personnel department. He could not find anything and was quite discouraged after his first day of searching. He knew also that every day that passed by during the Christmas break would mean that much less money he would have to sustain himself in school.

He talked with one company's personnel department the second morning. They told him there were no openings at all and that during Christmastime jobs were always filled. He came back home quite discouraged and talked to me about it. I tried to get him to exercise his faith, testifying that the Lord knew of his serious situation and that he would have to pray more fervently to convince the Lord he really needed help right then.

About that time, he went to his car, ready to do some more searching, when the telephone rang. I called him back in to answer the phone. After the call, he came to me with tears in his eyes and told me that one of the personnel managers had called. She had said, "You must really have someone upstairs who likes you. In the past half-hour we've had an opening come up out at our distribution center. If you want the work, it's full-time during the Christmas holidays."

He was overjoyed. He felt that his prayers had truly been answered. Then he told me that just five minutes earlier, after I had talked with him, he had gone down to his room and pled with the Lord to find him a job, that he needed it urgently or he could not go to school. I sensed that he had really exercised his faith. He was so touched by the fact that within a matter of minutes the phone rang and he was offered a job.

This son then went back to Ricks College with the thought that he would find employment there immediately and thus be able to sustain himself through the spring semester. But after searching all through January and up to the middle of February, he could find nothing. He was really discouraged. We talked to him a number of times on the phone. He finally told us that if he couldn't get some money soon, he would just have to quit school. We loaned him a little money to help pay for the insurance on his car. He doesn't like to ask for those loans, and we know it's best for him that we not provide them, but we did assist him for about a month. He finally reached a point where he called us to say that if he couldn't somehow obtain more money in the next week, he would have to come home.

We suggested again that he exercise his faith. My wife and I fasted for him. We encouraged him again about really praying for work, and we began to pray fervently as a family as well to help him. Within a week he had a call from a motel in Rexburg. They were looking for a night manager. The man interviewed him, learned that he was bilingual and had worked in the hotel business before, and hired him. My son then began to earn a good income, enough to sustain himself in school.

The hours were a little more than he had planned on, but he sustained himself with excellence. He was later able to pay us back the money he owed us and to have some money in his pocket. He was really pleased to have the work and the money and to be able to do his schoolwork at the same time.

It's surely evident in his life that whenever he has really exercised his faith humbly and forcefully, the Lord has responded to him in rather dramatic ways. As poor as he was, "keeping the commandment" helped him sustain himself through school. A month or so after this experience, we received a call from an extremely happy son. He had felt impressed to ask the college if he could get some sort of a grant to help him with his finances for the rest of his schooling at Ricks. To his surprise and delight, he was approved for a grant of five hundred dollars. The blessings for this young man went on and on as he tried to be faithful and do what was right.

Prayer for a Son in Danger

A mission president's wife recounted to me an experience where the faith of a mother had great impact on her son.

A young teenage boy had permission from his parents to take their pick-up truck into the mountains to ski with his friends. They told the parents that they would be back by about six o'clock in the evening.

As the day progressed and the mother watched the clock, she saw six o'clock pass by, seven o'clock, and then eight o'clock. Her fears and doubts began to mount. She became greatly concerned that her son was having problems. She offered a silent prayer for his safety. Nine o'clock, ten o'clock, and eleven o'clock passed by. She and her husband talked about the situation and finally went to bed, their hearts filled with anxiety and fear for their son.

After the husband fell asleep, the wife got up, went into the family room, and on bended knee poured out her heart to the Lord to protect her son. She felt a great peace come over her, and she went to bed and fell asleep.

About six o'clock the next morning, the son and his friends finally arrived home. The mother threw her arms around him. His first question to her was, "What were you doing about midnight last night?" She then told him of her heartfelt prayer.

The son said they had been stuck in the mud for several hours. Then, after getting unstuck, they had begun driving down the mountain in the late evening, but about midnight their truck began to slide off the road. It was headed to the edge of a dangerous precipice; if they had gone over the edge, they would surely have been killed. The boy bore his testimony that as they were sliding to the edge of the cliff, it was if someone had stood in front of them and pushed the car away from the edge and back onto the road. He saw it as a direct intervention from heaven, especially considering the prayer of his mother.

Such examples show the great power of faith and prayer, especially the faith and prayers of parents for children, or of children for parents. The Lord seems especially to honor the fervent prayer of a good mother in behalf of her children. This young man surely knew his mother's faith well and held her in deepest esteem.

Are we exercising the same kind of faith and prayers in behalf of our own families? As we set that kind of example, day by day, our children will surely follow. I am sure this boy will never forget what his mother did for him that evening.

A Priesthood Blessing from a Son

We will know our example and teaching has borne fruit when we are able to call on one of our children for help in a spiritual matter. We had an interesting experience with a worthy son who could give me a priesthood blessing. It reminded me of the words in Alma 38:2-3: "And now, my son, I trust that I shall have great joy in you, because of your steadiness and your faithfulness unto God; . . . I say unto you, my son, that I have had great joy in thee already, because of thy faithfulness."

Some years ago while living in South America, our family came back to the United States for a visit. While here, we spent some time at a water resort. After coming down one of the water slides, I had a pain in my right foot. However, while walking around the rest of the water park, it didn't bother me.

Later that day, we returned home, and I took a nap. When I woke up, I had a terrible pain in my foot. I drove the car to have dinner with some friends, but I could hardly push the gas pedal. Finally, at our friends' house I took off my shoe and sock to examine my foot. It was really swollen and hurt more and more.

I ate dinner with great difficulty, trying not to complain. After dinner, the pain was so bad that I thought we should go to the hospital.

By this time, I couldn't even walk on my foot. It hurt terribly, even with no weight on it. My daughter and wife, who were with me at the dinner, helped me down the stairs and into the car, and we drove to the hospital.

In the very moment I was entering the hospital doors, a doctor friend of ours appeared. He said, "I didn't have any patients here at the hospital. I just felt perhaps I was needed and came." We felt he had been inspired. An X-ray showed that the foot was not broken or fractured but badly sprained. The doctor found an orthopedic surgeon who took us to his office to treat my injury. Instead of putting the whole foot and leg in a cast, he gave me a removable cast and some crutches. I experienced a lot of pain going home, and I was quite depressed and discouraged because I had suffered from so many health problems in the previous few months. Some had been life threatening, and I just didn't feel I could handle one more.

We got to the house where we were staying at about one o'clock in the morning. I was in a lot of pain and was very concerned about it, so I asked my son to give me a blessing. He was a newly ordained elder and had assisted me a few times in anointing. But he had never sealed an anointing. This was his first time, and he blessed me that I would recover quickly and be healed. He gave me a fine blessing that was full of faith.

I tried hard to exercise my faith in the blessing but went forward assuming, as the doctors had told me, that I would have to have the cast on for probably a month or six weeks and use the crutches from ten days to two weeks until all the swelling had gone.

What a great blessing this son gave me. I slept through the night with no problems at all, even though my leg was in the cast and outside the covers. The next morning I kept my leg up and stayed home the whole day. Some friends came to visit, but I just tried to take care of myself and not do much.

That night when I finally removed the cast, I found I could walk without it. The next day I took the cast off and walked normally. My foot was well! It was hard to believe, but I had experienced a total healing. The six-week recovery time had been done away with. In total kindness the Lord had removed this ailment. The next morning, with a lot of faith and trying not to doubt, I left behind the crutches and the cast, walked onto a plane, and flew home to Mexico.

I was surely thrilled and humbled by the fact that the Lord had answered our prayers and honored this blessing from my son. I don't know that I could have handled one more ailment at that time. It was a great thing to have my own son perform the blessing, and I'm sure it strengthened his own faith in the priesthood that he held.

Principles of Living by Faith

Such experiences as those in this chapter, when examined carefully, can actually teach us how to exercise our faith as a family. As I have thought about them, I have identified certain principles that can help us do it again and again:

There are many principles we can learn and then teach our families about how to live by faith. However, in general the idea is simple: if we will have faith in the Lord, humble ourselves, and repent of our sins, the Lord truly will bless us with the things we desire.

Lest anyone misunderstand that these principles will work only in an exceptionally good family, let me stress again that we have a very average, normal family. If anything is different about it, it may be an attempt on the part of the parents to try hard to help our children have spiritual experiences.

To the degree we can take advantage of the routine experiences in life and turn them into experiences in faith, we will find one of the secrets to raising up a family to the Lord. If we can show our children who the leader really is, meaning the Lord, and turn them faithfully to him, he will raise up our children. He will turn their hearts. He will humble them. He will teach them from on high.

Many of the stories in this book were just small, everyday experiences. But because we wrote them down, thought about them, and discussed them, they became spiritual experiences. Part of the key to having spiritual experiences is simply to recognize them, value them, and treat them with enough respect to record them. Surely the Lord taught us well through the Prophet Joseph Smith, who, after his great vision of the heavenly kingdoms said, "This is the end of the vision which we saw, which we were commanded to write while we were yet in the Spirit" (D&C 76:113).

Think what would have been lost if Joseph Smith had not recorded those revelations at the time they were given, while he was yet in the Spirit. Surely we would have lost most, if not all, of the revelation.

That is so in family life as well. When we have a spiritual experience, if we do not take time to record it, it will shortly be lost. We think we will always remember it, but shortly thereafter we will not. The facts become clouded, the memory becomes shortened, and before long we forget the great blessings of the Lord to us.

May I recommend strongly that you record your experiences and then recount to your family the great blessings the Lord has given you over and over again. Many families have the experiences but do not record them. Thus they must go on learning anew instead of benefiting from the lessons of the past.

In order to have spiritual experiences and to turn routine experiences into such, we need to have the Spirit of the Lord with us continually. We need to ponder the significance of the events in our family, many of which appear, at the time, to be very small and unimportant but which are actually great experiences if seen in their proper perspective. As Alma wrote, "By small and simple things are great things brought to pass; . . . and by very small means the Lord . . . bringeth about the salvation of many souls" (Alma 37:6-7).

May the Lord bless us to do our best, to ponder more, and to be more susceptible to the promptings of the Lord. Then we will better teach our family to live by the power of faith.
