Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Six

Teaching Your Family Repentance and Discipline

Upon arriving at home a few years ago, I met my wife as she was going out for an appointment. She said, "Honey, we've got a problem, and you'll have to solve it. Your six-year-old son has been a party to killing some expensive tropical fish at the neighbors' house. I've got to leave right now, so please solve it with him. He probably ought to go down and apologize."

This six-year-old and I had a little father-to-son talk. He said that he and his friend Tony, the son of a neighbor, had been in Tony's brother's room playing. This older brother raised tropical fish, which he had received from his father from several places around the world. The two boys thought the fish were probably hungry, so they decided to feed them. Not knowing any better, they gave the fish all the food they wanted—in fact, four or five times as much as they needed—and the fish began to die. They also caught some of the fish with their hands and moved them from one tank to another. Of course, several of them slipped through their fingers and fell on the floor. From what I gathered there were dead fish all over—about ten in all.

After my son explained what had happened, I said, "Well, what do you think we ought to do?"

He gave the typical six-year-old's response: "I don't know."

We talked about it some more and finally concluded, with Dad doing most of the concluding, that he should go to the neighbors, apologize, and make restitution.

Over several weeks he had saved seven dollars, part of which he had received for his birthday just four days earlier. That was all the money he had. I suggested he had better bring it with him.

He cried and didn't want to give his money away, but I finally said, "You go into your room and pray about it; then you come and tell me in a few minutes what you think you ought to do." About five minutes later he came with his crinkled dollars all in a pile, saying, "I guess we'd better go down. I'll have to pay him the money."

We walked down the street, my son really not wanting to go. In fact, he tried to convince me it would be better to solve the problem some other way. But I persisted, and we went to the neighbor's house.

I had him knock on the door. It was a very quiet knock. I'm sure he was hoping nobody would come. He knocked again. Finally the door opened, and there stood the older brother. We could tell he was quite upset and was probably thinking, "What are you doing here?"

My son and I just stood there. I tried to coax him, saying, "Come on, Son, tell him why we came."

Finally, in a quiet voice, he said, "I'm sorry I killed all your fish."

The neighbor boy responded quite sternly, "Well, I'm really mad and upset. Those fish were special to me. My dad gave them to me, and now they're dead."

My boy said again, "I'm sorry," and it seemed to humble the older boy's heart.

He said, "Well, okay. But don't ever do it again."

My son pulled the seven crinkled dollars out of his pocket and said, "I want to pay for your fish."

The older boy graciously said, "No, that won't be necessary."

I winked at him, telling him he should accept some money. Finally he said, "Well, all right. How about if I take two dollars?" A big grin came across my boy's face.

I said, "Well, maybe three dollars. What do you think, Son?"

He quickly said, "I think that would be fair" and handed three dollars to the owner of the fish. My son was really relieved he didn't have to pay the whole seven dollars. Again he apologized, and we left.

As we walked back up the street, I sensed that my companion was walking about a foot taller than the young boy who had walked down the street with me. He seemed pleased with himself and thankful he had repented. When we got to the house, he said, "Dad, I'm glad we went down there. It was right, wasn't it?" A hug around the neck, a thanks, and he was off to play.

It would have been easy to have been angry and upset at our son. Our reputation as a good neighbor was somewhat at stake, and our neighbors' son was angry with us. Fortunately, because my son knew inside what he should do, and because he received encouragement from his father to follow the promptings even though he didn't want to go and confess, it ended up being a great blessing to him. It increased the love between the two of us and reinforced the rightness of always following the Spirit. I was also pleased because:

Again, I think the reason things worked out so well was that the Lord was in it. Thus our son's heart was softened. My heart was also softened so I was not angry. Instead, I could handle the situation spiritually so it would be a good growing experience for him.

The Power of Love in Disciplining

Love in all forms, including discipline, can be a great blessing to children. They must learn obedience from their family. They must learn the principles of the heart from the examples of family members. If they so learn, they will then assimilate further lessons from the Lord and fare much better in life. Yes, love that comes through lovingly administered discipline brings the Spirit of the Lord.

Is there any greater power than love? Is there any greater commandment? The Lord commanded us that we must first, above all else, love him, and secondly, love one another. On this hangs all the law and the prophets (see Matthew 22:35-40).

Love is a divine motivation; it motivates the Lord and thus must also motivate us. Particularly is that so in dealing with our families. Joseph F. Smith once said:

Fathers, if you wish your children to be taught in the principles of the gospel, if you wish them to love the truth and understand it, if you wish them to be obedient to and united with you, love them! and prove to them that you do love them by every word or act to them. For your own sake, for the love that should exist between you and your boys—however wayward they might be, or one or the other might be, when you speak or talk to them, do it not in anger; do it not harshly, in a condemning spirit.

Speak to them kindly; get down and weep with them if necessary and get them to shed tears with you if possible. Soften their hearts; get them to feel tenderly towards you. Use no lash and no violence . . . approach them with reason, with persuasion and love unfeigned. With these means, if you cannot gain your boys and your girls . . . there will be no means left in the world by which you can win them to yourselves (Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1939], p. 316).

Truly, love is a great power for good. President Smith was teaching the importance of softening children's hearts, getting them to feel tenderly toward us and us toward themselves. President David O. McKay said it this way:

Earnestly we urge parents to gather their families around them, and to instruct them in truth and righteousness, and in family love and loyalty. The home is the basis of a righteous life, and no other instrumentality can take its place nor fulfill its essential functions. The problems of these difficult times cannot better be solved in any other place, by any other agency, by any other means, than by love and righteousness, and precept and example, and devotion to duty in the home (Family Home Evening Manual, 1965, p. 111).

This book has tried to focus on the importance of teaching our children love of God and love for one another. That truly cannot be overstated. However, sometimes our understanding of love is somewhat one-sided. Thus, we cannot understand how our children could do wrong when we have loved them so much.

When you think of Jesus Christ, what image do you have? Most people remember him healing the sick, forgiving the adulterous woman, and loving the little children. They think of him as a loving, kind, and tender God.

All of that is true. But we must remember that genuine love is motivated by what is best for another. At times, the softness, tenderness, and loving care of the moment may not be what is best for the one being loved. We need to remember that it was the same Jesus who drove the ungodly from the temple; chastened Peter, James, and John; and chastened Joseph Smith and even the Saints as a whole in Missouri.

How could that be for one who loved his people so much? We have to understand that the Lord will always do what is best for his people, even if that means removing them from the earth lest they bring themselves deeper and deeper into sin. In truth, then, the chastening is really an act of mercy on the Lord's part, motivated by his divine love.

The Lord explains this principle in a beautiful way in D&C 95:1-2: "Thus saith the Lord unto you whom I love, and whom I love I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation, and I have loved you—wherefore, ye must needs be chastened and stand rebuked before my face."

It's interesting that the Lord says those whom he loves he also chastens. Since he loves all his children, we can assume we will receive some of that chastening. The true purpose of the chastening is that our sins might be forgiven. I am so impressed with the fact that he also says he will prepare a way for our deliverance from our problems if we will follow him as his disciples. He then reasserts, after speaking of chastening, "And I have loved you."

Isn't that the same spirit with which we must discipline our children? Let no one misunderstand the "chastening" as harsh words, unkind responses, or severe physical punishment. The Lord would not act that way, and neither must we. We must love our children with all of our heart, with kindness, tenderness, and a loving touch. And at times, if they need it, we must chasten them as well. Remember that we are showing love when we discipline our children, every bit as much as when we hug them. The children who receive the discipline will love the parents who discipline them even more if it is done in the spirit of love.

The Power of Repentance

Let us remember that our reason for disciplining children is to help them humble their hearts and repent of their sins. In other words, if they have hardened their hearts and are doing something wrong, they have to be helped, on occasion, through chastisement, to humble themselves and thus receive the Spirit of the Lord. If that is our purpose, we will not make very many mistakes in disciplining our children. If we truly love our children, we will be willing to do whatever is honorable and right to help them turn their hearts to the Lord.

While the word discipline has something of a negative connotation, it comes from the word disciple. The Lord will discipline us, and if we are willing to receive it with the right spirit, we become his disciples.

The word repentance denotes a change of heart or mind, or, in other words, a conversion. Perhaps it's the "mighty change" that the Book of Mormon speaks of (see Mosiah 5:2; Alma 5:14; Matthew 3:2, footnote).

The Hebrew word for repent means "to turn or return to God." Thus when we talk about repentance, it is a very positive aspect of the gospel. When I repent, I am returning my heart to God. I am seeking to undergo that mighty change. Similarly, when I administer discipline to my children, I am seeking to turn their hearts to God.

In Spanish, as well as in some other languages, the word chastisement is difficult to translate. It is usually translated into Spanish as castigo, meaning punishment. However, that word has too negative of a connotation. When the Lord chastens someone, it is always with a righteous purpose. It is never punishment for punishment's sake. It is to turn people to the Lord, to humble their hearts, and thus to bring about growth and development from the mistakes they have made. If that is our purpose in disciplining our families, we will know we are on the right track.

If we start with the correct spiritual premise about discipline, we will have fewer problems in disciplining others or in receiving discipline ourselves from the Lord. It is essential to teach children as they grow older to say, "Thy will be done, O Lord, not mine."

All of us are selfish, and children especially so, in seeking their own will. Sometimes children want to tease their brothers and sisters. They try to compete with one another. All these kinds of activities will bring contention into the home. Children many times do things for the wrong reasons—to please their parents or to avoid punishment—and not so much because the things are right.

Those who seek to please only themselves are very selfish. But the will of the Lord must be supreme in all things. We must learn to do things we don't want to do, simply because we ought to. The key, then, is to nourish in children the desire to respond to the feeling "You ought to." If their motivation is merely external, they will never be well-disciplined or submissive to the Lord.

For example, when we first started reading the scriptures as a family, we had a rule that the children had to be up by six o'clock. If they didn't comply, they had to go to bed an hour early that night, on the premise that they must need more sleep if they weren't able to get up for scripture study. Then one of my sons said something that really caught my attention: "Dad, the only reason I come to scripture reading is so I won't have to go to bed early." We realized then that we were unrighteously pressuring our children to obey, and we rescinded the rule. Children will respond outwardly to that kind of discipline, but then they will not learn to obey for the right reason—an inner desire to follow the Lord.

Perhaps the paramount description of what it means to be humble before the Lord is found in Mosiah 3:19:

The natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father.

Truly, we must submit to our Father in Heaven, all of us. And our children, particularly when they are young, will submit to their earthly parents because they want to, if those parents have disciplined them correctly.

Let us look at some statements from the Lord himself from which we can learn some principles to use in administering this kind of love to our children. Some parents who are a bit "laissez faire" feel they should not intervene when their children are having problems or quarreling. However, the Lord clearly said, "Ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another, and serve the devil, who is the master of sin, or who is the evil spirit which hath been spoken of by our fathers, he being an enemy to all righteousness" (Mosiah 4:14)

Clearly, we are not to allow our children to fight with each other or to transgress the laws of God. Furthermore, the Lord says that a bishop should be "one that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity" (1 Timothy 3:4). The same is true in any good family.

In Proverbs we find much counsel about discipline:

Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die (Proverbs 23:13).

Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying (Proverbs 19:18).

Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give delight unto thy soul (Proverbs 29:17).

The New Testament also teaches us to not provoke anger in our children:

Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged (Colossians 3:21).

Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord (Ephesians 6:4).

I am always impressed that when children are given time to turn to the Spirit and follow it, the Lord will tell them what to do, and they will choose the right. Sometimes they need their parents to help them have enough courage to face their mistakes, but as they face them time after time, they will learn to do what is right on their own.

On one of the first days of elementary school, one of our boys and his friend were caught climbing up a wire-mesh baseball fence during lunch break. They didn't know that was against the rules. Nevertheless, the teachers took them in and made them work through recess for several days. In fact, they were probably a little harder on them than they should have been.

This boy came home mad at the teachers—he felt very rebellious, with the attitude of "We'll teach them" and "Just wait until we figure out how to get back at them." In other words, he and his friend did not receive the punishment with humbled hearts but with hardened hearts.

My wife and I started working on this son to convince him that he ought to go apologize to the teacher even if he was only partly in the wrong. He resisted, embarrassed about what his friends might think. Instead of deciding the issue for him, I finally told him to go into his room and pray, and if the Lord told him that he didn't have to apologize, that would be all right with me. But if the Lord told him that he did, then he ought to be man enough to do it. After being alone for twenty minutes or so, he came back with a humbled heart, determined that, whatever the cost, he would apologize to the teacher. And he did so the next day.

I am convinced that if we give our children a chance to choose, having taught them correct principles, the Holy Ghost will lead them to decide for themselves what they ought to do, without someone else dictating or controlling their lives. They, themselves, must decide.

Principles Concerning Discipline

Over the years I have learned several principles of discipline that have made it easier to turn our children to the Lord:

As I have watched parents discipline children, they often seem to fall into two different patterns. In my judgment, one is incorrect. The other is correct.

Incorrect Principles of Discipline

Parents cannot go on giving that kind of discipline without harmful results, and it will eventually result in the destruction of their children or of their relationship with them.

Correct Principles of Discipline

There is a more enlightened way to discipline.

The relationship between parents and children must be in order. It is not enough for the parents to feel good about their children; the children must also feel good about their parents. Then the discipline will work.

There are many other principles of effective discipline that might be discussed. For example, parents must be careful not to try to resolve a serious problem in the moment that it happens. They are better off to wait until a little later—a few hours or the next day—before getting involved, especially if they are feeling the emotion of the moment. Sometimes this same seeming lack of involvement by the Lord is used as evidence by nonbelievers to "prove" the "nonexistence" of God.

The world criticizes the Lord for allowing evil to occur. They wonder why he allows little children to be killed, women to be raped, violent deaths to occur, and so on. While these things are difficult to understand, we must have faith that the Lord knows what he is doing. As Isaiah recorded, "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts" (Isaiah 55:8-9; see also Alma 14:8-11). In truth, it may be one of the greatest characteristics the Lord could possess to know everything, to have all the answers and all the power, but still not intervene, even when the world would intervene.

Many parents are not disciplined enough to hold back and let their children learn at their own speed, to experience things for themselves. Instead, the parents are anxious to jump in and tell the children what to do, because, after all, the parents "know." Then they try to manipulate the children to go in that direction.

The Lord seems to work in the opposite way. If we ask him, he will help us. But he does not seem to openly control or direct things. His seems to be a "laid back" way of operating that allows maximum growth and development for the individual. Sometimes when parents see clearly what needs to be done, they find it difficult to refrain from intervening or conveying information that will solve their children's problems. But standing back may be the greatest love of all, and it gives us new understanding about the majesty of the love of God. It makes us humbly recognize that we know very little about the Lord.

We could do everything for our children, but the only real safety for them lies within themselves. We can set up restrictions to guide them and put every protection around them, but when all is said and done, the final test is what is inside of them. They must be able to stand alone and to follow the promptings of the Spirit.

When disciplining your children, remember that people are usually doing the best they know how to do. They may have incorrect motives and make mistakes, but they usually have a reason for doing what they do.

If parents and children know they will not intentionally offend one another but seek to understand one another, through time that trust will pay many other dividends.

Trust Between Parent and Child

One of our daughters was quite anxious for her eleventh birthday to come. She wanted us to commit that she could have one of her friends over for her birthday on Friday night. We didn't say yes or no, but as the time grew closer, we learned that her friends were planning a surprise party for her.

Knowing this, we told her it would not be possible to have anyone over on Friday night. She was really disappointed, and she cried and pestered us about it for some time. We kept telling her, "Honey, it will be okay. Don't worry about it." She had a hard time understanding why.

I finally said, "Listen, do you believe in your dad?"

"Yes."

"Do you believe he would do anything to hurt you or have things go badly for you?"

"No."

"Then trust me, and things will resolve themselves by Friday night. Okay?"

She finally did believe and was somewhat calmed by our discussion. When Friday came, we made up a reason for going to her friend's house. When we walked into the room, her friends were all there, holding a big sign and shouting "Happy birthday!"

Our daughter was very emotional and taken aback. She was so pleased by the love of her friends in having a party for her. She was also pleased in the trust she had placed in her parents, which had been rewarded. She stayed for the evening and had a wonderful birthday.

How children need to trust their parents! Parents know the end from the beginning on certain things, and if their children will believe and trust, things will turn out well for them, usually even better than they anticipated. Trust is never built in a moment; it is built through many weeks and months and experiences of parents and children seeing each other respond in true love. Again, if parents will teach their children to pray and read the scriptures and respond to the voice of the Lord, the accounting will occur internally with the children and the Lord. Then the parents will not have to be "the sheriff," directing their children's lives.

Self-Discipline

One day at school, a boy was pushing around one of my sons. He had even punched him because he and some of the other LDS kids were dressed in their nice Sunday clothes. They had planned on going to the temple right after school to do baptisms for the dead and were taking some real razzing from the other students because of their clothes.

A boy who was smaller than my son kept pestering him. My son was very strong for his age, and he had the tendency to be quite physical with everyone. He could easily have made the other boy stop, but he refrained from hurting him even though the boy was really giving him a hard time. A couple of the LDS girls were very impressed with that and told him they admired his discipline in refraining from hitting back. My son replied, "I couldn't punch him. I'm going to the temple."

I was impressed by the fact that down deep he knew it was wrong to "punch people out," especially if he was going to the temple. Somehow that message had taken hold in his heart and helped him to discipline and control himself. I found it interesting that even after that experience was over, he had better control over himself and stopped being so physical with others.

The same kind of self-discipline can be exercised by adults in speaking out when they know something is wrong. One time my wife attended a luncheon with several other women. Some were active Latter-day Saints; others were less active. A few nonmembers were also present. The subject turned to abortion and birth control. For several minutes, one of the women voiced her strong feelings that nothing was wrong with abortion and that no restriction should be placed on birth control.

My wife was faced with the difficult challenge of whether to talk about the weather or speak out in favor of the truth. She chose to do the latter, explaining that under most circumstances abortion is a serious sin with the only exceptions being in cases of rape or incest. Even then, the matter should be decided only after careful counsel with priesthood leaders and under the direction of the Spirit of the Lord. She then bore testimony about her feelings on the subject. As you might expect, the luncheon concluded rather abruptly. However, afterward one of the inactive women approached my wife to say that she had never before understood the Lord's view on those issues and had felt the truth being spoken on that day.

A few years ago one of my daughters found herself in a similar circumstance. She was just going to class when one of her friends said, "Let's ditch class." The girl made it sound very tempting to my daughter. But my daughter thought about it and felt the Spirit say to her that she should not do it. She then said to her friend, "No, I can't. It wouldn't be right. I have to go to class." And she did.

Later I asked her what had happened to her friend. She thought about it a minute and said, "Oh, I didn't realize it at the time, but she went to class too."

How thankful I am that she heard the voice of the Spirit and had the self-discipline to follow it. This experience told me that she was truly progressing spiritually and would merit increased trust from her parents.

All of us, children and parents alike, need the courage to follow the voice of the Spirit, for the Lord himself is the true disciplinarian. I know of no pain greater than having disappointed the Lord. Doing so often requires intense repentance to regain the privilege of having the Spirit return and give instruction.

Requiring Accountability

Some parents have a difficult time obtaining an accounting from their children about such things as what time they will be home, where they've been, what they've been doing, or especially whether they have finished an assignment. As important as planning and doing the work is, providing a proper accounting for what was done is most important and is taught clearly in the scriptures.

Parents can help their children be more accountable by following certain principles. Please consider the following:

l. If children are not required to make an accounting to their parents, they will have no respect for their parents.

If children are having difficulty with a reasonable assignment, parents must not be too quick to get involved. Some of us make the mistake of trying to jump in and solve all of our children's problems. One thing I've noticed about the Lord is that he does not seem overly eager to take over. He lets me struggle, feel frustrated, humble myself, work through the problem, and finally see the fruits of my labors and the personal growth that follows. Parents need to follow the Lord's example in that thing. They should be involved with their children, caring about what is happening in their lives and in their hearts, but they should not be too involved in helping them solve every problem through their "great wisdom," their "great resolve," or their "great discipline." Otherwise, how will the children ever learn to develop their own strengths and turn to the Lord for help?

Parents must be responsible to enforce the rules of the family. If parents are delinquent in enforcing a valid rule over a period of time, they should not be surprised when children frequently break that rule. It is not proper for parents to penalize children for their own neglect in enforcing the standards. In such cases, the problem is a default in the leadership of the parents, not in the disobedience of the child.

A Lesson in Accountability

One morning I could tell that one of my sons was really "blue" about something. I got him alone, and we began to talk about what was concerning him. After some hesitation, he said, "Dad, I let Patches go." Then I knew he was talking about the neighbors' pet rabbit, which they had been trying to find for more than a month. I thought, "Those folks are going to have some bad feelings about us as neighbors."

When I asked him why he did it, he said, "I don't know. I guess I was just angry with my friend." I remembered then that our boys had seemed extra concerned about finding the neighbors' rabbit. Now I understood why.

We talked for a few minutes about what it all meant. I asked if he needed to talk to his friend about it, but he had been praying and had already decided to do so.

He was mainly concerned that the other boy might not like him anymore. The other boy would surely wonder why he had let the rabbit go and why he hadn't told him about it over those many weeks. The parents had felt bad enough about it that they had purchased two other rabbits to replace the one that was lost.

My son wondered if it would be all right to call his friend and discuss the problem over the phone. I told him that it was usually better to tell people to their face what had happened, and that maybe he could invite his friend to come over. I gave him the option of having me present or telling his friend alone. A little later, he told me he would do it alone.

I told him that besides clearing the matter up with his friend, he would also need to clear the matter with the Lord. He told me he had already prayed about it and asked forgiveness. He had surely followed the promptings on that matter.

My son invited his friend to come over, and they went downstairs to watch a video together. I went down two different times to see what had happened, only to learn that he still hadn't brought the matter up yet. I felt he was stalling because he was really worried about his friend's response. Finally I called him aside and told him that he needed the courage to do what needed to be done, and to do it now.

In short order, this good boy was back to me with a big smile, saying everything was okay. A little later, I got him and his friend together for a minute and told the friend how bad my son had felt about it, that he was hoping it wouldn't affect their friendship, and that he hoped he would forgive him. His friend smiled and said that things were fine. My son volunteered to buy him another rabbit, but he said they didn't really want another one because of their two new ones.

I was surely pleased to see that my son had been responsible enough to face up to what he had done and to "clear the air" with his friend and with the Lord. He had pretty much done it on his own, although someone had been there to help him be accountable and to help him follow through with what he had already determined was right. That is a much different thing than telling him what to do and making him do it.

Discipline Techniques

When we hold our children accountable for their actions, they will interpret that as love. When we are loose and let them do whatever they want, they will interpret that as a lack of love. Children need direction, guidelines, and parents who love them enough to enforce the proper discipline for the breaking of rules. Remember that empty ultimatums are doomed to failure, and rebellion will usually follow.

President Kimball used to say about someone who was not doing right: "He is entitled to discipline—not as a punishment, but as an aid to his growth. It's because we love him so much. Let us, therefore, seek him out and discipline him." I believe that is a great principle.

Several techniques for administering discipline have worked well for us, especially the following:

Â recognize their sins.

Â confess their sins.

Â ask for forgiveness.

Â desire to make good what they have done.

Â resolve to sin no more.

As you can see, those are the five steps of the repentance process. Repentance is what we want for our children, because it brings about a humbled heart.

Early in our marriage, I used to conduct the interviews on my own as the father. Later we found it much more productive for my wife and me to hold them jointly. We try to learn the children's feelings about themselves, their progress in school, their friends, their spiritual progress, and so on. This seems to have more impact than when one of us would interview them alone. That does not mean, of course, that they won't occasionally need an interview with an individual parent, especially to talk about worthiness.

This focused attention on an individual child has gone a long way to help keep them on the straight and narrow. Often we have sensed needs that would otherwise have gone unnoticed. Sometimes we have been able to discuss serious questions about spiritual or sexual matters. These interviews have also been valuable in deepening the love we have for one another. Many times the interviews have ended with a priesthood blessing, but always with a prayer, which, again, greatly increases our love for one another.

We ought to be careful not to give blessings only when there are problems. We should encourage our children to ask for blessings when they're going away from home, leaving for school, starting a new job, or at any other appropriate time. Sometimes a father may just feel prompted to give a child a blessing of commendation. If the family wants to record these for the child's future benefit, that could surely be done.

Rules

Part of providing discipline for children includes setting good rules, especially for younger children. But even older children need some rules. We have tried hard not to have very many rules, but some things should be completely clear in the minds of the children. If rules are made and presented in kindness and respect, with the Spirit of the Lord, the children will see them not so much as rules as guidelines for their own benefit.

For example, we've had rules about modest clothing, makeup, jewelry, and so on. There have been some rules for the younger children about bedtime, and even the teenagers and adults are usually in bed by ten-thirty or eleven. We have agreed as a family on different curfews, depending on the age of the children. When the older children were on dates, they could not stay out beyond midnight. We didn't allow sleepovers or overnight parties. We tried to maintain some control over friends, music, TV, radio, videos, proper language, and use of the telephone.

We have also had some clear understandings about schoolwork, chores, and music lessons being completed before playtime. There was also some clear direction about eating meals together as a family, and especially about avoiding contention at all costs.

If children learn to discipline themselves, they will abide by family guidelines as coming from the Lord. The more mature the children, the less their need for rules as they guide themselves by the Spirit. And if children are busily involved in constructive projects, developing their talents, working, and so on, they will not have much time to get into many problems or difficulties.

Punishments

I believe that sometimes punishments are a necessary part of discipline. But before administering any kind of punishment, parents should consider their motives for so doing. They should do it because they love their children and with the intent that it will humble them and turn them to the Lord. If it will do these things, the punishment should be administered. If not, the parents should seek a different form of discipline.

Punishments, of course, will vary greatly depending on the age of the children and what those children need. We have always sought to find something the children hold dear, that would be a sacrifice for them and really "get their attention" if they were deprived of it. But what is an appropriate punishment for one may not be for another, and thus it is very individualized.

We have not been too prone to spank our children. When they were younger and we were not getting their attention on something, we occasionally did spank them. We used an old racquetball paddle that the kids gave me for Christmas one year. Later the children wrote "paddle whacker" on it, with lots of other funny comments. We determined to use it when it was needed to get someone's attention. And on those occasions, it was very effective, especially with the younger ones. Fear and respect for the "paddle whacker," however, were always more effective than the pain from the "paddle whacker."

Sometimes, when children are rebelling about something, they want to "grandstand" or to have an audience. The worst thing you can do is let them do so. Thus, an effective discipline is to isolate them, to send them to their room where they can think things out on their own.

We've actually had fun over the years with a room we called the "cooler," an uncomfortable room, such as the bathroom, where we have sent children to wait until they were ready to humble their hearts and talk to us. One of our sons used to call himself "the cooler king" to remind us that he had been sent there more often than any of our other children.

With smaller children, sometimes just having them sit on a chair while they calm down and get control of themselves is sufficient. The important thing is to have them prayerfully consider what has happened and, when they are humbled, to seek you out.

On occasion, the little ones, especially, would come out and say they were humble. Sometimes they were, but other times they were not and needed to be sent back again. But once you feel that they are truly repentant and humble, then you will know the discipline has been effective.

Another particular technique that has worked well for us is to have our children stand against the wall for twenty minutes. That, too, is a form of isolation. It's also a difficult position, and our children didn't like it, but it surely brought about the desired results.

Another traditional approach that is good, depending on the age of the children, is to ground them—in other words, to withhold privileges that for them really matter. For this to be effective, you must really know what it is your children hold dear, and that is what must be withheld. It takes real discipline on the part of the parents to withhold something that really matters to children when they cry and beg for it. But you still must say no. One or two of those experiences will teach more respect and obedience than a hundred attempts to do so when you give in to the cries of a child.

Use logical or natural consequences with your children. If you can find a way to make your children "face the music," that will be much more effective than just pulling a punishment out of the air. A bit of creativity in this area will result in some effective chastisements.

Always remember that punishment must be administered with a cool head, with detachment from the situation. When you are emotionally involved in something, that is not the moment to discipline. You might want to have your spouse handle it or wait until you can discipline without emotion. Especially remember to always be gentle in your words and gentle in your ways and to avoid any kind of abuse.

There is a critical moment in disciplining when children beg and cry and say, "I'm sorry! I won't ever do it again." That is the time to go forward with the discipline, not listen to explanations or promises or excuses (assuming you have the facts). The time for talk is not at the time of discipline but after the discipline is over.

When your children know you hold the gospel dear, don't allow them to get the Lord or the gospel into the issue. A child might say, "Well, if that's how you're going to be, I'm not going to pray anymore" or "I'm not going to church" or "I'm going to go play ball on Sunday." Our response has been, "Well, that has nothing to do with this matter. If you want to do that, it's up to you. That's between you and the Lord. But this has to do with . . . " and then we restate the real problem. Under no circumstances have we allowed children to bring the Church into issues about discipline. If they do, it becomes a bargaining chip. In time, that may destroy faith and testimony or keep them from attending church.

Often parents can have success with such tangible rewards as an apple, a cookie, a star on a chart, a trip to the zoo, a day with a friend, and so on. Rewards might also be social—hugs, kisses, and pats. Or, more important, you can teach your children to recognize the good feelings that naturally come from doing what is right. To the degree you can do that, your children won't need other rewards. They will instead provide their own.

Principles of Self-Esteem

In disciplining children, parents must be careful to maintain the children's self-esteem. We should never put them down or destroy their image of themselves. Here are some ways we can strengthen the self-esteem of our children:

If you can't think of anything good, pray that the Lord will help you see some things upon which you might compliment them. That will always work. Remember the rule to commend in public and correct in private, Always be careful to reject children's bad actions but not the children themselves.

I will never forget the impact a particular man had on me in damaging my self-image in athletics. I was in the seventh grade, was a little taller than the other boys, and was doing quite well in basketball and track. However, as the year progressed, the coach began saying to me, "Gene, stay on the bench. You're no ball player. You're too clumsy! You can't run. You can't shoot. You're not fast enough." This treatment continued for a number of months.

I finally began to believe what the coach was saying, and in coming years I did my best to avoid sports altogether. I set aside running. I determined not to play basketball with the young men at church or school.

This negative conditioning followed me into my first year of college. Some athletics were required, but I minimized my involvement as much as possible.

A year later I served a mission in a distant land. In that country the buses did not stop to let passengers board; they just slowed down. We soon learned to board the bus while on the run. One afternoon as a missionary companion and I looked down the street toward the bus stop, we saw the bus coming. We took off running to catch it so as not to miss our next appointment. To my great surprise I beat my companion to the bus stop. Later that day, I purposely arranged a few runs for the bus, and each time I beat my companion. I was shocked and amazed, especially because my companion had received a number of awards in college for being one of the fastest runners in northern Arizona. It was then I realized I had wasted all those years. I could have excelled in athletics, but I had believed what someone else had planted in my mind.

I was totally taken aback by this experience. That very day I spent some time considering what had happened to me and whether I had created this image in my own mind or the coach had inadvertently done it. It didn't matter; the effect was the same. As a result of that experience, I reexamined my life in a number of other areas, trying to determine if by chance I could have been "fooled" by myself or someone else into believing things about myself that were just not true.

Some people believe they are not good in music, and thus they are not. Others believe they are not good in math, and thus they are not. Of course, some have gifts in certain areas, but all can improve upon what they have. Whatever you sincerely believe about yourself becomes true, even if it is false in the beginning. We would all do well to stop and examine the beliefs we hold about ourselves, because many are true and probably many are not.

Many of us go through life believing ourselves capable of a lot less than we really are. Be careful in dealing with your children to help them believe the very best they can about themselves and the gifts the Lord has given them. Be careful not to inhibit them in the great growth and potential of which they are capable.

We must discipline our children in love, considering their eternal welfare. Our main purpose must always be to turn their hearts to the Lord. If we do that, our discipline will always be effective.
