Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Seven

Teaching Your Family to Keep the Commandments

My wife's great-great-grandparents, Edward and Caroline Amelia Owens Webb, were among the Latter-day Saints who were driven out of Nauvoo. Brother Webb was a blacksmith, and when he arrived in Council Bluffs, Brigham Young asked him to stay there for a time to help outfit the pioneers going West. One year, two years, three years, four years, and finally five years passed before word came for Brother and Sister Webb to move their family to the Salt Lake Valley. They were thrilled that at last they could join the rest of the Saints.

By 1852 the Webbs were outfitted to make the journey, and they traveled with the last company to leave Council Bluffs. When their company reached the Platte River, an epidemic of cholera struck the camp, and several people died of it.

Amasa Lyman, writing about this disease, said: "The cries and moanings of those suddenly attacked were truly terrific—to see one stricken down in a moment and in a short hour the ruddy glow of health displaced by the pallor of death and to know that the sufferers were the forms of loved ones endeared to us by the tenderest ties that bind the heart and soul, was heart rending. To most of those sufferers there was no rest but the grave. However, some were healed, through administration, by a servant of God."

A young woman who was suffering with this disease sent for Brother Webb to administer to her. Though his wife tried to persuade him not to go, a thing she had never done before, he felt he should go and perform this duty when called upon. In faith he administered to the sick girl. She was healed and was able to go on to the Salt Lake Valley. However, he was struck with the disease and died that very night. From a box nailed to the end of his wagon a rude coffin was made, and he was buried at night near the Platte River. In the sketch of her life, his wife wrote, "He died in full faith of the gospel."

We can only imagine how Sister Webb must have felt. In helping another, her husband had lost his own life. It would have been easy for her to challenge God, to be upset, to be angry, and to turn her family from the Church. Instead, she was obedient to the commandment of the Lord and took her family alone to the Salt Lake Valley. She was faithful to the end. Now many years have passed. What does the Webb family have to show for this sacrifice in faith? Hundreds and hundreds of their descendants have been endowed and sealed in the temple and are faithful in the kingdom.

How important it is to keep the commandments of the Lord! How far-reaching is the impact of faithful parents! That faithfulness can be traced through generations of Saints.

Clearly, we must teach our children to keep the commandments. If we have taught them to turn their hearts to the Lord and to feel the promptings of the Spirit, teaching them to keep the commandments of the Lord will be relatively simple. Also, as children watch their parents living the commandments, they will see, feel, and know the importance of so doing. They will experience the blessings that come from keeping the commandments in a faithful family and thus will not have to be convinced or go through a period of rebelliousness. Still, they do need to be taught.

Parents sometimes think their children will learn to keep the commandments by osmosis or learn them on their own. They say, "Well, I was never taught by my parents, and I suppose children have the freedom to choose on their own." However, the Lord has instructed us that parents are to teach their children:

Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents.

For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized.

And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands.

And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord.

And the inhabitants of Zion shall also observe the Sabbath day to keep it holy (D&C: 68:25-29).

Alma was taught by the Spirit of the responsibility to teach his children to keep the commandments:

The Spirit of the Lord doth say unto me: Command thy children to do good, lest they lead away the hearts of many people to destruction; therefore I command you, my son, in the fear of God, that ye refrain from your iniquities (Alma 39:12).

The Lord will hold us responsible if we do not teach our children. President Heber J. Grant said it well:

The Lord has said it is our duty to teach our children in their youth, and I prefer to take His words for it rather than the words of those who are not obeying His commandments. It is folly to imagine that our children will grow up with a knowledge of the Gospel without teaching . . . . I may know that the Gospel is true, and so may my wife; but I want to tell you that our children will not know that the Gospel is true, unless they study it and gain a testimony for themselves. Parents are deceiving themselves in imagining that their children will be born with a knowledge of the Gospel [Conference Report, April 1902, p. 80].

Church leaders need to be careful not to take over this responsibility from parents. Elder Boyd K. Packer has said:

Bishops, keep constantly in mind that fathers are responsible to preside over their families.

Sometimes, with all good intentions, we require so much of both the children and the father that he is not able to do so.

If my boy needs counseling, bishop, it should be my responsibility first, and yours second. If my boy needs recreation, bishop, I should provide it first, and you second. If my boy needs correction, that should be my responsibility first, and yours second.

If I am failing as a father, help me first, and my children second. Do not be too quick to take over from me the job of raising my children ("Solving Emotional Problems in the Lord's Own Way," Ensign, May 1978, p. 93).

Teaching Children to Receive the Ordinances of the Gospel

Parents should make a special effort to prepare their children for baptism and the reception of the Holy Ghost. They should also prepare them for ordination to the priesthood, missions, temple marriage, and so on. As children learn to follow the Spirit, they will naturally want to receive the ordinances of the gospel.

There is great power in the ordinances. President Brigham Young said:

Let the father and mother, who are members of this Church and Kingdom, take a righteous course, and strive with all their might never to do a wrong, but to do good all their lives; if they have one child or one hundred children, if they conduct themselves towards them as they should, binding them to the Lord by their faith and prayers, I care not where those children go, they are bound up to their parents by an everlasting tie, and no power of earth or hell can separate them from their parents in eternity; they will return again to the fountain from whence they sprang. (In Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:90-91).

Teaching the Law of Tithing

A few years ago, one of my sons got his first paycheck from his job at a cemetery. The check was for $245, and he was very excited about buying some things he wanted.

We went to the credit union, where he put a third of the money in his mission fund and held out the rest for tithing and for a bicycle. While we were driving back home, this son put his envelope with the money in it in a cubicle in the back of our station wagon.

Suddenly another driver began honking at us, rather rudely, I thought. We moved ahead, thinking he wanted the passing lane. He continued to honk and acted very excited. Finally at a stop light he yelled through the window, "Don't you know your boy is throwing money out the window? Twenty-dollar bills were flying all around."

While we had been driving, one of our younger children had found the money and proceeded to throw it out the back window. We were all very upset. We drove off the highway and had a word of prayer. Then the whole family searched for a quarter of a mile along both sides of the highway but didn't find one single bill. (The total lost was about sixty-five dollars.) The bills must have blown away or been picked up by other people. My older son cried and was very upset, as we had been on our way that very moment to buy his bicycle.

This son finally said that if he used his tithing money, he would still have enough to buy the bike. We told him we didn't think that was a very good idea. He said, "You've always told me that the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof. Well, now he's got his money." He was determined that we should take him to buy the bike, using his tithing money. We finally said we would talk about it a day or two later after he had cooled down and prayed about it. After that, if he still wanted to do it, we would sustain him in his decision. If not, he ought to pay his tithing to the bishop.

We were very pleased a few days later to see him walk into the bishop's office and pay his tithing. He had turned to the Lord and received an answer and was obedient to those promptings. We told him he would surely be blessed for having done that.

However, as is often the case, he began to face some tests. The owner of the cemetery where he worked said he would have to terminate his employment. The cemetery had been purchased by someone else whose son was going to do his job. My son was very hurt by that and said to us somewhat kiddingly but with a bit of seriousness, "I wonder if it really does pay to pay your tithing?"

He struggled a few more weeks trying to get a job somewhere else but could not. Finally, a doctor who was a member of the Church called him to say that he had a cleaning job to be done in his office and that if my son wanted the job, he would employ him. My son was delighted.

Interestingly, though the janitorial work didn't pay quite as much as the cemetery job had, the doctor took a personal interest in our son and did much to help him mature and prepare for his mission. The gain to our son was much more than just a financial one.

This experience in keeping the commandments was a blessing to the whole family, and it especially served our son well as he went on his mission and was able to preach from first-hand experience the importance of paying an honest tithing to the Lord.

Teaching Children to Proclaim the Gospel

When one of my daughters was ten years old, we had been talking as a family about how to use the Spirit to influence other people.

One day while she was talking with her nonmember piano teacher, who came to our home to provide lessons, she felt an inspiration come to her. She said to her teacher, feeling this would bring the Spirit to her, "Let's sing together." The teacher was agreeable, so my daughter purposely gave her our hymnbook from which to play. The teacher easily played the hymns, and they sang together. After singing a few numbers, our daughter felt the additional impression to sing "In Our Lovely Deseret." The lyrics of this hymn talk about not using tobacco, tea, coffee, or alcohol—all of which the teacher used. This good daughter started to sing the words with the teacher, but the teacher choked up and couldn't continue singing. As a result of our daughter's initiative, we were able as a family to teach more of the gospel to her.

Some weeks later, this same girl challenged a group of teachers at school to quit drinking coffee (they were on their coffee break). She told them it was against the commandments of the Lord. A teacher, with a chuckle in her voice, called to inform us of our daughter's activities. These kinds of experiences build real faith in a child. It was interesting to see how courageous she was, and now, as a teenager, what a great missionary spirit she still has. Those experiences served her well.

We need to be sure that in training our children to keep the commandments, we do not neglect missionary work. Children can have a great influence in bringing people to Christ, and as they have these experiences, they will develop a desire to serve formal missions when they are older. We must teach our young men and, as appropriate, our young women to go on missions. All young men should be prepared to go. We have always felt that our daughters should be prepared to go on a mission or be married in the temple, whichever comes first. All of our children have been taught to save for both mission and marriage. As you teach your children to prepare for missionary service, you might consider the following:

l. In family prayer, let your children hear you pray about the time they will go on a mission, and pray that they will prepare for one. Some parents have said, "We will pray them there."

There is a mission of the family as well as a mission of the Church. The mission of the family is also to proclaim the gospel, perfect its members, and redeem their kindred dead. Teach your children by example as well as by precept, and they will be great missionaries—in each of these areas.

Controlling Television and Movies

In my judgment, we must be careful not to let television rob us of time with the family. We have had varying rules about television, but the result over the years is that we've watched it very little in our family. Sometimes we have gone for months or even years with the television unplugged. Normally, during the school year, the television has not been on from Monday through Thursday. We have watched some on Friday and Saturday as a family. Sometimes the children have watched cartoons.

Too much television gives children the idea that they should always be entertained, often at the expense of learning about more important things. Although we can't hide from television and the world, we can certainly teach our children to be selective and disciplined about what and how much they watch. We should be careful to help them pick programs that will be educational and uplifting. Some families have found it beneficial to simply disconnect the television.

Teaching our children to keep the commandments when they're with us will bring great payoffs when they're alone and have to rely on themselves and the promptings to know what to do. My wife and I were so pleased to hear from some friends about the faithfulness of one of our sons.

This nonmember family had tried on occasion to get our son to do things with them on Sunday, but he had always told them that Sunday was a family day, that it was the Lord's day, and that he didn't do those kinds of things on Sunday. He had always refused in a polite way. They were very impressed with the fact that even under some real influence from them, he would tell them no.

What added more to their experience with him was when they decided to go to a movie on a weekday and asked him to go with them. He said, "I can only go if it is a good movie, if it doesn't have swearing and sex in it." They said that would be all right. He asked what movie they were planning on seeing. When he learned what movie it was, he told them he didn't think he should go. They didn't pressure him, but they did try to persuade him.

They were somewhat surprised that his convictions about the quality of the movie were enough to turn down a friend, their son, who wanted him to go. They were even more impressed with the fact that he would stand up to two adults and tell them that.

I'm thankful that my son did what was right on his own, with his parents nowhere in sight. As a result of his example, my wife and I were able to introduce the gospel to this family.

I remember another time when I decided to take two of my sons to a certain movie. We had heard good reports about it from neighbors, but the first few minutes had a lot of very bad language. The three of us commented to each other that it was surely bad but assumed it would pass. The language continued but so did our interest in the show.

I asked the boys a couple of times, "What do you think we should do?" perhaps more to see where they were in their thinking than anything else. (To be honest, I was really enjoying the show and, except for the language, would have liked to stay.) The language became even more severe, and finally the younger boy said, "Dad, I don't think it's right that we should stay here." The older one quickly agreed. They both sat there staring at me to see what I would say. I choked out, "Well, you're probably right. I think you're right. Let's go." So, with some reluctance, and yet knowing that we were doing what was right, we walked out of the movie within fifteen minutes of its beginning.

We ended up going somewhere else and doing something fun together. As I left the movie, I had some interesting feelings:

l. I have good sons.

This was a case where dad really wanted to see the movie and might have been tempted to do so, but his children were more disciplined at that moment than he was.

Keeping the Sabbath Day

Sometimes children have real questions about what they can do on the Sabbath Day. Following is a list of some activities that might be appropriate on Sunday; at least they have been of assistance to our family:

What is most important is for a family to learn together from the scriptures what it really means to keep the commandments and then work together to do so. That's a much better approach than just "laying down the law." If children participate in helping to determine what's right, they will usually make things more strict than the parents would anyway.

Once when we were struggling with what it meant to keep the Sabbath Day holy, we determined to turn to the scriptures and see what the Lord had said. Consulting the Topical Guide, we looked up and read aloud the following passages:

Exodus 31:13-17: Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may known that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you. Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death. Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.

Nehemiah 10:31: And if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.

Nehemiah 13:15: In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals.

Isaiah 58:13: If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:

Matthew 12:8: For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.

Our observations as a family:

D&C 59:9-14: That thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day; for verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High; nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times; but remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full. Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer.

We observed that we may:

D&C 59:15-20: Inasmuch as ye do these things with thanksgiving, with cheerful hearts and countenances, not with much laughter, for this is sin, but with a glad heart and a cheerful countenance—verily I say, that inasmuch as ye do this, the fullness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth; yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for vineyards; yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart; yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul. And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion.

We observed that as we keep the Sabbath, the Lord will give us the fullness of the earth, including food, clothing, houses, barns, and so on.

As we read together, we listed the main points of each verse, watching for the things the Lord expected and the wonderful promises he had made. We reviewed the commandments in some detail and thus learned with the Spirit what the Lord would have us know about the Sabbath Day.

It is interesting that when a family takes that kind of approach, the Lord's values pass from the older generation to the younger generation. If parents teach and testify by the Spirit, their values pass into the younger generation's hearts. I believe that is what happened that day in our family. When we were finished, we felt that we understood more clearly what it meant to keep the Sabbath Day holy, and we felt a renewed desire to do so. This is a powerful way to teach your children (and to learn yourself) any principle of the gospel.

Teaching Honesty

Parents should make a special effort to teach their children to be honest with others and with themselves. They should teach them to honor the laws of the land, including traffic laws, tax laws, and so on. In these things, especially, children will follow their parents' example.

One morning one of my sons, a nine-year-old, and I took a three-mile walk, and he talked almost the whole time as I asked him questions and prodded him along.

In the process, he told me he had passed a pre-test in school on Monday with a score of 100 percent and thus would not have to take the spelling test on Friday. I commended him for it and we went on talking.

A little while after we returned home, my wife sought me out privately and said, "Your son has something to talk to you about." His conscience was bothering him badly because he had told me a lie about his spelling test.

He'd felt really bad about it and gone in immediately to confess to his mom. The truth was that he didn't get 100 percent on his test; he had misspelled one word and gotten 99 percent. He had spelled the word "Friday" as "Fryday" but had corrected it anyway and submitted the score of 100 percent. He was very embarrassed to tell her and then later confessed to me through his tears.

To make matters worse, his teacher had put his name on the board with the other star students whose names stay on the board all week when they pass the Monday spelling test. He felt very repentant and guilty and yet relieved that he had confessed it to his mom and then later to his dad.

He asked what he should do. We asked him what he thought he should do. He said he had to tell his teacher, but he said, "I'm so embarrassed. She'll wipe my name right off the board, and all the kids will ask, 'How come your name's not on the board?'" He was really worried about having to face up to the truth and especially the public humiliation that might be forthcoming.

In addition, he was worried about when he would even tell his teacher. He said, "She's always in the room, and there are always students around." We suggested that he try to seek her out in the hallway before she arrived in class, or afterward, and maybe he could solve it that way.

We told him that he needed to face the music and put things right, and that if he did it humbly and prayerfully, perhaps his teacher could figure out a way to handle it so that he wouldn't be unduly embarrassed. We all three had a prayer together. He seemed relieved, and I know he prayed about it that night. We bid him farewell the next morning and wished him good luck with his teacher.

He came back from school very happy. He had caught his teacher before she arrived in the classroom and talked the problem through with her. She was very happy that he had been honest with her, and while all the kids were out to recess, she erased his name, and no one ever noticed that his name was gone from the board.

He was greatly relieved that his teacher had received his confession well, and he was thankful that he had been honest. He told us three or four times the next night that he would never lie again. He said, "I've learned a hard lesson about telling the truth."

I'm always amazed at how the punishments that the Lord has for disobedience to his laws seem to be built right into the laws themselves. If we are dishonest, we will pay the penalty sooner or later. The guilt that is associated with disobedience is often sufficient to bring about repentance.

It's amazing that even with a child, guilt is the signal from the Spirit that something is wrong. I'm thankful that this son was a boy of integrity in this incident and that he was willing to tell the Lord, his parents, and his teacher.

Teaching the Word of Wisdom

We must teach children to avoid the use of tobacco, alcohol, coffee, tea, and all inappropriate drugs. We must teach them to keep their bodies healthy and strong before the Lord at all times.

I once interviewed a young priest who had been going out with some friends who were not such a good influence on him. These young men smoked, and they had been working on this young man (we'll call him John) to smoke. He'd told them no many times, but he finally caved in and said, "Well, I think a little bit won't hurt. Just one." And he started smoking a bit. He went to the priests quorum one Sunday morning, and one of the priests began to sniff and said, "Aha! You've been smoking, John." John was terribly embarrassed and turned red-faced in front of everybody. As he left the meeting that day he thought, "What should I do? Should I continue to be friends with these priests, or should I go off with my other friends?" Unfortunately, he decided to go with his other friends.

I met him six months after that "little decision" to smoke one cigarette. By then he had also broken the laws about drinking alcohol and using drugs, and he had even broken the law of chastity two times when he finally came to confess what he had done. He said to me through his tears, "Elder Cook, all for a dumb cigarette. That's what did it to me. If I had just not done that . . . "

I said, "What do you mean?"

He said, "Well, I didn't realize that my friends were doing a lot more than smoking. Then I found out that they were drinking, too. And I found they were doing other things worse than that. Before I knew it, I was ensnared in it." And then again he said, "For one dumb cigarette." That is a very telling story.

I remember another young man who had resisted his friends on an athletic team who had pressured him to drink. He had done well in resisting them, but they continued to harp at him. He finally thought (erroneously), "If I go out with them and drink just one time, I'll get them off my back. At least they'll leave me alone and quit teasing me about being a Mormon." And so he believed that lie.

Now, if you want to get a drink, where do you go? You don't go to the church or to the bishop's house, do you? You go to a bar. And there are a lot more things going on in a bar than just drinking. There may be people who have more on their minds than just having a drink. Well, this eighteen-year-old didn't think too much about that and went in to have a drink with the boys. An hour or so later he came out, an unchaste person.

Once again, having confessed to his bishop and stake president, he wept in an interview with me. He sorrowed over the fact that he had been ensnared by "one dumb drink." He said, "Elder Cook, if you ever have a chance to talk to young people, tell them how dumb I was so they won't fall into the same trap." And it all began with just one drink.

Teaching Chastity

Chastity is one of the most important of the Lord's commandments, and in many ways it has the most far-reach-in effects. We should carefully teach our children to avoid pornography, inappropriate videos (especially at friends' homes), being alone with someone of the opposite sex, filthy language, dirty jokes, bad stories, improper dress standards, close dancing, kissing, petting, masturbation, and improper thoughts. We must teach them that Satan continually says, "A little bit won't hurt," and that he will do all in his power to tempt and try them and cause them to fall into sin. Teach them clearly that all such sins come from Satan himself, and that he is behind the teaching of these evil practices. They must be taught that if they meddle with these things in the least degree, they will get burned. Of course, our own example is paramount in teaching children to avoid these things.

It's often good to role-play with our children how they might handle temptations that arise. For example, if someone offers to let them look at pornography, what will be their response? What if someone offers them a drink or a cigarette? If they have worked this out with their family beforehand, they will know what to do when the reality hits. Parents can use this technique in teaching any area of the gospel.

We should emphasize the positive in teaching moral cleanliness, stressing especially the blessings it brings. We must spend many a family home evening teaching children the importance of keeping themselves chaste throughout their lives. The world would have them believe that all young people are involved in immorality. We must teach otherwise. We must teach the Lord's standard about moral cleanliness. Where should children learn about sexuality? Who should provide sex education? Without question it must come from their parents. From the time children are small, parents should teach them about their bodies, about cleanliness, and about the proper relationship between boys and girls. This should be done naturally over the years so there won't need to be a "crash course" on "sex education" when they become teenagers.

If these matters are built on a spiritual foundation, they are easily understood by children. Parents need to be frank and direct in letting their children know that sexual relations that take place between parents are good and appropriate, not only for the important purpose of conceiving children but also in regenerating and strengthening love between husband and wife. Parents can show children that they love each other through appropriate displays of affection. Then the children will have little difficulty understanding these things.

Parents must be very careful never to cross the line of propriety with their children. Parents who are involved in any way with child abuse whether physical, mental, emotional, or any other kind, will certainly be held accountable before the Lord. Few sins are more serious. Children must be taught to be careful in their dealings with other adults as well. They should be quick to talk to their parents if any kind of abuse occurs.

Teaching Repentance and Forgiveness

The Lord has commanded us to repent and to forgive one another, and children especially must be taught these important principles of the gospel. Often the sweetest experiences in life have to do with forgiveness, and it is parents who must set the example. In disciplining children and helping them learn to repent, some of the greatest lessons of all are taught. These experiences allow us to truly teach our children to keep the commandments and to rely more fully on the Lord. If parents and children seek to follow the Spirit, they will forgive one another, and they will also receive forgiveness from the Lord.

When I arrived home from work one day, I found my youngest son in a very sober mood. He came up and put his arms around me, and I could tell he was upset about something. My wife and daughters all knew what he was doing and signaled me to give him a lot of love. He was very, very sad and took me into the bedroom.

There on the bed was my outdoor thermometer—now broken—with about seven dollars in bills and coins—all the money he had. My boy told me through his tears that he had accidentally broken the thermometer by kicking his ball. He particularly felt bad because he had broken the one in the front yard the week before. Also, he felt even worse because he knew I had worked to calibrate the thermometers with each other and with the thermostat. He was sure I was going to be really upset.

I put my arm around him and told him that I forgave him. He was so repentant that I didn't have the heart to make him pay for the thermometer, or even for part of it, although ordinarily I would have. I was glad I didn't, as I learned later that the accident had happened that morning and he had been sorrowful the whole day. He was really repentant.

He told me later that evening that he had prayed fervently to the Lord that I would not be mad at him. For some reason he had been really worried and was very relieved when I told him I forgave him.

The next morning in scripture reading, we were reading in John 3 about how the Spirit comes to us and how we can be born again and have spiritual experiences throughout our lives. What made this experience especially sweet was that when I asked the children, "When was the last time you really felt like the Spirit helped you?" this youngest son said, with great feeling, "It was just yesterday." He related how he had prayed fervently that I would not be angry about the broken thermometer. He also said that after we had settled things between us the previous night, he had truly thanked the Lord for answering his prayer.

He said, "I really feel like the Spirit inspired me and that I was able to get my prayer answered. I also told the Lord how thankful I was, and I'm glad I did that." He was strongly confident that he had had an answer to prayer and that he had been inspired to follow the promptings of the Spirit to give thanks for the answer thereafter.

Without question, if we will properly teach our children faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and repentance as the first two basic principles of the gospel, those principles will lead our children to the ordinances of the gospel. They will learn of the Lord's forgiveness of sin and of his atoning sacrifice for all of us. If we keep those things in mind as we are teaching the principles, we'll be better at disciplining our children and teaching them obedience to the Lord's commandments.

The Lord really will bless our families if we turn the hearts of our children to us as their parents and even more so to their Father in Heaven. The same will be true if parents turn their own hearts to their children. May the Lord bless us to teach our children with profound love and thus turn all of our hearts to God.
