Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Eight

Teaching Your Family about Work and Finances

After we moved to a South American country to preside over a mission, we realized that our food budget was in serious trouble. We started talking about where the money was going. What was happening? Were we feeding all the missionaries, or what?

Then we began to realize that we were feeding four or five extra people a day who came begging at our door. They were very compelling cases, like the woman who would come with a three-year-old and say, "My son needs to have an operation. I don't have enough money, and without it he'll be dead within the month. I'm trying to get the money." You know how that would tug at your heartstrings, and my wife had responded from her heart.

We talked about that and thought, "Well, we can't support this whole city. We can't even support this neighborhood. In fact, on a mission budget we will have a hard time supporting ourselves." So we wondered what we should do. We decided that any time we really felt inspired to give, we would do so. However, we also came to understand that we were "on the beat." In other words, some people were sustaining themselves month after month by making the rounds of certain houses, and ours was one of them.

We had a piece of ground right by our front door, and I said, "Honey, when they come by, why don't we say, 'We'd be glad to give you a full dinner. We'd just like you to put in one hour working in this little plot of ground. We're thinking of putting in a garden.'"

Guess how many people in a full year took us up on the offer? Not one. Isn't that surprising? They had been taught an easier way. I don't know how many hundreds came to our house, but not a single one was willing to work to obtain the money, medicine, or food for which they were asking. How thankful we should be for inspired principles of welfare that allow us to maintain our dignity and self-respect by working for what we receive.

Do these principles apply also in our families? Yes, they do. We must be sure to teach our children "how to fish" and not just "give them a fish." We must be careful not to provide an easy life-style for our children; rather, we must help them provide a life for themselves. If children are raised with a poor attitude about work and do not learn to sustain themselves, they will be weak and dependent as adults. They may ultimately become a liability to society instead of making a real contribution.

The Lord was speaking to us all when he said: "Cursed shall be the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also, and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eat the herb of the field. By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, until thou shalt return unto the ground—for thou shalt surely die—for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou wast, and unto dust shalt thou return" (Moses 4:23-25).

The commandment to work was one of the first commandments given by the Lord to his children. I believe the Lord knew that if we were idle, we would be more prone to discouragement and temptation. If we were given something concrete to do, we would be closer to the Lord and more fulfilled in life. Nothing else is quite as disheartening as being idle and not having work enough to do. I believe this is why the Lord would have us work all the days of our lives, as we are physically able, to sustain ourselves by the sweat of our own brows.

The old proverb "Idle hands are the devil's workshop" is certainly true. The Lord has commanded us to be busily engaged in a good cause and to not idle away our time:

It is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward. Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness" (D&C 58:26-27).

Cease to be idle; cease to be unclean; cease to find fault one with another; cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated" (D&C 88:124; for other scriptures on work and related subjects, see the Topical Guide).

The Lord gave special instruction on this subject to parents: "I, the Lord, am not well pleased with the inhabitants of Zion, for there are idlers among them; and their children are also growing up in wickedness; they also seek not earnestly the riches of eternity, but their eyes are full of greediness" (D&C 68:31).

Teaching Children to Work at Home

Where will children learn the principles of work? They must learn them at home. These principles are not necessarily learned because parents try to teach them. They must be experienced by children in doing the work itself.

Parents must take the lead in determining what work must be done around the home and then dividing that work among their children according to their age and abilities and any special needs. This division of responsibilities will change over the months and years as the family grows older and as needs at home change, and it will depend on the children's physical, mental, and emotional ability.

A few years ago we divided up work responsibilities with a rotating job chart made from two paper plates, a large one and a small one, fastened together in the middle with a pin. On the larger plate were written the family chores; on the smaller plate were the names of the children. Each week the smaller plate could be turned and the duties rotated among family members.

Of course, we made sure the children understood how to perform the duties on the chart before requiring them to follow it. We also followed up to make sure the children had done their work correctly. My wife checked the work inside the house, and I checked the work outside.

We also found that we needed a less formal list of things that had to be done around the home from time to time. It needed to be a flexible list that could be added to from day to day so the children would know daily what was expected of them. The list was helpful year round, but it was especially handy during the summer when children would ask over and over, "What can I do?"

We also used lists and charts to keep track of repairs, major purchases to be made, family home evening assignments, issues we wanted to discuss as a family, family activities, and so on.

Yes, to be successful, families must be well organized. But that kind of organization doesn't happen on its own. It requires plenty of planning and hard work.

As Elder L. Tom Perry has said:

Eternal families don't "just happen." To enjoy this greatest of all gifts, we must earn it through our accomplishments here in mortality.

First, I would be certain that sufficient time was calendared each week for a family executive committee meeting to plan family strategy. The executive committee, composed of a husband and wife, would meet together to fully communicate, discuss, plan, and prepare for their leadership role in the family organization.

Second, I would make the family home evening times on Monday night a family council meeting where children were taught by parents how to prepare for their roles as family members and prospective parents. Family home evening would begin with a family dinner together, followed by a council meeting, where such topics as the following would be discussed and training would be given: temple preparation, missionary preparation, home management, family finances, career development, education, community involvement, cultural improvement, acquisition and care of real and personal property, family planning calendars, use of leisure time, and work assignments. The evening could be climaxed with a special dessert and time for parents to have individual meetings with each child.

Third, Saturday would be a special activity day divided into two parts: first, a time for teaching children the blessings of work, how to care for and improve the home, the yard, the garden, the field; second, a time for family activity, to build a family heritage of things you enjoy doing together.

Fourth, Sunday would become the special day in each week. Careful preparation would precede the three hour worship service time at the chapel. The family would arrive at church rested, relaxed, and spiritually prepared to enjoy the meetings together. The balance of the day would be spent in a climate of spiritual uplift. We would dress to fit the occasion—boys in something somewhat better than levis and t-shirts, girls in comfortable, decent dresses, not in shorts or slacks. It would be a time for our family scripture study, genealogical research, personal journals, family histories, letter writing, missionary contacts, and visits to extended family, to friends, and to shut-ins ("For Whatsoever a Man Soweth, That Shall He Also Reap," Ensign, November 1980, p. 9).

The Spiritual Benefits of Work

Why is it necessary for children to work, and work hard, around the home? I believe there are many reasons, both spiritual and temporal, for the Lord's commandment that we must work all the days of our lives:

I'll never forget how my Father taught his children as we worked in a citrus grove in Arizona. It was hot work, in temperatures up to 110 degrees, and we really wanted to go inside for a drink. He would always say, "Let's do just two more rows and then we'll go in." That taught us to discipline ourselves and to make sure the job was finished.

One father used to have his children straighten old nails that could not be used again. When asked why, he said that work is more than producing a result; it is a discipline. If parents focus on the outcome of their children's labors, they will become frustrated at how inadequately children do things. However, if they realize that the true outcome of the work is what the children learn, they will have more patience. They would realize they are building attributes and characteristics in their children that cannot be built in any other way.

I'll never forget a sweet note one of my daughters gave to me after we had some difficulty with her not wanting to work. After some counsel, she did the work and felt really good about her accomplishments. She tucked a note into my suitcase when I was leaving for one of my conference assignments. Part of the note read:

You mean so much to me and you do more than I know or than I can repay you. I hope I will never disappoint you, and that I'll always be a good daughter to you. You deserve the best! I hope I can come close to what you deserve. And if you ever think you're not handsome or compare yourself, don't say it to me because it makes me cry. You are the best dad there is! I love you for everything. Have a good night's sleep. I love you!

How happy that made a father feel that night, but especially because he had loved his daughter enough to discipline her when she didn't want to do her work. She learned. I learned.

Work also provides many fun times. I will never forget one little boy who saw his father drive up to the garden with a truck full of manure. The boy said, "What is that for?" The father said, "It's for the strawberries." The boy said, "Well, if it's just the same to you, I'll just keep having sugar and cream on mine."

Learning Skills through Work

Through their work at home, our children have learned some unusual skills. One of our sons, for example, has developed an uncanny mechanical aptitude that will be useful to him throughout his life.

When we were called to live in Mexico, we were quickly confronted with the fact that Latin Americans love keys. I thought that our home would have eight or ten keys for the various doors and cabinets. After we moved in, we counted sixty-two keys. There was a lock for everything—bedrooms, bathrooms, closets, kitchens, cabinets, and so on. Every lock had its own key, and all the keys were different.

The practice in that area was to leave the keys in the locks inside the house so they could be more easily managed, and we had been told by the "professionals" that our house was as secure as any in the area. After just a day or so, my fifteen-year-old son had learned how to unlock any of those locks from outside the house in about fifteen seconds using a coin, a pen, or a potato peeler. When I asked him how he had learned to do that, he said, "I just noticed that when a key is left in a lock, it frees the lock to turn, and it can easily be opened." He could get into any of the doors from the outside as long as the key was in the lock on the inside. Of course, we immediately stopped leaving the keys in the locks.

A building contractor for the Church came a few days later. He said, "I consider myself an expert on locks. We've put these locks in hundreds of places. We have always felt they were secure." He stood there in amazement as a young boy showed him how to open a door from the outside when it was locked on the inside.

Although we laughed about this incident, I realized that this young son had some unusual mechanical talent. He has always been quite ingenious in figuring out how things work and fixing them when they are broken. A lot of that, I think, has come from working on things around the house.

Gardening

The prophets have often counseled Church members to have a garden. We have always found a garden most useful in teaching our children to work. We have found that besides producing food, gardens strengthen family unity—we have really had to learn to work together to produce a large garden. It was so large at times that the children would claim we were trying to become farmers. They used to say, "Dad, we're nothing but slaves." It may have seemed so to them, but it was certainly a great way to teach them the value of work. To be continually responsible, as a garden requires, will certainly help children when they reach adulthood.

Gardening also teaches many spiritual lessons. It lets children see that the Lord's creations, things of great value, cannot be rushed. There is a process that must be followed patiently. They learn that besides doing the work, we must wait upon the Lord to finally see the fruits of our labor. Finally, children can see the hand of the Lord while working on a garden. The miracle of life in all its varieties is manifested. These are some of the jobs that can be delegated to individual children or done as a family.

To have an effective garden, families must plan the garden out, prepare the soil, and plant the seeds. Then, when the seeds begin to sprout, they must weed and weed and weed. At times we have had our children take responsibility for a particular part of the garden; at other times we have weeded together as a family. To succeed, we had to water regularly, spray as needed, and weed some more. This process takes work but develops discipline, patience, and endurance. Then the family begins to harvest, store, and eat the food, and they begin to appreciate the value of their work.

We have always found it a great blessing to have a year's supply of food. We have tried to store more than just the basics of wheat, sugar, and so on, and to have a year's supply of bottled fruit and canned goods. That meant one or two of our children had to keep a count of the inventory and suggest to their mother what we needed to purchase to maintain the supply. (We are constantly eating and replenishing our food storage.) Not only did our storage provide security for our family; it also gave them quality work to do, taught them useful skills, and helped them become more responsible. We also hope they will carry these characteristics into their adult life.

Finally, we have found that one of the great benefits of a garden is that we always produced more than we were able to eat. This gave us an opportunity to share with others in and around our neighborhood and develop good relations, except, may I say with a smile, in "Zucchini sharing." Actually, sharing vegetables always gave us a reason to go visit someone, and again some great principles were learned in the process.

I bear testimony that gardening is a tremendous way to teach the family many principles of the gospel. The Lord often mentioned planting and harvesting in his parables, with good reason, I think. Gardening teaches the true value of work—that we must plant and cultivate and then we can harvest. Watching plants grow also provides many spiritual lessons. In addition, gardening provides a lot of talking, sharing, and fun time together while the work is going on.

Of course, gardening has not always been fun and games. At times children had to be disciplined because they didn't want to work. Sometimes they let their duties go in order to go play with friends. But even though things haven't always gone smoothly, having something worthwhile to do as a family has been of invaluable assistance in raising up a family to the Lord.

Teaching Children to Work Outside the Home

President Wilford Woodruff once said:

It is one of the greatest blessings that God ever bestowed upon children that they have had parents who were in possession of true principles in relation to their Heavenly Father, salvation, eternal life, and were qualified and capable of teaching and traditionating their children in the same that they may be qualified to fulfill the object of their creation . . . . Ninety-nine out of every hundred children who are taught by their parents the principles of honesty and integrity, truth and virtue, will observe them through life (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, ed. G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990], pp. 266-68).

It is important for children to be able to learn principles of honesty, truth, integrity, and virtue and to learn them at home. Those children then go out in the world to work and to begin to learn to sustain themselves. If those principles are in place they will have a successful experience, in large measure due to a good family who taught them those principles from the Lord.

It has been our experience that children must learn not only to work at home but also to work in the world so they can sustain themselves as they become older.

Work outside the home, of course, depends somewhat on the age and ability of the children. We have always tried to teach our children to earn money on their own as soon as they were able. Some have been able to get paper routes at age eleven or twelve. Before age sixteen, when most young people can work, young children can work for neighbors in mowing lawns, washing windows, washing cars, cleaning garages, and so on.

We have also had fun teaching our younger children to sell things. Some of their best money makers have been cookie sales.

One of our sons was struggling to earn money. He had tried to mow lawns around the neighborhood, wash windows, and so on but really couldn't find anyone who wanted to employ him. His mother and I talked to him about learning how to make cookies on his own and sell them. He was desperate enough that he determined to do so. His mom taught him how, and he immediately made about ten dozen cookies and went out to sell. I tried to coach him somewhat before I went to work about what to say and felt that perhaps he would be able to do it.

When I came back home, a little earlier than usual that afternoon, I found a very negative and discouraged young boy. He had gone to many homes but had only sold a dozen cookies. I told him that if he was going to be so negative and discouraged, the Lord could not help him. I told him that the Spirit would help those who exercised faith, believed they could do it, and believed that the Lord would help them.

I asked him if he believed that. He said, "I want to believe, but I've been out there. I was the one out knocking on all the doors, and nobody wants any cookies."

I said, "How would you feel about having a prayer together? Then I'll drive you around to see if we can exercise our faith more and help you sell the cookies."

He was relieved at that and said, "I think that would be very good."

He prayed and then I prayed. Each of us tried our best to exercise our faith in the Lord that he would be inspired to know what to say to touch the hearts of the people so they would purchase the cookies from him.

He was more encouraged as we left home but was still struggling a little with what he had faced earlier in the day. We reviewed very carefully what he was saying at each door. At the third home, he made a sale, and then again at the fourth, and at the sixth. Within forty-five minutes, he had sold nine dozen cookies and was twenty dollars richer. He was thrilled and humbled. His father was also humbled. We both realized that because he had set aside doubt, fear, and negativity and was trying to exercise faith in the Lord, that spirit was contagious to others. They sensed his sincerity, his earnestness, and his good spirit at the door, and thus they purchased the cookies.

The real object of all of this wasn't so much for him to earn money or even to learn to bake cookies, although that was valuable, but to learn the more important spiritual principles relative to work.

He learned determination and persistence. He learned how to respond to other people, to look them in the eye. He learned to answer their questions directly, to speak with confidence, and to handle objections. Above all, he learned how it feels to succeed. He learned the satisfaction and fulfillment that came as a result of his own accomplishments, of fulfilling what he had set out to do. I might add that this boy, some years later, became one of the best cooks in our entire family. He is well known in the family and in the neighborhood for his pizza, his homemade ice cream, and, of course, his cookies.

One year, some weeks before Christmas, we told our younger children that they could earn some real money if they went around gathering up Christmas trees after Christmas and disposing of them for a fee. We thought if they called people on the phone, they could get a number of commitments. They could also try knocking on doors.

Two sons and a daughter made the major attempts and went down the street talking to the neighbors. They had some real discouragement, as they approached thirty or forty homes but signed up only three or four people. I told them they really had to sell their product, not just take orders. They challenged me, saying, "Oh, that can't be. We've tried it and people just aren't interested."

I took one of my sons aside, as he seemed the most interested, and gave him a persuasive talk to give on the telephone. He practiced it but tried to change some of the wording. I said, "No, you've got to say it exactly this way. If you'll say it this way, that will counter any objections they might have. If they say no because of a certain reason, then you must say this."

In about half an hour he had made twenty dollars. He then started to change his approach, adjusting the carefully measured words I had given him, and he started having less success. He quickly went back to the original wording and then continued to receive commitments to pick up Christmas trees.

A week or so after Christmas, I convinced a younger son and daughter to go with us and knock on the doors of houses on both sides of where we were to pick up the trees. They were to persuade the people to give them two dollars to haul away their trees. The children were agreeable but were not sure it would work.

After a while, the one son was really discouraged as he had not made a single sale. He came weeping into the car and said he was quitting. I finally convinced him to humble himself and to say what I had told him to say. Then he would have success. He said he would. Then he too began making sales.

I'll never forget the delight on my younger son's face when the first two dollars was placed in his hands. He came dragging the tree across the snow like lightning. His smile would have reached from the west coast to the east coast. What tremendous self-confidence he exuded!

One woman came to the truck and said to our older son, "I'm not really interested in having you haul my tree away, but you can do it. I'd pay two dollars anytime to see a boy working. Most young people just want a free ride. I commend you for earning your own way."

Our younger boy had gone to a door where the woman went to get the two dollars, but her husband came out and rather brusquely scared my boy off. He came back to the truck and said, "I'm sorry. He wouldn't buy."

"Well," I said, "did you tell him you would do it for one dollar?" He hadn't and wouldn't go back.

The older boy came to the truck, and I said to him, "This guy thinks he's winning. Go back and tell him we'll take his tree for one dollar."

This boy went to the door and said, "We've reconsidered; we've decided we'll take your tree for one dollar." The man didn't know what to say at this boy's determination. Finally he said, "Okay, you've got a deal for fifty cents." We hauled the tree away and all got a good laugh out of it.

Toward late morning my daughter was not having much success and was a little discouraged as it was so cold. When we went home for lunch in a warm house she decided not to go out again.

While she was there, she had a talk with her mom, and in the afternoon she went out again and made quite a bit more money. When we were alone she said, "Dad, do you know why I've done so well this afternoon? Mom told me I should pray to the Lord and that he would help me. I really prayed when I was home and have been praying. Look what the Lord has done! Look at all I've sold."

Sometimes the children were embarrassed when they came to a house where they knew children their age. Once one of the trees rolled off the truck and right into the middle of the street. I went out to grab the tree only to face the first counselor in the bishopric, who laughed at what we were doing. A counselor in the stake presidency also drove by and laughed in good spirits with us about what we were doing. We were in a fairly well-to-do area, and some of the neighbors probably thought that was not the thing to do, but I saw great growth in these three children that day.

They gained more confidence that the Lord would help them in whatever they were doing. They gained more confidence in themselves. They learned how to meet people and talk with them and counter their objections. They learned more about how to handle their money and figure out their tithing and mission funds. Above all else, we felt a great amount of love and unity. Together we had devised a plan in our minds, something we had never seen anyone else do, and made it successful. They were so pleased that they began looking for other projects to make money, and the next year they wanted to collect Christmas trees again.

This time I talked to the children about how to persuade people. They had learned this skill in part the year before, so they knew what to say and could pretty much do it without my help. The real difference between merely average "persuaders" and those who accomplish their goal most of the time is what they do when people say no.

If the people initially said they weren't interested, the children would say, "Well, because we're already here, I'll take your tree for just one dollar. May we throw it on the truck?" Most of the people would say yes. If they said no, the kids would say, "I'm trying to earn this money for my school clothes, and I sure would appreciate your business. It's just a dollar. We'd sure be pleased to take it to the dump."

If the people still said no or said, "Well, the city will come by and pick it up," then the children would say, "This very morning we called the sanitation department [which we had done] and confirmed that they would pick up trees, but it won't be until the third week of January. Meanwhile, your tree is going to lie out here on the curb, spread needles all over, and make a real mess. We'll take it for just a dollar." At that point almost all of the people gave in and delivered up their trees.

I made sure the truck was sitting right in front of the door so the people could see us. Sometimes I would honk the horn so they would see the truck. I told the children to point to the truck so people could see the trees that were already on it. Then they would feel we were offering a good deal and would want to get in on it. Those little things make a big difference. In fact, little things like that make all the difference between an average "persuader" and one who can persuade almost anyone.

I taught the children not to talk in their normal voice but to put some feeling and enthusiasm into it. I couldn't hear what was being said because I was too far away, but I could watch the reaction of the people and tell almost exactly what the children were saying. It was fun to watch a no turn into a yes and see the children come dragging another tree out to the truck.

The gift of persuasion is one we ought to transmit to our children, as it will greatly help them throughout their life. It will be of tremendous benefit in the mission field and in their teen years when they begin searching for employment. (That is why I have shared the details of these experiences.) I believe that this process is nothing more than removing doubt and fear and uncertainty from our words and approaching a situation in pure faith. As Joseph Smith taught, faith is the moving cause of all action.

Excuses for not Working

How important it is for children, especially as they move into their teen years, to find employment and learn to earn money on their own. Great blessings will come to them as they learn how to deal with people beyond their family and to live in the world but not be of it. Children need to be taught to give of themselves, of their own time, to sacrifice and learn to work. The very sacrificing of some of the things they desire will teach them much and help bring the Spirit of the Lord to them. "Sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven."

It is not always easy to convince children that they ought to have a job. Some have felt inclined to, but in our community many of the families were well enough off that their children didn't have to work, so many of them did not. We have always felt that children should work whether it was necessary or not. Children learn much from having to be dependable and regularly respond to an employer.

We have found that the excuses for why children don't want to work are all about the same:

Â "I don't want to use up all my free time. I have lots of things to do with my friends."

Â "How can I get a job when I have homework after school, piano lessons, and chores around the house?"

Â "How can I get a job when there are so many after-school activities? I wouldn't be able to be a member of the pep club or the choir or just have a good time in all the after-school activities."

Â "I don't want to work because I would be embarrassed to have my friends see me working. After all, about the only place you can work are those fast food places. None of my friends want to work there, and neither do I."

Through your own faith, you will have to teach your children the principles of hard work. Testify to them about the value of work, and lovingly convince them to put aside their fears and "with all their getting, get going."

Finding a Job

Children who want to find work will be more successful if parents teach them how to go about it. The following suggestions may be of help:

These kinds of experiences truly helped our children develop. They learned to be more bold and to take better command of the environment around them.

When I was a young man, I saw the means my father used to motivate his children to work. When I reached age eleven, he told me he was not going to buy my clothes anymore, and that I would have to. I knew he meant it, as he had done the same thing with my older brother. My father was very determined that his children would be economically self-sufficient, and he did all he could to teach us to bring that about. So, when I was eleven, I obtained a paper route and began to earn and save some money. Five years later, I was still delivering papers. One day the manager of the newspaper, said, "Young man, you have been so loyal and done so well in delivering your papers and selling subscriptions that I'm going to appoint you as assistant manager of circulation of this newspaper. You'll supervise the other paper boys and teach them how to sell subscriptions. After school, upon finishing your route, you'll be able to come to the office to work two or three more hours. You'll be able to do some homework while you're waiting to answer complaints on the phone. All in all, it will be a great job for you. And by the way, your pay will be tripled."

I was delighted because I was saving money for a mission, and this pay increase would help me reach the goal much more quickly. This was an ideal job, at a time when many teenagers had no work. I said to myself over and over again, "The Lord truly does bless those who keep the commandments." I had been trying to faithfully pay my tithing, keep the Sabbath Day holy, and honor my priesthood.

After a few more years, the newspaper manager approached me one Saturday with another opportunity. "Good news!" he said. "One week from now, we're going to begin delivering the Sunday paper. You will not only have a Sunday route to deliver early in the morning, but you'll be able to stay in the office from about seven until two in the afternoon. You'll also receive a 30 percent increase in pay."

When the manager saw my countenance fall, he said, "I know you're a Mormon, and you may be thinking of not accepting this extra responsibility. But if you don't take the job, you'll lose your paper route and be fired from your weekday job as well. Many of my other paper boys would give their right arm to have your job. I haven't trained you all these years for nothing. Well, what's your answer?"

I said somewhat emotionally, "I'll answer you on Tuesday."

As I rode home on my bicycle that day, I was despondent. I prayed over and over, "How could this be, Heavenly Father? I have kept the commandments. I've tried to do what is right. I've paid my tithing. I'm trying to save for my mission. Now I may lose my job. Shall I work this added job on Sunday or not?"

I explained the problem to my father, who wisely responded, "I don't know the answer, but I know someone who does." (He was referring to the Lord.) I talked to my bishop, who told me much the same thing that my father had told me. For two full days I prayed and struggled. I knew that I could attend sacrament meetings on Sunday in another ward later in the afternoon, but then I would miss all the meetings in my own ward.

When my boss asked for a decision the following Tuesday, I replied, "I love my job and my route, but I cannot work on Sunday and miss all my church meetings. It's not right."

"You're fired!" he said angrily. "Come in Saturday to pick up your last check. You're a very ungrateful young man!" And he stomped out of the office.

For the next several days the manager hardly spoke to me. But whenever I wondered if I had decided correctly, the answer seemed to be the same: "There may be some who have to work on Sunday, but you don't have to, and you should not."

When I went to pick up my last check on Saturday, I found the manager waiting for me. "Young man, please forgive me," he said, "I was wrong. I ought not to have tried to make you go against your beliefs and the commandments." Then he confessed to me that he was an inactive member of the Church. He said, "I have found a young man of another faith who is willing to do the extra work on Sunday. You can keep your job. Will you?" With a thankful heart, I answered yes.

The manager then added, "By the way, you'll find the extra 30 percent I was going to pay you for the work on Sunday included in your paycheck from now on, even though you'll not be working in the office on Sundays. That will be so for as long as you work for me."

What great joy I felt in my heart as I went home that afternoon. I said to myself over and over, "It is worth it to keep the commandments of the Lord. The Lord will bless those who do." Of course, it would have been worth it even without the tangible reward. A year later, when I gave my final talk before leaving for my mission, I was overjoyed to see my manager in the congregation. I felt even greater joy when, not long ago, I learned that, after all these years, he is now a faithful high priest group leader in his ward.

Decisions about employment and careers truly are difficult ones. But if young people are taught to look to the Lord and keep his commandments with exactness, he truly will cause all things to "work together for [their] good" (D&C 90:24). We must teach our children never to compromise the principles they believe in. They must remember to always trust in the Lord.

Life is a struggle, but the promises from the Lord are sure. Major problems and decisions face all of us. But they are all solvable if we will rely on the Lord. The Lord really is the answer to everything. He's the one who can unleash our potential and that of our children, who can teach us who we are and what we ought to do.

We must teach our children that the Lord will ultimately prosper those who keep his commandments. As Nephi said, "If it so be that the children of men keep the commandments of God he doth nourish them, and strengthen them, and provide means whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has commanded them" (1 Nephi 17:3; italics added].

I bear testimony of the fact that if we will teach our children to keep the commandments, the Lord will provide for their needs and enable them to accomplish all that is required of them. He will help them find a job. He will bless them for working and applying the principles he has taught us.

Creating a Desire in Youth to Work

At times parents will need to help create a desire in young people to work. Sometimes that is difficult to do. What follows are some suggestions that might create a desire in a young person and also some thoughts on how the Lord does it with us. For example, it is interesting that the Lord tells us we must earn our own way by the sweat of our own brow and literally leaves us in the world to fend for ourselves. He leaves us to find employment, to find a home, to fend for ourselves each day. That is a tremendous challenge. The Lord will be of assistance, of course, but only as we work and do our part. Do not those same principles apply to our children?

When I was a boy, people used to throw puppies in the canal to teach them to swim. They all then began to swim of necessity. I never saw one drown, although each time it was most upsetting to watch. But, out of necessity, every one of them began to swim.

Are not we much like that? If we have a real need for something, then will come the desire to achieve it, but usually not before. Thus to create that desire in their children, parents must help them to recognize a real need. Children can often be motivated to help out financially when there is sickness, a death in the family, a serious economic problem, or other problems. The same is true of spiritual things; when the need is there, so will be the desire. Then if our children are properly directed, they will turn to the Lord for help in resolving the problem.

Sometimes a need can be created by giving a child a difficult calling or assignment. For example, my father originally told me he would not pay for my mission, that I would have to do it myself. I'm sure he was trying to create a need, and he did so. I worked for eight years to have enough money to sustain myself on my mission. However, a few days before I left for my mission he informed me that he had "no intention of being robbed of the blessings of paying for my mission." He said I could use my money for marriage and college when I returned home. Whatever his reasons for doing it, he surely created a need in me. He helped me accomplish a most valuable goal and at the same time develop my character well beyond what it would have been otherwise.

At times we have suggested to our children that by a certain date they must have a certain amount of money in place to be on target for their mission, college, or marriage. That kind of specific goal has helped create a real need in the children. The same is true when they have no money and want us to buy something for them. We have usually said we would not (except with very small children) and that it was up to them to earn their own money.

Another way needs are created is by seeing something exemplified in someone else. Many times a good friend may be working and earning money and thus help create the desire in a child to do the same. If parents are able to start out their first or second child correctly with respect to employment, the rest of their children will almost automatically fall in line and follow that powerful example.

One last suggestion about creating a need: Many times children can create a need within themselves. If young people are approached spiritually and taught what the Lord expects them to do, they will create the need within themselves and will stretch to do what is right.

Lessons from Working Outside the Home

Working at a job teaches children many important lessons:

It is not always easy for parents to help their children be employed, as it creates additional demands on the parents. But then again, it is certainly worth it. Parents sometimes have to be the taxi drivers who take their children to work at odd hours. Or the sharing of a car may be a major challenge. Many times children begin to miss family activities because they are at work. That is always hard on the family, but these children are preparing to leave home anyway, and it is time to assist them in that preparation. Sometimes it is hard for the parents to let go, but employment in the world helps children make the transition from youth to adulthood.

May I bear testimony one last time of the importance of young people working. It will build into them honesty, integrity, faith, diligence, determination, and many other characteristics of a good, well-developed person.

Teaching Children about Finances

When children are employed, parents face the additional challenge of teaching them to properly manage their finances. As with most other areas, children learn about finances best from their parents. If the parents are diligent in budgeting, saving their money, being careful in distinguishing between needs and wants, and staying out of debt, so will be the children. If children see that example, they will learn the proper relationship between spending and saving and how to control their finances.

Children must learn the difference between the things they would like to have and the things they can afford. Most important, they must learn the financial laws of the Lord regarding tithing and fast offerings.

Parents must decide whether to give allowances to their children. There are some strengths in so doing and also some weaknesses. Some families have found it beneficial to pay smaller children for work around the home. This enables the children to earn some money, learn to pay their tithing, and save for the future.

Other families have not paid allowances to their children. They have felt that work around the home is an obligation of all family members and that children should not be paid for routine labor. They might be paid for special work that has to be done but not for day-to-day chores. These families have been more inclined to encourage their children to work in the neighborhood or do odd jobs for other people in order to earn money. Perhaps it doesn't matter much whether children receive an allowance or not as long as they are learning to work.

As young people begin earning money, parents should introduce them to a simple budget that allows them to plan their expenses. It is important that they be taught that a budget is not just a way to keep track of their expenditures but also a way to plan them. Then they will learn to stay within their budget.

We have always felt it essential that children budget a regular amount of money for savings, no matter how much or how little they are earning. In addition, we have always suggested a priority of expenditures:

We have always felt that children should not be given a car in their teen years or even purchase one, as it eats up too much of the money they are saving for the future. It has been a challenge to have children share the family car, but it has saved them from many unnecessary expenditures. This principle has surely helped our older children, who have been able to pay their way through college without loans, money from parents, or other help. It also took away some of the temptation children face to come and go as they please, with whomever they please, at any time.

Whenever the family was planning a vacation, we made sure that the children saved some money to help out. That not only lessened our burdens financially but also made our children more aware of the cost involved. They were thus more helpful in reducing the cost and in suggesting what we should do on vacation.

In family councils we have regularly reviewed parts of the family budget over which the children had some control, such as utilities, food, music lessons, educational costs, and so on. That has helped them realize that they couldn't just have whatever they wanted in life but had to live within a budget. As they saw their family do that month after month, they naturally wanted to do the same. Then they found it easier to do so when they were on their own or married.

One of the most important things children must learn is that there is a direct relationship between keeping the commandments and being financially stable over the years. If that concept can be taught when they are young, then they will have fewer financial problems when they become adults. The Lord is certainly willing to be involved in our temporal problems if we will do our best to humbly involve him.

Spiritual Answers to Temporal Problems

A friend of mine has a Mexican friend who used to drive his old car from Mexico to Utah to attend each general conference. Year after year he would come and stay with my friend.

After one of those conferences my friend got kind of upset and told him he must never come again in that old car. He said, "That car is so old it is going to fall apart right on the California freeway. I know that you drive back home through Los Angeles, San Diego, and Tijuana. You are not to come up here again in that old car and endanger your life." My friend gave him quite a talking to.

This good Mexican man listened and then went on his way. The next general conference he arrived once again in the same old car. My friend again began to counsel him a bit, but this good Mexican brother said, "Wait a minute my friend, listen to me. Sure enough it was as you said. When I left here last time and was driving on those freeways in Southern California, right in the middle of all the traffic my car stalled. There my brother and I were, sitting on the freeway with all the cars honking about us.

"We did not know what to do. Neither one of us is a mechanic. We finally went around to the front of the car and looked under the hood, and as I looked at the engine I thought to myself, 'What this car needs is a blessing.' My brother and I bowed our heads and prayed that the Lord would bless the car and help it function well for us. After we finished we closed the hood and went around and got in the car. With a humble heart I turned the key, and the car started again and has worked exceptionally well ever since. Thus, with my car having been blessed, it won't be necessary for me to get a new one. It is working just fine now."

One can see the humility in this good Mexican man. He truly had a need to keep his car and not buy a new one, and I believe the Lord did bless him and his car.

I bear testimony that there are spiritual answers to all temporal problems, and that our children must learn that lesson early in life. There will be times in the years to come when they will be faced with unemployment, debt, or other difficult economic problems. If they clearly see the connection between the spiritual laws and the temporal laws and experience them when they are young, they will know how to face those problems as they get older. The laws are eternal. They work every time if we will humbly submit ourselves to them and thereby to the Lord.

While I was on a conference assignment in a Latin American country, some things occurred there that really taught a lesson and began to help the leadership of that country teach the attitude that people must be self-sustaining as individuals and as a country. The start of this change began with a humble bishop and a man whom I will call Brother Garcia.

At a stake conference, Brother Garcia came to me in private and said, "I have a serious problem. I'm unemployed. I'm an engineer." He then told me about his career and the money he had made earlier. He said, "I've been a good member and I've been to the temple. But I have been unemployed for a long time. I went to my bishop for help, and my bishop told me that what I needed was more faith and diligence and to humble myself. Can you believe that?" And then he laughed somewhat sarcastically. (The bishop had helped him and his family with the necessities, but he wanted more.)

This humble bishop, uneducated but most inspired, had given him the correct answer to his problem of unemployment. But he expected some sympathy from me. He was talking to the wrong man.

I could see his was not a humble heart. I told him, "Brother Garcia, you have misunderstood. The Church doesn't plan to help you out at all. In fact, I'm going to tell you that the bishop gave you the right answer right from the scriptures." I was really very blunt with him. Then I tried to give him some direction as to what to do. He said, "As you know, in this country one-third of all men are unemployed. You talk as if with faith and humility all could have jobs. That isn't possible, is it?" I said, "There may be some unemployed from other faiths, but there need not be one among the Latter-day Saints." I bore testimony that the Lord would help him and, shared the passages just mentioned: "Verily I say unto you, concerning your debts—behold it is my will that you shall pay all your debts" (D&C 104:78).

I asked him if he was out of debt. He said no and that he never really had been since he had been married. I told him that he couldn't expect the Lord to be of much assistance if he didn't plan on obeying him. We then read verse 79: "And it is my will that you shall humble yourselves before me, and obtain this blessing by your diligence and humility and the prayer of faith."

I asked, "Brother Garcia, what are the three keys?"

He answered rather sheepishly, "To humble yourself, be diligent, and the prayer of faith."

I then said, "Now, the Lord doesn't usually repeat himself immediately in the next verse, but he did in this case, perhaps because he thought we wouldn't get it," and then we read verses 80 and 81: "And inasmuch as you are diligent and humble, and exercise the prayer of faith, behold, I will soften the hearts of those to whom you are in debt, until I shall send means unto you for your deliverance.

"Therefore write speedily to New York and write according to that which shall be dictated by my Spirit; and I will soften the hearts of those to whom you are in debt, that it shall be taken away out of their minds to bring affliction upon you."

"Brother Garcia," I said, "the Lord will soften the heart of the one to whom you are in debt or the heart of the one who does the employing. Who will send the means for your deliverance?"

He answered, "The Lord."

I said, "Brother Garcia, you will notice that the Lord summarizes it all again in verse 82: "And inasmuch as ye are humble and faithful and call upon my name, behold, I will give you the victory."

I expressed my love and testimony to him and then left him.

I returned to that same city about a year later. In a priesthood leadership meeting, for some reason I began to say something about this fellow, not remembering I was in that very same city. (If I had remembered, I probably wouldn't have been bold enough to talk about it.) I started to say something, without using his real name. Suddenly a man stood up right in the middle of the congregation. He said, "Elder Cook, the man you're talking about is my friend, and he is sitting right here next to me. He's too modest to tell you this, but I will." And then he told this story.

He said Brother Garcia had been so taken aback by our earlier conversation that at first he was offended. Financially things became worse for him. For a month to six weeks, things just went downhill. He then began to think about what the bishop and I had said about humility, diligence, and the prayer of faith. He began to realize that the bishop's counsel was correct and that he should follow it.

He humbled himself to the dust and finally told the Lord, "I will receive any employment you give me."

Sometimes in unemployment situations, we are not humble enough to take whatever work might come as a "starter." But the process won't begin unless we remove our prejudices and conditions and humble ourselves.

The man continued, "He understood that he had to really go out and diligently hustle, which he had not done. He then went in and out of every place searching for employment with the prayer of faith. He was praying and fasting that the Lord would deliver him up a job."

Brother Garcia then stood up himself and continued saying, "You may be surprised to know that the job that came to me was to mow lawns. 'I must sustain my family,' I said to myself." (Here was an engineer who took a job mowing the lawns of some rich man's property. He really had to humble himself to handle that, but he decided to do so.)

He then said, "One year has gone by, Brother Cook, and I'll tell you this glad news. I now have the major operation in this city for handling lawn maintenance. In fact, I was contracted by the municipality about six months after that experience with the bishop, and I now do all the lawns for the whole city. I now have twenty men working for me.

I then said to Brother Garcia, "What about engineering?"

He said, "Forget engineering. I'm making a lot more money now."

This experience taught me a great lesson about the way the Lord works. Why did all of this spiritually work for this good man? It is because:

Â He humbled himself.

Â He was willing to be diligent and sacrifice.

Â He overcame his pride.

Â He prayed in faith, and that which appeared to be his greatest trial turned out to be his greatest blessing.

Â He followed the counsel of his priesthood leaders.

Cannot we all do likewise? When we humble ourselves and offer the required sacrifice (such as diligence and the prayer of faith), then the Lord acts. This bishop was an uneducated man and was not wise in the ways of the world. But he had been ordained as a bishop in the Church, and he understood that he had to pray to the Lord to obtain answers to help his people. Then in came the engineer who was making ten times what the bishop was making and who was better educated. But the bishop was the one who had the answer.

No one may know all of the answers to our temporal problems, but the scriptures teach a number of principles that are very clear. Here are a few of the keys:

The keys found in these verses are true and powerful. Let us be sure to teach them to our children.

Let me mention three commandments that relate specifically to temporal blessings:

Tithing. The Lord has promised tremendous blessings to those who faithfully tithe. Did he except the widows? No, he did not. As poor as they were, they also paid a tenth. Does he except children? No, he does not. That's hard sometimes for very poor people to understand. Yet, when it dawns in their minds what the truth is, they really resonate to it.

Some people have almost nothing, but just the same, we teach them to pay a tenth of their income. I have heard some of them say, "I don't have anything." But they do. Are they making only fifty or a hundred dollars a month to sustain their family? A tenth is still required. The Lord made no exceptions. This is the way the Lord can bless us. This principle should be clearly taught to all of our children as part of the answer to temporal problems (see Malachi 3:8-11; D&C 119).

Fast offerings. We've all heard many stories, and I can bear personal testimony, as can you, to the blessings that come from giving fast offerings. Let us teach our children the same.

In Matthew 6:25-33, the Lord taught, "Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on."

What kinds of problems is he talking about? Temporal ones.

"Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?"

He's again putting into perspective the spiritual and the temporal. Continuing on:

"Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?"

Think about that for a minute. Here are the Lord's fowls, and they do seem to be taken care of, don't they? And the Lord is saying, "Art thou not much better than they?" "How could I take care of them and not give some promise to you regarding your temporal welfare?"

"Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature? And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these."

Again, think about what he is telling us. He has provided the beauty of the fields and the flowers, and they don't even work for it. Aren't we much greater than the lilies? And then comes this great promise in verse 30: "Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?"

What's the problem? Little faith.

"Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things."

Many people have quoted this next verse but are not aware of the importance of all that preceded it: "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things [the temporal things] shall be added unto you."

We are not to be too concerned about making a living. Yes, it is a commandment to do so. But there is a great need for faith. The Lord promises us blessings economically and spiritually if we will put our faith in him.

My understanding, having lived in many of the Latin American nations, is that there is not an exception. I've been in hundreds and hundreds of homes and knelt on some mighty humble floors, in bamboo huts and all the rest. I've not seen an exception to the Lord's pouring out his blessings upon his people temporally if they would keep his commandments, if they would exercise faith in him and do those things he has commanded. Their problems get solved. They are not magically solved, but he gives them a step here and a step there. They begin to grow and develop and pull out of the serious economic problems they face. I bear testimony to the truthfulness of that fact.

The Sabbath Day. I believe there is a direct relationship between honoring the Sabbath Day and being blessed temporally as well as spiritually. We must teach our children this principle. The Old Testament is full of such references. You would do well to search for them in the Topical Guide. I will refer to one modern-day scripture in D&C 59:16-20. The Lord gives a promise with respect to keeping the Sabbath day holy. He says:

Verily I say, that inasmuch as ye do this, the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth; yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for vineyards; yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart; yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul.

And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion (italics added).

It's interesting that the fullness of the earth is given us for food, clothing, and even houses. In other words, if we will obey this law, the Lord will bless us temporally as well as spiritually.

I bear testimony that obedience to the Sabbath does have a direct impact upon our financial status as well as that of our children.

a. Avoid debt like the plague. We will do everything possible to not get into debt (with the exception of extraordinary long-term expenditures like a home or an education), or, if we are in debt, we will get out as soon as possible with all urgency. We will not purchase things on credit. We will not become involved in installment payments.

b. We will save part of our income from every check without fail. We will always "pay the Lord" first through our tithing. We will then "pay ourselves" through our savings.

c. We will clearly distinguish between needs and wants and satisfy only our needs. We will guard carefully against unduly trying to fulfill our wants as that will get us into financial difficulties.

d. We will always maintain a personal or family budget. We will not only record expenditures as spent but also plan in advance what ought to be spent and spend only that amount.

e. We will live within our means. It takes humility to so do, but it is without question against the commandments to live beyond our means. We will thus be frugal in all of our living.

If we faithfully teach these principles to our children and if they learn to live by them, most of their economic problems will be solved or prevented. The Lord is true to his promises. If we will learn the principles and live them, we will be blessed both spiritually and temporally.

Let us therefore teach our children the importance of working at home and in the workplace, and we will then properly prepare them for adulthood and for full and productive lives. May the Lord bless us to teach them the principles related to finances and the principles governing both spiritual and temporal blessings. The living and teaching of these principles in your family will be of great assistance to you in raising up your children to the Lord.
