Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Nine

Teaching Your Family through Meetings and Activities

At a stake conference in Lima, Peru, I met a young woman who was the only member of the Church in her family. Over the months since she had joined the Church, she had heard much counsel about holding family home evenings. She wanted to do so but wasn't sure how to go about it. She was only seventeen years old, and no one else in her family was interested.

One Sunday she heard a particularly strong testimony about family home evening and decided she had waited long enough—she would begin holding it. She went home that very day and in her living room began to sing a song, say a prayer, and have a lesson. Her family made fun of her, particularly her two older brothers. They laughed, jeered, asked what she was doing as a Mormon, and so on. In tears she fled to her bedroom, where she finished the lesson that night.

The following Monday, in spite of the resistance she had encountered from her family, she went ahead and had family home evening—and the next Monday as well. On the following Monday night as she began singing the opening song, there was a knock on her door. Her older brother said, "Mary, may I come in? I really would like to know what you are doing."

She said, "Well, yes, if you're not going to make fun of me." He said he wouldn't and came in. They sang, prayed, and learned together. The following week the second brother joined them.

As she bore testimony in stake conference that day, she said, "And here, Elder Cook," pointing to one of the front rows, "are my parents and both of those brothers. They are all members of the Church now."

What a tremendous blessing! This seventeen-year-old girl, through obedience to the commandments, was the instrument by which her whole family was converted. Surely the Lord meant it when he said: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10).

Ought we not, then, to love our families more deeply and try harder to treat each family member as the Lord treats us? Home evening can have great impact on a family, whether they are members of the Church or not.

Family home evenings and family councils are important family meetings, and each family has to decide when and how they will hold them. Many have found it helpful to have a family devotional on Sunday in which they teach the doctrine of the Church, perhaps in place of scripture reading that day. Then they hold an activity on Monday night. The activity is often just something they do for fun and recreation. But many times families can go out and serve someone who may have a need. Family home evening can also include a family council in which the family counsels together to solve a problem the family is having or to plan out work or upcoming events.

The prophets have clearly taught the importance of family home evenings and family councils. President Marion G. Romney once said: "No greater service can be given to a family . . . than to motivate them with a vision of the benefits of a regular family home evening, and thereby strengthen family ties in this life and prepare for the continuation of this sacred relationship in the life to come."

President David O. McKay said: "Families who prayerfully prepare and consistently hold their weekly home evenings, and who work together during the week to apply the lessons in their lives, will be blessed."

And Elder Boyd K. Packer has said: "Family home evening can inspire that turning of the hearts. The purpose of the family home evening is to draw families together in love and sweet association, to open the doors of communication between parents and children, to make them happy they live together and belong to one another—eternally."

Sometimes the fruits of family home evening can be a bit humorous. When our first three boys were quite young, I lined them up along the fireplace and taught what I thought was an excellent lesson on why young men should go on missions. After finishing the lesson, I asked the oldest boy, "Son, are you going on a mission?"

He said, "Nope!"

I was surprised, as was his mom.

I then ventured the next question: "Why not?"

He looked up and said, "I can't, Dad. I'm still in my pajamas!"

You can imagine how inadequate I felt in not being able to relate to my "students."

When I was called as a General Authority, we tried to teach our young children what that meant. Shortly thereafter, our seven-year-old son bore his testimony in sacrament meeting. He had forgotten a little what a General Authority is. He couldn't even remember those words. All he could say was, "My dad has been called to be a . . . , to be a . . . , to be one of those men who works with Jesus." He couldn't remember the term, but he knew the feeling. Family home evening is a real blessing to families.

George Durrant said it this way: "Parents who harbor a dream for their children's destiny know that the Lord's family home evening program is like a gift from heaven. It is not something that we have to do. It is something that we get to do . . . . The prophets have said, 'Children coming from such homes will not go astray.' You can have sons and daughters who are responsible, who desire service, who love virtue, who are strong in testimony, who love and are loved because you have family home evening and share this spirit in your home continually" ("A Gift from Heaven," Ensign, March 1971, pp. 6-7).

Planning Family Meetings

One important element of directing family home evenings and family councils is to plan ahead. Parents will have to do some of that. Then, as their children get older, much of the planning can be handled by them.

To help us plan our family home evenings, we have used various lists and assignment wheels that told us whose turn it was to conduct, to lead the singing, to pray, to give the lesson, to prepare refreshments, and so on.

Even little children who can't read can conduct family meetings. Parents can discuss with them what is to happen and in what order. Then they can make an agenda with pictures instead of words that the children can follow. It's a lot of fun to watch children conduct family home evening. It also builds their self-confidence and makes them feel like an important part of the family.

Later in our marriage, we no longer needed an agenda; our family had simply learned how to conduct the meetings. Now we just assign someone each week to teach family home evening.

The main thing is to organize things, without being too formal, so that good things can occur in your family. The goal is to have a happy, satisfied, fulfilled, excited, developing, growing family.

Family councils can often be incorporated into family home evenings, giving family members an opportunity to discuss personal or family problems. We have found them very helpful in coming to agreements on discipline, rules, and so on. We have tried to conduct much of our family business, such as budgeting and scheduling, in these meetings. We have also used these meetings to reach agreements on family decisions that have had far-reaching effects.

One evening when I arrived home from a stake conference trip, my wife said, "I have just found out that one of our relatives is in prison." She then said with a twinkle in her eye, "Furthermore, it's one of your relatives."

A distant cousin of mine, whom I will call John, had called from the local prison. We had never met him, but we knew his father. He had told my wife that if he could spend time with a good family, it would shorten his time in prison.

She asked me what I thought about letting him visit us. I responded rather negatively, perhaps because I was tired, saying, "Well, you know, we've responded to a lot of people here and there, and I'm not so sure we need to respond to something like this. Let's talk more about it later." Time passed. We did not talk about it.

I returned from another trip a week or so later, and my wife said John had called again. I again responded rather negatively, saying it probably wouldn't be wise to have him in our home when I was traveling so much. Thus, once again I dissuaded my good wife from her righteous desires.

A few weeks later, my wife approached me early in the morning when I was reading and said, "You know, honey, I've mentioned two or three times about our trying to be of assistance to John. Each time you've responded rather negatively. I just want you to know how strongly I feel that we really ought to minister to him, that we really ought to help him and do what he's asked of us. However, I'm not going to bring it up again. I just thought you ought to know of my strong feeling." She then walked out of the room and left me alone.

Feeling bad about my negative responses, I sought her out and said I didn't think we should make a decision like that on our own but that we ought to bring together the family council to decide it. We called all ten members of the family together, explained the situation, and took a vote; nine in favor, one against. Then I stressed some more the possible danger of having a prisoner in our home when I was not present. (I knew what his crime had been.) A couple of the youngest children then changed their vote because they were persuaded by their father, and the vote was seven to three.

After still more discussion, one of my sons said, "Why are we talking about this any further, Dad? Why don't we just kneel down and confirm it?"

I said, "What?"

He said, "Yes, why don't we just kneel down and confirm it? The Lord knows whether we should or whether we shouldn't."

I was very much taken aback by his inspired statement, and I felt repentant and humbled for not having directed the family to seek an answer from the Lord. We all immediately knelt down, and that son and I prayed. After the prayers, the vote was ten in favor. I immediately called the prison.

When John heard my voice, he just wept. "Thank you. Thank you for calling," he said. "Thank you, thank you so much." I told him that we would be going to church in a few hours and then coming home for dinner, and that we would like to have him spend the whole day with us. He was most pleased at the prospects.

John wept through the church meetings for almost three full hours. I was quite surprised and touched by his humility. However, I was still a little worried about how he might respond to the children when we returned home. My fears were not realized, as within five or ten minutes of being in our home, he had every one of the children eating out of his hand. He knew some magic tricks. He knew how to joke with the children. He knew how to deal with children. In fact, it appeared to us that he really had a gift. We had a delightful Sunday afternoon and evening together. When we took him back to the prison that night as a family, once again we felt spiritually different, and we knew that he did as well.

John came to our home a number of times over the next few months until finally he was released from prison. We heard later that he was married and was moving forward with his life. How the Lord blesses all of us if we attempt to reach out to the needy! I'm not suggesting that we should respond to everyone in prison, on the street, or anywhere else. I am suggesting that the Lord can surely direct us in whom we should help, and one way he can do that is through family councils. I'm surely thankful for the family council we held on this matter, as much good came of it. Truly, as the psalmist wrote, "Children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of the youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate" (Psalm 127:3, 5).

May the Lord bless all of us to be more giving and to encircle the needy with the love of our families. Family home evenings ought to deal with the feelings of the heart and not so much with instruction, although that can be a part. Let us hold more effective family home evenings and family council meetings and thereby raise up our children faithfully to the Lord.

Planning for Family Events

To be most effective, family councils, home evenings, and other events and activities should be planned ahead of time. In fact, when parents are planning their schedules, they should put family matters first. For example, if you want to hold a weekly family home evening, would it not be wise to put that on your calendar every week? Plan out birthdays and other special times in advance. Mark the days on which the children will be out of school so you can plan work around them and, if possible, be home then. By obtaining a calendar from school, you can check for such things before planning activities at work or at church and thus be able to maximize family time.

Plan some quality family home evenings or devotionals. At times these can be held in a relaxed atmosphere, but at other times, when important subjects are to be discussed, they should be planned with the same effort and care given to a quality presentation at work.

Family activities as well can sometimes be spontaneous, but at other times they should be planned out in advance: trips to a museum, a family history center, a temple (to do baptisms for the dead), an amusement park, and so on can provide many positive experiences. The key is to do a variety of things and have a fun time together.

Having fun together provides an important part of the growth and development of a family. Children need to just enjoy being with their family, and activities can provide that important ingredient of family life.

Planning fun events in advance creates anticipation in the family. Thinking about an outing over the days or weeks before it actually happens sometimes brings as much satisfaction as the event itself. The anticipation can also help children get through some tough moments at school or at work.

In spite of all of the planning you might do, be aware of the promptings that come in the very moment a family member has a special need. In such cases, family plans should be set aside to meet that need.

Plan your affairs each day so that you are up first in the morning and can be prepared to minister to your children as they arise. Above all, remember that your children are with you for just a short time, and you must do all you can to prepare them for life and to give them all the time you can.

Being Involved with Your Children

Take time to be really involved with your children. Pray with them, play with them, work with them, worship with them.

Take the responsibility to leave your family happy in the mornings. Before going to work, do all you can to help set a happy spiritual environment every day, and thus you will send your children off to begin their day on a spiritual basis.

Spend time with your children. Perhaps that is the greatest gift you can give them. You will not be able to affect them much unless you hear and feel what they are hearing and feeling in their lives. Only then will you be able to counsel them and help them learn how to face life and overcome their challenges. Above all, listen, listen, listen.

Leave your briefcase at work. Parents who bring their work home almost always rob their children of "family time." If you do bring work home, perhaps it ought to be done early in the morning or late at night when the children are in bed.

I believe that parents should avoid reading the newspaper or watching TV when their children are around. Such activities, again, are better left until the children are in bed or doing their homework. Again, time with your children is your most valuable gift to them.

If you have a larger family, be careful to spend as much time with the younger children as with the older ones, who tend to be more dominant, have more challenges, and require more attention. Unless parents are careful, they may neglect the needs of younger children.

Lighten up! Increase love among family members by sticking little notes around the house that say "I love you" or that mention something special you have seen one of your children do.

Play games together, take walks together, and do all you can as a family. If you do, you will find that love will increase in your family.

I believe it is essential that families eat together. Doing so provides extra time every day. Families that eat together talk together. Families that talk together stay together. Use mealtime to talk about schoolwork, review news events, tell some jokes, and relate experiences.

Don't let family life center around the television. Some families think watching TV is being "together," but usually there is not much value in that kind of togetherness. It is sad to see families spend so much time in front of the television when there is so much else to know, feel, and do together.

Be sure to spend adequate time with each individual child. All children need to know they are special and that they will have your undivided attention sometime during each week.

Remember that children often need talk at inconvenient moments. They may come when you are busy, when you are already committed, when you are reading, when you would really like to go to bed. Remember that you can't dictate what they are feeling, and if they have a need, you should try to respond to it.

Pass on to your children some of the skills you have learned. Although families live together, the parents often fail to share what they know about prayer, scripture reading, human relations, planning, getting a job, and so on. The time spent in passing along such skills and information will have much greater payoff than watching television.

At night, be sure not to miss that last hug, a story to a little one, or a goodnight kiss. Even though these things can become routine, it is a powerful routine that can greatly benefit family members.

Be sure to decide most issues together in family council. There are some personal things the parents will decide, but most issues, we have found, can best be handled by family discussions. Then the whole family feels like a part of things, and all are authors of the "family plan."

Seek out service opportunities to do with your family. These will bring some of the greatest rewards of all. Memories of serving others together will endure forever and help your family to follow the example of the Savior.

Receiving Direction from the Lord

Be sure to pray specifically for your family and attempt to receive direction from the Lord regularly about the needs of the individuals in your family and your family as a whole.

Don't be too worried about children making mistakes. They all do that, as do adults. But watch for patterns of errors that are being developed. There is a great difference between making a mistake and developing a pattern of mistakes. Try to correct most of the patterns and let some of the smaller errors pass by. If you take care of the little problems and little attitudes that are out of order, there may never be any big ones.

Pray with your children alone—just father and son or daughter, or mother and son or daughter.

When your children have a problem, do your best to read a passage from the scriptures to give them direction from the Lord. Not only will the counsel be correct but it will also teach your children to rely upon the scriptures in obtaining answers to their problems.

Unless unusual circumstances exist, a wife ought to be at home with her children. Don't ever trust the teaching of your children to others or feel that the Church will teach them. The Church's role is to help parents teach. The true responsibility rests with them.

Be loyal to your family above all the world's concerns. If you will be true to them and to the Spirit of the Lord, all your other priorities will fall into place.

Gauging Your Progress

Your progress as a parent can be measured somewhat by how well you are able to take a reading of the intimate feelings of your children's hearts. Will they share with you? Will they seek counsel from you? Learn to take the "temperature" of your children regularly to see where they are. If you feel they may be a little off, you will then be able to take some action.

Perhaps nothing will cover the errors parents make better than simply loving their children. Hug them physically. Speak kindly to them and be supportive of them. The same kind of response will come back to you many times over; then you will know how you are doing as a parent.

Another way to know how you are doing is to determine if your children really want to be home with you. And do you want to be home with them? Of all the places I have been in the world, there is no place I would rather be than at home with my family.

Perhaps these four items best summarize the role of good parents:

Characteristics of Effective Mormon Families

Some years ago a study was conducted by the Department of Sociology at Brigham Young University to try to determine the characteristics of effective Mormon families. The study gathered information from more than two hundred of these families to find out what made them effective. The researchers wrote to me about their conclusions:

Dear Elder Cook:

With the strong emphasis in the Church for building good families, you may be interested in the results of our research of the characteristics of effective Mormon families. We asked Stake Presidents from different states to identify the 15 strongest families in their stakes. Then we gathered data from some 200 families to find out what made their families so effective. We compared these findings with some less effective families as well. Here are some of the things we discovered.

l. Almost 100% of these families are full tithe payers, attend all of their meetings regularly and always accept a job or position in the Church.

We hope this information will be useful to you. It should help to show what families should do if they want to become more effective.

Sincerely,

William G. Dyer

Phillip R. Kunz

Notice that these effective families held family prayer, scripture reading, family home evenings, and other spiritual activities discussed in this book. Also, items 7, 10, and 13 relate directly to spending time in activities together.

Activities are a real blessing to a family. They provide a way to have fun together, relieve tensions, and develop relationships on new levels with one another. Activities are especially exciting for younger children. Activities are an integral part of the teaching and training of the family. At the same time a family is having a fun time together, parents have an opportunity to teach about many things.

Unfortunately, some members of the Church and of the community in general have determined that activities should be left to the school or to the Church. They feel that it is the role of these organizations to entertain their children and provide appropriate activities for them. Some members of the Church are even tempted to leave activities to seminary or to the Young Women or Aaronic Priesthood programs. If that direction is followed, families can inadvertently lose out on some crucial time together and at the same time inadvertently weaken their family.

There seems to be no question that the "chairman of the activities committee" in your family is you as a parent. You will want to have your children help you, but you will take the lead in planning different activities in which your family might be involved. That leadership should not be left to anyone else. Part of the bonding that occurs between parents and children comes from having a fun time together. One of your major objectives must be to become their best friend, and part of a friendship is having fun, as well as learning together and doing the many other things mentioned in this book.

Parents will want to include in their schedule an appropriate sequence of activities for the family. The family's activities ought to be jointly decided by all family members and thus be able to compete to some degree with some of the more exotic or well-planned activities put on by the school and the Church.

Balancing Activities between Home, Church, and School

"How can I provide all of these family activities," some parents might ask, "when my children have so many other activities outside the home?" And that is a valid question indeed. A greater focus on home-centered activities would reduce the number of demands on active families but still reach the less active who have more of a need for help from the Church.

Perhaps our family has a different perspective than most because we have lived outside the United States for so many years. In some of the countries in Latin America, there are almost no school or other activities to which the children could go that were not very worldly and that didn't involve the use of tobacco and alcohol. The Church in those countries was in a basic developmental stage and thus offered few activities. My wife and I soon saw that we would have to be the "activities committee" for our family.

When we arrived home in Utah, we returned to a very active ward. In fact, in our first three months, we counted thirty-nine activities to which we were invited as a family or as individuals—Young Women's activities, the annual Relief Society anniversary, the high priests' ice-cream social, Scouting affairs, and on and on. If I'm not mistaken, we went to about three of those activities as a family, and some of the children attended a few more.

Soon after that, our good bishop told me he was worried about my family. I said, "If you know something I don't, I'd be very anxious to know. Please tell me."

"Well," he said, "I have a feeling that your family isn't as supportive of the Church as they ought to be. For example, last Sunday night we had a Scouting meeting for all the Scouts and their families in the stake. At the meeting, they counted the number of people in each ward. The ward having the most people present won a prize. Because your large family was not there, we didn't feel you were supporting the Church as much as you should." (He said all of that very carefully, lovingly, and with good spirit.)

I said to him, "Well, I might be mistaken, Bishop, but my understanding is that the Church is supposed to support the family. If we had been to that social meeting that night, we would have missed the tremendous family devotional we had in our home." I asked him if he'd ever seen our children miss priesthood meeting, sacrament meeting, Sunday School, or Mutual. He said he had not. I continued, "I understood that all those other things were electives, that they were optional, and that we could choose which ones we wanted to attend. Is that not true?" He wasn't too sure.

Then I said to this good bishop, "Do you know what my biggest problem has been since I returned home from Latin America?"

He said, "No, what is it, Brother Cook?"

I said, "It's been the Church itself, and perhaps the school here to some extent."

He said, "What do you mean?"

I said, "Because I travel a lot on the weekends, the week nights are very important to me, as are Saturday and Sunday if I'm home. I must have that time with my own family. In Latin America we had family home evening almost every night. I don't mean a lesson; I mean just a fun time.

"Sometimes we carved things. Sometimes we built things. Sometimes we took walks around the block. Sometimes we helped the widows or ministered to others in need. Sometimes we had lots of fun with other families. But since I've come home it's been difficult because some group has my children on Tuesday night, another group on Wednesday, and somebody else on Thursday, and they are with their friends on Friday night. My biggest challenge has been all of these activities going on outside the home."

This faithful bishop was quite shocked at my response but I'm sure he understood. I suggested there might be wisdom in having the family heads in the ward determine how many activities there ought to be, and then in helping parents understand that they—not the Church or the school—were primarily in charge of the activities in their family.

In the following months, with the planning and involvement of parents, this good bishop greatly reduced the number of activities in our ward. He also retaught the principle that parents were to hold activities with their own children, and that in its support role the Church would sponsor some group activities as well. (It should also be mentioned that he knew, as did we, that he had to provide more activities than "the ideal" to help families who had greater needs than we did.)

President Harold B. Lee said: "It seems clear to me that the Church has no choice—and never has had—but to do more to assist the family in carrying out its divine mission . . . to help improve the quality of life in the Latter-day Saint homes. As important as our many programs and organizational efforts are, these should not supplant the home; they should support the home" ("Preparing Our Youth," Ensign, March 1971, p. 3).

Activities with Grandparents

In planning activities with your family, please don't forget some of the most important members of your family—grandparents. Grandparents can be of great assistance in raising a family, particularly if they live nearby. Make a special effort to involve grandparents in as many family activities as possible. They can provide excellent gospel instruction if they are faithful members of the Church, especially in home evenings and during scripture reading. At times when children are having a difficult time, grandparents or other family members such as uncles and aunts can be of great assistance in times of need. At times like these, worthy grandparents can become children's heroes.

In the gospel we know families are multi-generational. I believe that the Lord meant families to include aunts, uncles, cousins, grandparents, and beyond.

At times grandparents have the idea that they have raised their children, that their turn is over and now they can go and do as they please. Some in the world have said their obligation to society has been completed. We know better. We should make every effort to strengthen and include the extended family in our lives.

Grandparents normally have free time to spend with children because they do not have the immediate demands of a family. Thus, they may be of great assistance to their children who will appropriately involve them. Even grandparents who live a long distance away can be of help by telephone, letter, and occasional visits. Nonmember grandparents can also help in teaching, sharing, and loving their grandchildren.

Good grandparents will have the vision of trying to draw their whole family together and will provide a righteous influence that could not otherwise be provided.

Family Activities

One of the real challenges families have is deciding what to do for activities. Many of those outside of the home cost money, and thus it's difficult for a family to do many of those. However, they can do many other activities with no cost at all. Following is a list of activities we have found to be fun and helpful to our family:

All of these activities can be done with little or no cost, and some are educational.

Other activities that might require a full day to finish:

Other, more commercial activities include:

There are many such activities that will, of course, vary according to where the family lives.

Activities for Younger Children

Families with younger children can have fun by:

Let the older children help plan what to do. That will increase their love for their younger brothers and sisters. Remember too that older children often need one-on-one time with a parent, swimming, bowling, playing racquet-ball, or taking a walk. Our daughters have always liked special daddy-daughter dates. Don't forget that these fun activities can be turned into good teaching moments as well. Remember above all else that heaven is to some degree just a continuation of an ideal home. Nothing else is more important.

Family Games

There are also lots of fun games families can play. If your family is not accustomed to playing games, you might turn to the Church's Family Resource Book, which contains excellent games to help stir the creativity of parents and children alike. Following are some games we have enjoyed over the years:

Blindfold

Spin the bottle

Tell the truth

Charades

Ping Pong

The gossip game

Computer games

Checkers

Celestial Pursuit

Chess

The deer hunter game

"Do you love your neighbor?"

Poor pussy

Kick the can

Impersonations

Basketball

Baseball

Volleyball

We've also had fun doing exercises as a family.

Of course, each family should select games and other activities that are fun for them.

Quizzes and Tests

We've often had a good time with quizzes or tests that we have made up or taken from various books and magazines.

We have used the following quiz at Christmastime:

Name the carol whose opposite is given here:

Answers:

l. Away in a Manger

Height and Weight Chart

We've also had fun over the years keeping track of the children's height and weight. We would have them measure or "weigh in" every six months, and we would record the results on a separate sheet for each child. They enjoyed seeing they were growing in both height and weight. It made growing up fun for them and allowed them to get a better feeling for how they were maturing. In time they all enjoyed passing up their mother.

Career Visits

We have had a fun time with our children when we have used some of our activity nights to learn about various careers. It has allowed them to see what kinds of jobs are available and to think about whether or not they might like them. We've visited places like these:

Fire station

Police station

Steel plant

Candy plant

Architectural office

Engineering office

Dairy

Farm

Garbage dump

Fish farm

Forestry

Sewage plant

Car dealership

Electrical company

Business office

Bank

Telephone company

Department store

Computer plant

Printing press

Beauty shop

Newspaper office

Courthouse

Municipality

Employment center

University

Copper mine

Art museum

Bishop's storehouse

Deseret Industries

Cemetery

City library

Family history center

Extraction center

Family Music

Many families enjoy singing and listening to good music together. We have a number of tapes that we sing along with in the car or sometimes just for a fun evening. We have both sacred music and fun music such as cowboy songs, romantic songs, and so on. Families can also sing from the Primary Songbook or the hymnbook. We particularly enjoy singing at the piano, with the guitar, or with the flute. Music brings a wonderful spirit into the home. The Spirit truly comes as families sing fun and religious songs together.

Deciding on the Activity

While there are plenty of activities for families to enjoy, they sometimes have trouble deciding which ones to do and when. If a family will plan out their activities on paper or on a calendar, they will find it easier to put some variety into them. In a family council, we would usually plan four weeks' activities at a time. Just take a piece of paper and make a list like the following:

Date Event Participants

July 15 Fire station The whole family

July 28 Waterskiing for All but one son

the full day who has to work

August 10 Games at home Older daughter in

charge

August 17 Dinner in the canyon The whole family

Having made these decisions in advance helped us be more faithful in fulfilling our responsibilities relative to family activities.

If families are going to "compete" with school or church activities, they'll have to do some fun things. If families plan these things together, their enjoyment will be increased, and they will also increase love among family members. These activities also provide a chance to "cleanse" your children every few days from what they may have picked up from the world. Just being together and talking allows a tremendous "cleansing process" to go on.

Sometimes, because of the various ages of the children, it might be fun to split up activities. One parent can go with the older children and one with the younger ones.

Refreshments

Above all, don't forget the refreshments! All family members love refreshments. They can be things you buy at the store or things you make at home. Our family most enjoys donuts, ice cream, bottled fruit, taffy, baked apples, cold cereal, hot chocolate, fruit leather, marshmallows, popcorn, and cookies.

Constructive Family Projects

There is real value in involving children in constructive projects around the home where they can develop skills, hobbies, and talents. Many times children are bored at home and just want to be with their friends or perhaps to do activities with little value. Or they may want to watch television or videos evening after evening or all day on Saturday.

Some of the Brethren have taught that some families are too activity oriented and are just doing "fun things." They've suggested that great strength can come from doing family projects, things that are a bit more constructive but still fun.

Family projects have allowed us to have a "family home evening" every night, with each family member working on some constructive project, many times with a parent or a brother or sister. These projects have included:

Planting a garden

Quilting

Learning to cook

Writing in a journal

Learning to sew

Writing personal and family histories

Learning how to repair things around the house

Writing letters to family members

Organizing individual and family photo albums

Painting a picture

Balancing the family budget

Drawing

Preparing a year's supply

Preparing seventy-two-hour emergency kits

Developing weekly menus

Baking bread

Studying phonics

Holding a read-a-thon

Working on merit badges

Studying Spanish

Exercising

Doing math

Dancing

Looking things up in the encyclopedia

Carving wood

Singing

Carving soap

Improving handwriting

Holding a spelling bee

Taking typing lessons

Taking music lessons

Learning missionary lessons

Having a scripture chase

Holding a sports night

Holding a drama night

Holding a book of remembrance night

Learning to iron

Learning to work on the computer

Learning about manners and etiquette

Working on the Young Women's "Personal Progress" program

These projects, while enjoyable, add to the skill and talent of each family member. They also give great satisfaction to family members—much more than do games and similar activities.

Family Callings

Just as we have callings in the Church, so we extend callings to our children in the family. The children handle these assignments on their own or with assistance from a parent or brother or sister.

One child has taken the lead in missionary work—putting our family picture and testimony in copies of the Book of Mormon and making contacts with neighbors. Another child has taken the lead in putting our family history information into the computer, arranging to go to the Family History Library to do research, and organizing the family to be baptized for the dead.

Another child is in charge of helping the needy. We have maintained a list of people in the neighborhood who need help, and this child makes sure that we respond individually or as a family.

One of our other children helps us keep track of our food storage, telling us what we need to purchase when we are getting low.

Yet another child takes the responsibility to plan a weekly activity for family home evening. Another encourages us in family scripture reading, family home evening, and family prayer.

All of these activities help involve children in productive things.

We have an annual family activity where we write New Year's resolutions. If they are not too private, we share them with the family. Then we ask if anyone can think of any others they would add to the list. Invariably, there are a few, and that gives us an opportunity to help each child set some long-range goals. Typically, the resolutions have been in five areas: spiritual, educational, physical, financial, and social. After that, we agree on two or three family resolutions in those same categories.

Every other month or so, we review those resolutions as a family. We have encouraged the children to put them on a note card on their dresser where they can review them frequently. This has particularly helped our girls in setting goals for Personal Progress.

Children Can Strengthen the Family

Once we were talking during supper about how the children could better strengthen the family. We were centering on what it is that makes a family successful. After some discussion, we came up with what we called "The Family: Ten Commandments for Children":

l. Elijah shall "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers" (D&C 128:17; italics added).

Children really can support and strengthen their family and make it stronger. You will notice that besides spiritual things, these "commandments" include time for love, activities, and fun together. That balanced approach to family life seems to bring the most success.

Summer Projects

We've found it very helpful, during the summer especially, when the children are always saying, "Mom, what can I do?" to have planned out some projects for them to accomplish within a certain time frame, such as the summer months. The following activities helped us develop our skills, talents, and abilities:

Dad Mom 15-year-old girl 13-year-old boy 10-year-old boy

guitar piano cooking trumpet piano

piano flute flute piano Spanish

computer Spanish piano Spanish computer

singing reading singing computer guitar

Spanish exercise computer puzzle

memorizing computer Spanish model-making

scriptures haircut cooking

(learn to give) guitar

6-year-old girl Family Projects Joint Projects

reading exploring Mom/a daughter on the flute

writing Spanish Dad/a son on the guitar

Spanish family games Dad/a daughter and a son learning

swimming sing with guitar/piano computer

singing encyclopedia search 2 daughters on piano and flute

scripture chase

service project

In these projects, Mom was to teach flute. Dad was to teach piano, guitar, and computer. Our older daughter was to teach piano and flute. We have also found reading to be an extremely useful activity, not only as a summer project but as something that can be done year round. Frequent visits to the library to obtain appropriate reading material for all the children has been a continuing activity. Children can be introduced to great heroes through reading the classics or just enjoy fun, wholesome reading. It also allows the older children to help the younger ones read. The involvement among family members in teaching one another a variety of skills has really increased the love in the family. Also, developing their talents and abilities has given our children additional self-confidence and a level of maturity that they would not have otherwise achieved.

Holidays and Birthdays

Families can take advantage of all the holidays that occur during the year in the country where they live. These might include religious holidays like Christmas or the restoration of the priesthood, or they might just be fun government or traditional holidays. Birthdays also provide great opportunities for family celebrations. As our family has matured, we have become more and more adept at having fun on birthdays. It's easy when children are little to have birthday parties with cake and ice cream. But as the years pass, it becomes a little more challenging to plan a fun birthday.

We have found it most edifying in our family to spend time before the birthday to plan some things that we know the person really likes. All in all, it's a great time to honor an individual in the family. We've always written little notes to each other and read them aloud to the family. That has made the person being recognized feel additional love and attention from all family members. We make that person the king or queen for the day.

On Christmas, we have tried to teach our children the Christmas Story with a little program based on the scriptures that illustrates the life of Jesus. Each family member plays a role from the scriptures:

Of course the same kind of program could be developed around other holidays as well.

Once while living in Peru, we decided to have a different kind of Christmas. It consisted of two parts. First, we would contribute what we would have spent on our family, all but one purchased gift for each person, to someone in real need. Second, whatever else we gave each other had to be made with our own hands. It could not be purchased from a store but was to made with items we already had at home. Thus we'd have to improvise and give of our time, our talents, and ourselves.

One of our sons decided to make a key holder for his mother's keys. We had fifty or so house keys but nowhere to put them, and they frequently got mixed up. He decided a key holder would make an excellent gift.

We looked for a piece of wood to make it. I wanted to buy it, but my son reminded me that we couldn't. We spent an hour getting a little piece of wood ready that would have taken us minutes to buy. When we tried to sand it, we realized we didn't have anything to sand it with, so we scraped off the rough edges with a rough board. We soon came up against the problem of painting it. Fortunately, we had a little yellow paint, but we had no paintbrush.

Again I thought about going to the store, but my son said: "Dad, someone had to invent the paintbrush. How did he do it?" We made a brush by pulling some straw out of my wife's broom, and though I had my doubts about how it would work, we made a brush as good as one from the store. We then had a problem with what to use for the hooks for the keys. We solved that problem by bending nails into shape, doing each with love and lots of patience. On Christmas morning, this boy had a delightful experience as he gave his mother a true gift from his heart. We still have that key holder after all these years.

One young daughter found a good-sized rock, painted it with the same yellow paint (since it was all we had), and wrote on it, "Mom, I love you." We still have it—a rock prepared with loving hands and a pure heart.

Another son made a llama from straw pulled from the broom. (Poor broom, it had almost disappeared.) Since he was the oldest, this boy really created a quality item. It probably would have sold well in any store in Peru. That, too, is still part of our family collection.

Personal Gift Certificates

The giving of self for Christmas and birthdays brings an added measure of the Spirit. We have often given personal gift certificates anonymously to our neighbors that say things like "The snow in the front of your house will be shoveled. One of these days some neighborhood 'angels' will do it."

What happens in the heart of the giver is much more important than what is received. We have also given similar certificates to family members. They say things like "I will make your bed seven times" and "I will do your dishes three times." My wife likes this one: "Six hours of peace and harmony."

And to one of our mothers who lived far away, a certificate promising to send twelve letters, one letter each month of the year. This gift was better than anything we could have bought in a store because it showed more profound love, more giving of self. As we have considered what Christ gave, each time we have come to the conclusion that he really gave of himself, time and time again.

One time during the Christmas season, with a certificate we gave to an older couple, we included this little poem that we wrote:

This gift to you is something special, It represents the true spirit of giving, the Christmas vessel. The giving of knick-knack, trinket, or doll Is not long lasting, and into this pattern we choose not to fall. For the memories of presents quickly pass, So we have desired something that will last. It's time together that really will count; As we build family ties, our love will mount. The days together in a year are a few but they inspire. Thus this gift can be spent together any day you desire. The gift we offer is a dinner together out to eat, And the cost will be our Christmas treat. Time together should build our understanding, love and rapport, And will strengthen our love to the eternal core.

Involving the family in many wholesome activities is an enriching experience. It adds fun, zest, and spark to family life. Be sure that children are full participants in deciding what to do, and you will have much more success with your activities.

Let it not be misunderstood that families should not be involved in school or church activities, but let it be understood that those must be secondary to family activities. I pray the Lord will bless all of us to work a little harder to have more fun times together as a family and thus create memories to laugh about and talk about for years to come.
