Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Chapter Ten

Teaching Your Family Love and Service

Some time ago I was in the practice of making bread on Monday, my day off (my wife had taught me), and then as a family we would take a loaf or two to someone in our neighborhood who was in need. On one particular evening we thought we would visit a certain widow and give her a loaf to cheer her up. We went down the hill to her house, but she was not there. We thought we would then go by and visit another person, but she was not home either.

Some of us were kidding each other that maybe we weren't very inspired about where to go. We had offered a prayer earlier that we would be inspired to know to whom to give the bread. We were jokingly saying things like, "Maybe we should just take it home and eat it ourselves."

We started heading toward home thinking, "Well, we tried to give the bread to someone," but then one of us felt impressed to say, "Let's go see Brother Jones. He's been a widower for about a year and must surely be lonely. Maybe he'd like to have a loaf of bread." As we went up his walkway, I told the children we ought to sing to him. They resisted saying, "No, let's not do that."

When he opened the door and saw our whole family standing there, he was really taken aback as to what it all meant. We told him we had just come by to wish him well and express our love to him. We went into the living room and visited with him a few minutes.

Then I said, "Why don't we sing to Brother Jones?" The children didn't want to very much. My wife thought of a number of songs we could sing but finally suggested "You Are My Sunshine." As we sang, we could tell he was a little embarrassed at first, but then came some real emotion and gratitude.

He expressed his love to us and said, "Today, this very day, is my forty-fifth wedding anniversary. No one knew that, and no one remembered me on this day. To have you come tonight and sing this song touches me deeply in my heart. I want you to know how much I appreciate your coming. I'll enjoy this bread, but more than that, I'll never forget the gift of love you gave me in coming to see me tonight."

How true it is that it is more blessed to give than to receive. As important as it was to him, I don't think Brother Jones received as much from the visit as we did. As we walked down the walk from his house, we knew something special had happened. It was hard to describe the joy we felt as we left his home that night. Our love for him was even deeper. When he passed away a few months later, we were grateful to have had that experience with him and to know we had added a bit to his happiness.

We have always been amazed that we can never give to someone else with the Spirit of the Lord and not be blessed a hundredfold in return. Jesus told his disciples, "A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:34-35).

In other words if we truly love the Lord we will desire to love one another, both in the family and beyond the family.

The Lord also says, "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15). Besides loving our families and those around us, we show our love to the Lord by keeping his commandments, especially faith, repentance, and the basic ordinances and covenants of the gospel.

In fact, the Lord clearly explained that love for him and for others are the two great commandments:

"A lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying, Master, which is the great commandment in the law?

"Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets" (Matthew 22:35-40).

Clearly, if we are obedient in loving God and in loving one another inside and outside our families, we will, because the whole law hangs upon these principles, be able to raise up our families to the Lord.

Marriage, a Partnership of Three

In any righteous family, the marriage does not consist of just the husband and the wife who are sealed together for time and eternity in the temple of the Lord. The marriage also includes the Lord as a third partner. The best way to increase your love for your spouse and your spouse's love for you is to increase your love for the Lord. If you increase your love for the Lord, you will have greater love for one another.

My wife has known from the beginning of our marriage that I love the Lord more than I love her, and I have also understood that she loves the Lord more than she loves me. Because of that commitment to God, the love between us has been tremendously increased. President Joseph F. Smith said, "A home is not a home in the eye of the gospel, unless there dwell perfect confidence and love between the husband and the wife. Home is a place of order, love, union, rest, confidence, and absolute trust; where the breath of suspicion of infidelity can not enter; where the woman and the man each have implicit confidence in each other's honor and virtue" (Gospel Doctrine, p. 302).

The same is true of love for our children. As King Benjamin said, "Ye will teach them to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another" (Mosiah 4:15).

Avoiding Contention and Maintaining Peace at Home

Just as the Lord has commanded us to love one another, he has also commanded us not to contend with one another. The Lord has spelled out clearly who the author of contention is and why we must guard against it: "He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another. Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away" (3 Nephi 11:29-30).

If we allow contention in our family, then we as parents are at fault. There is no place in a family for teasing or quarreling or anything else that stirs up contention among family members. The same is true if we allow our children to compete negatively against one another. That can only bring hurt feelings and anger into the home. The same is true of allowing children to be overly physical. Sometimes one of the children who is stronger than the others will exert physical force on the others. We ought not to tolerate such behavior, as, again, it brings contention.

If we continue working to bring the Spirit into our homes, over time we should see very little contention. Parents must especially be sure that their children do not fight with one another: "Ye will not suffer your children . . . [to] fight and quarrel one with another, and serve the devil, who is the master of sin, or who is the evil spirit which hath been spoken of by our fathers, he being an enemy to all righteousness" (Mosiah 4:14).

Elder F. Enzio Busche, in general conference of April 1982, explained that one of the best ways to remove contention is to pray: "I fervently prayed to my Heavenly Father to help me to handle the situation [a problem with a son]. Peace came over me. I was no longer angry . . . . As I expressed my confidence in him, he broke into tears, confessing his unworthiness and condemning himself beyond measure" ("Love Is the Power That Will Cure the Family," Ensign, May 1982, p. 70).

Just as King Benjamin told us we should not suffer our children to fight, he also told us how to solve the problem: "Ye will teach them to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another" (Mosiah 4:15).

We have truly found that counsel of great benefit in our family. The devil is the source of contention, and it does not seem to matter whether you are the innocent party or not. If you participate in or aggravate the contention, then you are to blame.

While I was flying on a plane from Salt Lake City to Houston, Texas, some years ago, my seat had not been preassigned and I ended up having to sit in the smoking section.

No one was smoking next to me, so I felt quite comfortable. However, the fellow across the way and up one seat began smoking, and the smoke drifted back. He was sitting in the nonsmoking section.

I finally asked the flight attendant to ask him not to smoke. She was a little embarrassed and said, "Why don't you just change seats so he will be in the smoking section and you won't?" I agreed to that. Everyone in the smoking section pretty much heard the conversation, and I felt a little embarrassed.

As soon as I sat down in my new seat, the couple directly behind me began smoking and blowing their smoke my way. The more I sat there, the angrier I felt inside, especially as I had recently read articles about second-hand smoke causing cancer. The smoke kept coming over the seat. I thought, "Why do I have to tolerate this? Why can't I breathe fresh air? Why can't these people be more disciplined and not smoke?"

Finally, I turned all my air vents straight back so they would blow on them. The man was a little irritated and said to me, "What's the idea of doing that? It's already freezing, and my wife's getting cold."

I turned around and said, "Well, when you stop smoking, I'll turn the air off. I don't want to breathe your smoke." There was some contention between us, and I could tell he was really mad.

I turned back around in my seat, and then a moment of inspiration came. My eyes fell upon the verses I had just been reading, 3 Nephi 11:29-30 which say that the devil is the father of contention. And here I was causing the contention, even if I was right and even if the smoke was harmful. I began to have feelings come to me like these: "Contention is not of me. You ought not create it or, if it exists, augment it. You're being a party to creating contention." Feeling repentant, I turned around and told the man, "I'll turn off the air. I don't want to breathe your smoke, but I'll turn off the air so you won't be cold. I'm sorry for speaking so sharply."

He immediately said, "No, I'm the one at fault. I know I shouldn't even smoke. I'm sorry."

Interestingly, as soon as I took the contention out of the situation, he also calmed down, and I know I did too. He and his wife immediately stopped smoking, and I don't believe they smoked again until we arrived in Houston.

I realized it is not right to be the source of any contention. Mormon wrote to Moroni, "My son, I fear lest the Lamanites shall destroy this people; for they do not repent, and Satan stirreth them up continually to anger one with another" (Moroni 9:3).

Contention is definitely of the devil, and it causes anger to rise in people's hearts. I was probably the innocent party in this encounter but I was the source of harsh words between us. Thus, I ended up being the source of contention. I felt particularly bad about this because I had been reading the scriptures at the time.

When we're dealing with contention in our families, husband and wife need to start with the premise that there simply will be none. If children clearly understand that you really mean that—that there won't be any harsh words or put-downs or language like that—they will abide by it. If they don't, then some discipline must be put into effect.

I remember one little boy who, when told he wasn't so smart, said, "Oh, yeah? Then I'll give you the alphabet backward." We all knew he could do it frontward but were certain he wouldn't be able to do it backward. He flipped around, put his back to us, and then said the alphabet. We all laughed, and it reduced the tension of the moment.

We must be sure never to let one little incident blow everything out of proportion. We must not treat something like a Supreme Court case when it is really just a minor traffic violation. At times, if we're caught up in our own problems or emotions, that's exactly what can happen. Some principles we might want to keep in mind about contention are:

One day, after seeing the report card of one of my sons, I told him that if he couldn't take control of what was going on in school, then I would. Of course, that greatly offended him. I was angry and he was angry, and there was some loud talk between us and some demands and ultimatums. As a result, he ended up going to school unhappy and mad, and I ended up going to work in the same spirit.

On the way to work as I prayerfully pondered what had happened, there came into my mind the words from the Joseph Smith Translation of Luke 6:29-30, which my wife and I had just read in the scriptures:

"Unto him who smiteth thee on the cheek, offer also the other; or, in other words, it is better to offer the other, than to revile again. And him who taketh away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also.

"For it is better that thou suffer thine enemy to take these things, than to contend with him. Verily I say unto you, Your heavenly Father who seeth in secret, shall bring that wicked one into judgment" (JST Luke 6:29-30).

The Lord seems to be saying we should give another our cloak in order to avoid contention—that it is better to lose the coat than to contend over it. The Lord in that way showed his great dislike for contention.

When people become angry, they usually harden the hearts of others in stirring them up to anger. That is one of the great tools of the devil—to get us to contend one with another. The devil delights in that because it hardens our hearts toward what is good, toward other people, and toward the Lord himself. And when our hearts are hardened, it is increasingly difficult for the Spirit to get through to us to teach us and guide us.

The Savior taught that in the old days it was said people were not to commit adultery; he added that he that even looks at a woman to lust after her has committed adultery in his heart. He was teaching the law of Moses but adding to it the higher law of Christ. Similarly, in the old days it was said that one should not kill, but Jesus again added the higher law of Christ, saying that he that is even angry with his brother is in danger of hellfire. Those statements of the Lord teach us that anger is a serious spiritual ailment (see Matthew 5:21-28).

I apologized to my son the next morning during scripture reading, and also to another son with whom I had had a confrontation the same night, saying the problem was my fault in having stirred them up to anger.

There is a way to handle problems without becoming angry and hardening our hearts. If I had exercised better control, I would probably have influenced my son to do likewise.

He responded in kind to my anger because of his own lack of maturity. If I had been in control, he probably would have been. Had he not been, I could easily have said, "Go to your room and wait there and pray until your heart is in order. Then come back and we'll finish the discussion. We can't discuss it when we're angry. There's no place for anger in this home."

It is impossible to be in a contentious spirit and have the Spirit of the Lord. It takes great discipline to be in control so the devil does not have influence over us. He has influence over us only as we allow it. As the Lord says of the fall, "The devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he became subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto temptation" (D&C 29:40). We will not be subject to the will of Satan unless we yield to temptation; otherwise he can have no power over us.

Avoiding Contention: The Difference between Boys and Girls

One morning one of our daughters missed scripture reading. At breakfast many times we talk a bit more about the most important thing we have learned in scripture reading that morning. We were doing that, and she was feeling a bit guilty. I cautiously asked her where she had been and why she hadn't come.

"I couldn't decide what to wear," she said.

I said, not too sensitively, "You mean for the whole twenty minutes?"

She said, "That's right. I was staring at the closet for twenty minutes and couldn't decide because my older sister wore what I was going to wear."

All the boys laughed, and I think it made her feel bad for a moment. But we helped her laugh with us, when I said, "I don't have much choice. I get to choose a black suit or a blue suit, period."

The two younger boys said, "We don't care. We just take what's next on the stack." To them, it didn't matter whether it matched or whether they had to get a favorite article out of the dirty clothes. Boys just wear what's "next on the stack."

We had a good laugh about that, my wife especially. The good humor defused an otherwise contentious moment. It ended up being a sweet experience, and at the same time taught us a little more about the difference between boys and girls.

That daughter later wrote me this letter:

Dear Dad,

I haven't done this in a long time. I wish I could remember more often. I want to tell you how much you mean to me. How much you teach me. I am so thankful of how well you know the scriptures for you to teach us. I learn so much at scripture reading because of you. I really hope I can find a husband just like you. I love you so much. I hope you have a good trip. I love to hear about your trips. Bye!

We all need to be reminded that most of our problems are just little ones, many of which have the potential to become big problems unless we handle them correctly. Let us stay close to our children and teach them to avoid contention. Then there will be no contention but only love for one another.

Extending Love to Others

One of the great benefits of service is that it teaches people to reach beyond themselves, to not be selfish, to help others, and to give Christian service. We ought to seek out those in need. We ought to be quick to respond to family members or others who may have physical handicaps, infirmities, or special mental or emotional needs.

When we practice true principles of Christian service, our compassion expands beyond ourselves. Then our love for others increases, our love of God increases, and the love of others for God increases as well. In all of the New Testament, probably no other message comes through as powerfully as the love that Jesus had for all people. He always set the example of ministering to others no matter what else he was doing. If we will go and do likewise, ministering to others with love, people will sense the spirit of Christ in us. They will then be able to follow our leadership because of our great love for them.

While fun family activities are important, experiencing the love and joy of heaven can bring your family closer to the Lord than almost anything else. If families want to experience that love, they will cultivate the spirit of the following passages:

The thing which will be of the most worth unto you will be to declare repentance unto his people, that you may bring souls unto me, that you may rest with them in the kingdom of my Father (D&C 15:6).

How great is [the Lord's] joy in the soul that repenteth! Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people. And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father! And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me! (D&C 18:13-16).

There is no greater joy than helping to save a soul. This isn't just bringing the gospel to a nonmember or helping perfect a Saint. Sometimes we can bring someone to Christ through a very small thing, such as encouraging someone, visiting someone who is sick, sharing a smile or an embrace, being a good listener, cheering up a child, and so on. Each little act of kindness, in my judgment, is part of bringing a soul to Christ.

As you act as Christ did in relation to other people, those people will see Christ in you and desire to follow your leadership and teachings. Truly there is no greater joy than bringing happiness to others and helping them save their own souls. This basic principle of love must be paramount in our teachings and our example to our children if we desire to raise them up to the Lord.

President David O. McKay taught that love made homes more permanent and enduring: "Homes are more permanent through love. Oh, then, let love abound. Though you fall short in some material matters, study and work and pray to hold your children's love. Establish and maintain your family hours always. Stay close to your children. Pray, play, work, and worship together. This is the counsel of the church" (Family Home Evening Manual, 1968-69, iii).

Yes, let love abound in our homes, and then let it overflow into our neighborhoods to bless our fellowmen.

Temporal Gifts of Love

The only way these attributes of love can be acquired is for children to experience them, and the best place for them to experience them is in the home under the direction of their parents. We have found over the years that setting some goals as to whom we might assist in our ward and neighborhood, and when, have been a great help to us. We have used many family home evening activity nights, as I'm sure you have, to go out and serve so we could experience more joy and maybe a little less entertainment. It has been great to be able to plan ahead about whom we might help and to feel the gratitude of others.

Shoveling Snow

On a Thanksgiving some years ago when our children were young, there was quite a snowstorm in Utah, where we lived. I don't especially enjoy snow, particularly when it's in my driveway. That morning I looked out the window and saw about a foot of it. I gathered up two of my boys, who were seven and five at the time, and convinced them how happy they would be helping their dad shovel all that snow. As you know, that takes some doing, but parents can make work fun. In fact, worthwhile work is one of the real sources of joy. I took them outside with me, and we shoveled the entire walk.

After we finished we were cold, and we were ready to go in. But I saw a teaching moment, and so I said "I wonder if we shouldn't go shovel Bill's walk." (Bill was our neighbor next door.)

I was pleased as one boy said, "That sounds good, Dad." The other boy said, "I'm cold."

Trying to take advantage of the moment to teach, I said, "I wonder how Bill would feel this morning if he opened his door and saw his entire walk all finished." Then the other boy caught the spirit of it and said, "He would really be happy, wouldn't he?"

The moment was right to say, "Well, what do you think, son, that Heavenly Father would have us do?"

He said, "I think we had better shovel the walk." By the time we were through, we were tired, and the youngest boy said, "Let's ring the doorbell now and tell Bill what we've done." He was going for some short-run pleasure, wasn't he?

Again there was a real teaching moment as I was able to say, "No, son, I think it would be best if we didn't tell him and left it as a surprise. Heavenly Father likes us to do things anonymously." I had to tell him what that big word meant—that we do things without anyone knowing we're doing them. The next thing I knew my other boy had caught the spirit of it and said, "Well, what about Smiths' walk!" Before we finished that morning, we had done three other walks.

We went home with great satisfaction to tell Mom all about it. We had hot chocolate and joked and kidded about what we had done, how tired we were, and how cold we were, but how good we felt inside.

Within the next hour we had two or three phone calls expressing thanks for what had been done. We particularly smiled at one caller who said, "I can't figure it out. This morning there were three angels in our neighborhood. I'm not sure what their names were, but they really were angels and did what the Lord would surely have done had he been here. If you happen to see those angels around, please give them our thanks."

There was great joy in our family that day as we experienced some of those feelings promised by the Lord for doing good. These boys experienced the joy that comes to the heart from doing good anonymously and then being found out. In a sense, shoveling those sidewalks was a small task for us. It was really just the kindness more than the shoveling that was greatly appreciated by our neighbors.

President Joseph F. Smith said:

Let love, and peace, and the Spirit of the Lord, kindness, charity, sacrifice for others, abound in your families. Banish harsh words, envyings, hatreds, evil speaking, obscene language and innuendo, blasphemy, and let the Spirit of God take possession of your hearts. Teach to your children these things, in spirit and power, sustained and strengthened by personal practice. Let them see that you are earnest, and practice what you preach. Do not let your children out to specialists in these things, but teach them by your own precept and example, by your own fireside. Be a specialist yourself in the truth (Gospel Doctrine, p. 302).

The real fun of teaching doctrine to your children is in the practicing of it. To see the growth, the development, and the excitement they feel as they are learning the principles you have learned is a great joy.

A Mexican Good Samaritan

I know a good Samaritan who really went the second mile to assist a total stranger and thereby showed that he was a disciple of Christ. After all, by those acts of kindness others will come to know that fact. A mission president in Mexico recounted this experience to me:

Ricardo, my first counselor, owns a machine shop, which I knew was in poor financial health. Business was slow, interest rates were high, and he was really afflicted with the responsibilities of the business, expecting to be forced to declare bankruptcy. He had been trying for two years, unsuccessfully, to get work from a company that could give him a lot of work. Our conversation went something like this:

"President, I am so happy! I feel so good! I just can't explain how happy I am!"

"Ricardo, why do you say that?"

"Do you remember the man from that company I have been working with to try to get work?"

"Yes."

"He called the other day because his wife asked him how we were doing and he didn't know. I told him I hadn't called because I was very busy trying to find work. He then asked me if I needed work, and I said yes! Then the conversation turned to other things.

"President, he just called me back last week and gave me an order that will keep us busy working all crews twelve hours a day for three months. This is sort of a test to see if we can really handle the work. If we can, he has promised to keep one machine busy full time. President, my men have all agreed, and I know we can do it! The business truck that I sold the other day—I'll be able to replace it in this one order. I'm so happy, and I feel so good!"

Then he began to explain to me that he would have to drive to Mexico City that very night, arriving about two in the morning to make arrangements for the raw materials he would need. I cautioned him about the dangers of driving at night on these highways and the risk of falling asleep at the wheel. He assured me he would be all right. He said, "I have so much energy and excitement! I'll be fine."

Energy? This triggered a thought from an area council meeting we had attended the previous day in Mexico City. So I asked, "Ricardo, what is divine motivation? What makes the Lord available at any and every moment to listen and forgive?"

Without hesitation, he answered, "Service to others"—the exact words we had been taught in that spiritual meeting the day before. I was so shocked at the immediate and accurate reply that the only thing I could think of to say was, "Why do you say that?"

He then told me this story:

"I was so down, so dejected, so discouraged about business affairs, financial obligations, commitments, my family's needs, and the needs of my employees that I went to the Lord as never before. I humbled myself and really poured out my heart to him.

"I confessed my sins, expressing that I was really confessing nothing, because he knew them all, but I asked for forgiveness and made certain promises to him. I really had a thorough and rewarding experience with the Lord.

"A few days later as I was returning home, I saw some people who appeared to have a problem. I saw a small crowd and stopped to investigate. I found that a truck had run over a ten-year-old boy named Miguel while he and his family were gathering cartons and valuables from the trash cans.

"The whole family was there, but they didn't know the boy's condition. They just knew the Red Cross had taken him and that he was unconscious.

"Seeing that they had no means to go to their son, I loaded them in my truck and went to the Red Cross. They wouldn't admit us, but I wiggled my way into where I could inquire of the doctor. I heard them saying there was no hope: fractured skull, broken bones all over—virtually just crushed. The doctor said they could do nothing. I asked if anyone could do something. He said possibly the Social Security program of the government.

"I spent the rest of the day trying to get Social Security to take the case by allowing me to hire the father and pay his contributions—just any way to get them to take the boy. They refused all attempts. I asked the Social Security doctor if someone in private practice could help the boy. He said that possibly a certain neurosurgeon could do something for him if anyone could.

"I went to see the neurosurgeon, who said, 'This is very expensive. Are you the boy's uncle?'

"I said, 'No, I don't even know the boy, but I will pay whatever it costs. Just do what you can.'

"The doctor said, 'If that is the case, then we will handle it a certain way and it won't cost so much.'

"I did agree to pay the neurosurgeon, but I was spending money we didn't have. My wife asked what was going on. I told her the story. She understood and supported me all the way. I had to sell my truck and some other things, but President, he is going to make it! He is responding well to treatment. President, he is going to be okay!"

As I listened to him, I discovered once again that:

l. Our afflictions bring us to the dust in humility.

Can you imagine? Here is a modern-day story of a good Samaritan—a man who finds a complete stranger on the road and sells his own truck to pay for the operation. From my own experience I know how the Lord blessed this man within a short time in his business and gave him the ability to purchase another truck. Truly this act of giving taught that boy's family and all who were involved about what it means to be a real disciple of Christ.

There are many temporal gifts of love. These might include cash, a special Christmas for a family in need, a hundred pounds of beans or wheat left on someone's doorstep, and so on.

My family, too, has often received loving service from others. I will never forget the time when someone unknown to me called a men's clothier and paid the cost of a new suit for me. I was fitted for the suit without ever knowing the identity of the gracious disciple of the Lord who had helped us in a time of need. May we always do our best to do likewise and thus be true disciples of Jesus Christ.

Spiritual Gifts of Love

We can also give other significant gifts that are spiritual in nature. They may come directly from the Lord, or we may be an instrument in the hands of the Lord to give the spiritual gift.

I was once the visiting General Authority at a stake conference in Montana. After our evening meetings and activities, the stake president and his wife and I just visited for about an hour or so. They were having some real challenges, especially financially, and were not certain about what to do. We shared some scriptures, testimonies, and stories and had a good evening together.

As I retired, an interesting feeling came to me as I began my nightly prayer. I felt that this stake president should have a priesthood blessing. I considered whether to go out and give it to him right then while they were in the Spirit or to do it in the morning. I opted to do it in the morning and went to bed.

The next morning, I was still wondering about giving him a blessing. I wasn't sure he would want one, but the impression seemed strong that he really should have a blessing. I set aside what I had planned to do that morning, got dressed, and went out to find him in the kitchen with his family.

I got him alone and offered to give him a priesthood blessing. He seemed quite surprised. He was not resistant but seemed to be wondering if he really needed one. We called in the family, and he offered a word of prayer. Then I gave him a blessing of encouragement and comfort to help him sustain his family in the difficult times he was having.

After the blessing, his wife was in tears. I went to get my briefcase so we could go on to our meetings. When I came back out, he told me (she couldn't because of her emotions) that unbeknownst to me or her husband, she had been praying for a week that the General Authority would sense the need for a blessing and provide it to her husband.

She later said to me, "I would never think of asking or bothering a General Authority for a blessing for me or my husband. I didn't even want to bother my husband to suggest to him that he should have a blessing. But I just prayed to the Lord that if it were right, that the General Authority would sense the need and give a blessing to my husband."

We then went off to the Sunday meeting. I called on a number of people from the congregation to bear testimony. As we were finishing calling on the people, I asked the stake president if his wife had borne her testimony in conference recently. He informed me that she never had. We then called on her, and she bore a beautiful testimony that touched all the people in the conference.

As the president was taking me to the airport that afternoon, he said, "My wife wouldn't tell you this, but you ought to know that my wife told me three days ago that she felt she was going to be called on to speak in conference. I surely have a faithful wife. It's also clear that the Lord works through his servants."

There was a great deal of love in this stake from these people and especially from the president, his wife, and their family. It's amazing to me how the Lord will prompt his people and his servants to respond to real needs.

What a great gift of faith this wife gave her husband! He had a real need. He didn't know that he did, or perhaps he didn't want to be humble enough to ask for help. His wife was able, through her righteousness, to influence both her husband and me. Some wise individual said, "As strong as the mother is spiritually in the family, so shall be the family." This certainly seemed to be the case with this good woman.

One can see that if parents like these teach their children about the powerful effects of love, they will quickly learn from the example of their parents.

The Lord's Gift: A Healing to a Faithful Man

Sometimes the Lord will minister to his people through one of his servants even though the servant doesn't know it. Just the same, the Lord will bless the one in need in the way he chooses to bless him.

A few years ago, Sister Cook and I attended a stake conference in a city in Guatemala. At the time, I had three broken ribs. During the meeting the stake president told the people about my condition and asked them to let me leave after the meeting without the customary handshaking and abrazos (hugs). They were very considerate and did as he requested.

As I was about to leave the chapel, however, at the suggestion of Sister Cook, I turned around and went back to the front of the chapel. I walked up to the brother who had led the choir, shook his hand, and thanked him for the music. There were some real tears shed. We greeted each other with an abrazo, and then I left.

A year later, we again attended a stake conference in the same city. This same brother came up to me and told me how that short encounter a year ago had changed his life. At that first stake conference, he was suffering from a spinal disease that created a paralytic condition. He was unable to walk more than a step or two without crutches, and then only with excruciating pain. In fact, he was on crutches while leading the choir. When we shook hands, he felt the Spirit of the Lord go through him. He was filled with a wonderful, warm feeling.

This brother went on to tell me that he had walked out of the chapel and into the hallway, where he met the mission president. It was only then that he realized he had walked that distance without his crutches. Previously, he had not been able to take even a step or two without great pain. Not only had he walked without his crutches, but he had also walked without pain.

He said in astonishment, "I've left my crutches!"

The mission president said, "Well, if you have come this far without them, drop them; you don't need them."

This good brother said to me that somehow when we had shaken hands a year earlier, the Lord had healed him, and he had never needed his crutches since. He was very emotional as he related this story, and he bore witness to me that the healing had come from the Lord.

Truly the Lord bestows his love upon whom he will. This man must have been sufficiently worthy and had sufficient need that the Lord healed him in an instant in a rather unusual experience. I would ask again, has not the Lord ministered great gifts of love to each of us, and ought we not to do the same to others?

A Lonely Man in Mexico

When we lived in Mexico, we came to know a man I will call Brother Clark. He was an American who had lived in Mexico for many years and was more than eighty years of age. Perhaps because he had no family or loved ones around him, he had become a bit cranky and hard for some to get along with. Perhaps because of the love of my wife, she was able to overcome that, and after a number of visits she finally invited him to come to our home for dinner.

He was delighted to accept, with the condition that he could bring his chess board and play my sons and me. We had a pleasant dinner with him that night and enjoyed visiting with him. He'd had some tremendous challenges over his life, and he shared a few of those with us that first evening. After supper, he played chess with me on one board and with one of my older sons on another, both at the same time. He beat us both. There was no question that Brother Clark's mind was still very alert. We sang. We talked. We prayed with him. We just had a fun night.

After we took him home that evening, he called us. He said, "Brother Cook, I want you to know that is the best evening I have had with a family in my life. I had forgotten there were families like that. I want you to know I will never forget tonight." As I hung up the telephone and shared his comments with my family, we were all very moved. We had loved Brother Clark before, but we loved him even more now.

It made us sad that he thought that simple evening had been one of the greatest nights of his life. Perhaps that helped move us try to draw closer to him over the coming weeks and months.

He came to dinner and visited with us a number of times. During this time he would not come to church but he allowed the priests and deacons to bring him the sacrament in his home.

Finally, the time came for us to move back to the United States. Shortly thereafter, we received word that Brother Clark was now attending church. A month or so later we heard that Brother Clark was to be the main speaker in sacrament meeting. Finally he had become a member in good standing in the Church.

Some months later, we were saddened to hear that Brother Clark had passed away. But how happy we were to know that with assistance from us and other good Saints who loved him, he was humbled and turned to the Lord. He counted his blessings, and we counted ours for the love of God extended to all of us.

A Gift of Love and Peace through an Embrace

I will never forget another experience that occurred in Mexico. I had gone to a stake conference and held the usual meetings. In the general session Sunday morning, the young Mexican stake president stood up to speak, and he said, "I want to tell you the greatest lesson I have learned from Elder Cook."

My mind raced ahead, wondering what he was going to say. I thought, "What did he learn? Faith? Repentance? Service? Doctrine?"

He said, "I had heard that Elder Cook likes things to be done in exactness and good order. I knew that he wanted to see the results of our having increased attendance in meetings, sent youth on missions, helped people pay a full tithing, and so on. I was quite concerned and worried about it this whole weekend of conference. I had 'stewed over' it for four or five nights and did not sleep very well. I wanted everything to be just right.

"That Saturday afternoon as this General Authority came into our building and started down the hall toward me, my anxiety increased a hundredfold. I was a basket case by the time he reached me, although I am sure that he didn't realize it. He shook my hand and greeted me. Then he turned away for a moment, put his briefcase down, and came back and just threw his arms around me. He gave me a divine abrazo.

"I bear testimony that all my anxiety left me. The Spirit of the Lord filled me. I felt the love of the Lord for me and the love of this good brother for me. I bear witness that perhaps the greatest good we can do for one another is to minister love to them." This good stake president then went on to teach a powerful lesson about loving and ministering to others.

How kind the Lord was to him and to me to allow us to experience love in action together. May each of us do our best to do likewise, to administer gifts of spiritual love to the people.

A Gift of Love to a Spiritually Faltering Family

A few years ago in Mexico City, the priesthood leaders had been visiting the homes of the less active and having some tremendous results. My wife, as an area general board member, also began teaching visiting teachers about how to be true shepherds and how to invite more of the Spirit of the Lord into their visits.

On a stake conference assignment with me, she accompanied a Relief Society president on a number of visits, with tremendous success. The next morning at the Sunday session of conference, as a result of their visits, two less active families and one newly baptized family were in attendance. We were all overwhelmed in love to see the response of these Saints to the Lord and his servants, even these two good sisters, in making these visits.

Then about a year later, in a different part of the city, I was teaching a group of priesthood brethren how to make such visits. As the meeting ended and we left to make the visits, a man asked me, "Do you know me?"

I said, "I don't believe so, good brother."

He said, "No wonder. You never came to visit me." He smiled, and continued, "But your wife did."

I then recalled that he was the head of the newly converted family my wife had visited a year earlier.

He said, "May I tell you a secret? My wife and family and I had decided, the very week your wife came to visit, that we were leaving the Church. We had been offended in the ward. We were determined that we would depart from the faith and never return.

"I bear witness to you, Brother Cook, that your wife touched us with the Spirit of the Lord. We felt the love of God in her. We felt the Lord speak through her as she stirred us up in remembrance of God and our ordinances and our commitments to him. I would not be here today if it were not for her."

He then added with a smile, "You will be pleased to know that I was called just last week to be a member of a bishopric. That's why I'm in this meeting learning how to go out and visit the homes. How I wish now that I had observed more carefully how your wife ministered to us! I wish I knew better what she did to bring the Spirit so forcefully to me and my family."

The Needs of the Elderly

As a family, we decided some time ago that we would spend many of our family home evenings in service to others. One night we visited an old folks' home near our neighborhood. We talked to the head nurse and asked if there was anybody who had not had a visit for a long time. We could see by her face that she was thinking, "There are about a hundred. Which do you want?" But she did give us the names of two or three people.

We visited a woman named Joyce and a German woman named Louise. They were both in their seventies. Joyce could hardly lift her head from her pillow.

We shook hands with them and could see that though they were surprised at our visit, they were very pleased we were there. We told them we had just come to tell them we loved them and to see if we might be of any service to them that night.

Joyce told us of her problems—of the difficulties she was having with her back. Louise told us of her children and showed us a picture of them. We were prayerfully considering what to do, and after we had talked a while, I suggested we might sing a song before leaving. My wife with inspiration said, "Let's sing 'You Are My Sunshine.' " As the whole family began to sing, these two women just started weeping. I don't think anyone had told them for a long time they were anybody's sunshine.

Joyce was so touched that she sat up in her bed. They were delighted to have us sing. Others in the hallway looked in to see what was happening. Louise was particularly touched. I asked her, "Do you know a song we could sing?"

She said, "I know a German lullaby." Then she sang a beautiful lullaby to us in German. She had a beautiful voice. Needless to say, not only were they touched but we were very touched by the Spirit. Mostly I felt something happen in the hearts of my children and my wife, and in my own heart.

As the rest of the family went down the hall, one of my sons and I went into another room and visited a woman who was seated in a wheelchair. I took hold of her hand, greeted her, and told her we had just come by to say hello. She held my hand tightly and would not let go. She asked me why we were there and if we really loved her. We told her that we did and that she looked very pretty.

Another woman in the room began talking to us while she combed her hair. These lonely women just couldn't get over the fact that we would come and visit them. While we were visiting, I kind of fooled my son by pressing his hand into the hand of the woman in the wheelchair. She then grabbed hold of him and I was free. He stood there pinned by this woman who wouldn't let go of his hand. We all laughed. They just didn't want us to leave. My son looked to me for help, but I just smiled.

As we went back into the hallway, another woman was whistling. We said, "My, you have a beautiful whistle. Whistle us a song." So she whistled several songs beautifully. She whistled better than any of us.

I was touched to see my wife kneeling next to a woman in a wheelchair who could not speak. She was holding and caressing the woman's hand and talking to her. The woman was so touched that even though she couldn't speak back to her, it was evident she was receiving my wife's love. I thought to myself, "I have just seen an angel. There's a real angel kneeling alongside that woman in need. My wife is truly a Christ-like person."

On a previous visit to this old folks' home, as we were leaving the building I saw a woman in a wheelchair. I said to one of my boys, "Come on, Son, let's just go say good-bye to that lady." She was in a dark corner, and we hadn't noticed her. We went over and took her by the hand. I told her we just wanted to say we loved her and asked if we could be of any help to her.

She said, "Oh, thank you for noticing me. Thank you for noticing me. Thank you for noticing me"—three times in a row. She said, "I'm stone deaf and I cannot hear a word you are saying, but thank you for noticing me." I think just the touch of her hand made us feel that we were doing what the Savior would have done had he been there.

May the Lord bless each of us to be more committed in our own hearts to give more, to forget about self, to extend to others the hallowed, saintly, sacred gifts that Christ gave. May we keep his example in our minds. May we teach with power and conviction, not only in our words but also in the powerful example we set wherever we go.

I cannot stress too strongly the need for parents to set the example for their children in these matters, and then for the parents and children together to set the example for other families in their neighborhood. All of us, children and parents alike, learn best by example.

I bear witness that the principles of the gospel, the principles of love, are true. I think we are all struggling to know how to apply these principles. No one seems to have all the answers, but keep in mind that great pattern that Jesus gave us by what he did. If you search after that, you will find the answers of what to do.

Many times our greatest difficulty in serving others is as simple as just deciding when and to whom to go. You might find it helpful to give a calling to one of your children for a few weeks or months to be the coordinator of service projects for your family. We may know the needs better than that child, but the child can still help us plan things so we do provide the service.

Experiences in serving others will help young men and young women prepare for the significant service they will render in the future, especially in serving as full-time missionaries. In addition, these experiences will bring more love into your own family. Jealousy, negativism, and criticism will be set aside, and love will reign in your home as your children learn to serve not only people outside the home but each other as well.

President Joseph F. Smith said:

I would have it understood that I believe that the greatest law and commandment of God is to love the Lord our God with all our mind, might and strength and our neighbors as ourselves, and if this principle is observed at home the brothers and sisters will love one another; they will be kind and helpful to one another, showing forth the principle of kindness and being solicitous for one another's good. Under these circumstances the home comes nearer being a heaven on earth, and children brought up under these influences will never forget them, and though they may be in trying places, their memories will revert to the homes where they enjoyed such hallowed influences, and their better natures will assert themselves no matter what the trials or temptations may be (Gospel Doctrine, p. 295).

If we teach our children to love one another, they will never forget those teachings. The memories of serving one another will stay with them, no matter what trials or temptations they may face in the future.

In conclusion, let us go about ministering to others, doing our best to do good for all mankind. Let us teach our families to enjoy doing good, to give love for the fun of doing it, and not just from a sense of duty. If we will all give love freely and anonymously, the Lord will greatly bless us and those to whom we minister.

I believe that in the end, the thing that will matter most will be the service we have given to others.

When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me (Matthew 25:31-40).

May the Lord bless us to follow the great example of Christ in ministering to all in need, and in so doing teach our children how to follow Jesus by more fully loving God and our fellowman. May he say to us and our families, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me."
