Gene R. Cook, Raising Up a Family to the Lord ( 1993)

Conclusion

No Empty Chairs

President Ezra Taft Benson often said that his greatest objective in life was to raise up his family to the Lord. He wanted to be sure that when he passed away and his family later followed him, there would be "no empty chairs" in his heavenly home. He meant, of course, that he did not want to lose even one of his children. He meant that he would do all in his power to help save all of his children that they might have eternal life. It seems to me that this should be a worthy objective of every faithful father and mother. We ought to do all in our power to make sure there are "no empty chairs" in heaven.

When we return home to our Heavenly Father, all of us would like to hear words like these: "Well done, my good and faithful servant. Enter into your rest. You truly have been faithful in all things and now will be crowned with glory, immortality, and eternal life. You have kept the commandments, you have passed the test, you have finally returned home."

But wouldn't we also love to hear words like these? "All of your children walk in truth. You have taught them well. You have taught them of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, of repentance, of the ordinances and covenants, of prayer, of studying my holy words, and all the other essential principles and ordinances of my gospel. You have taught them of the atonement of Jesus Christ, of how to obtain the grace and forgiveness of the Lord.

"Be comforted and know that because of your love and faithful teachings and patience with each of them, there will not be one lost. In due time they will all be with you in the eternal home that you started, strengthened, and nurtured upon the earth. They will all live again here with us in the eternities. There will not be one empty chair in your family. We love you for having loved your children and my children so much. They will all be crowned with you, with glory, immortality, and eternal lives."

Can you imagine the joy and satisfaction you would feel to hear those words? That joy would be nearly impossible to describe.

In summary, how can we as parents raise up our family to the Lord? We ourselves must turn to God and turn all of our children to God. We must help them soften their hearts and teach them by the Spirit of the Lord. We must teach them to keep all the commandments. We must teach them, by our example, to follow the promptings of the Spirit of the Lord until they reach their eternal home once again. We must teach them the doctrine of the kingdom. Above all else, we must love them with all our hearts.

Parents can become discouraged or wonder if all the effort is worth it. Some parents wonder what hope they can have for a child who is not living the gospel. But there are great blessings that come from having been born under the covenant or sealed to parents as a child, as well as from the sealings that occur between husband and wife. Elder Orson F. Whitney said:

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared—and he never taught a more comforting doctrine—that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return.

They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God (Conference Report, April 1929, p. 110).

President Brigham Young by revelation said the following, emphasizing the value of temple marriage, worthiness, and the binding power of the sealing ordinances in the temple:

Let the father and mother, who are members of this Church and Kingdom, take a righteous course, and strive with all their might never to do a wrong, but to do good all their lives; if they have one child or one hundred children, if they conduct themselves towards them as they should, binding them to the Lord by their faith and prayers, I care not where those children go, they are bound up to their parents by an everlasting tie, and no power of earth or hell can separate them from their parents in eternity; they will return again to the fountain from whence they sprang (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:90-91).

May the Lord bless us to give our very best effort to raising up our families to the Lord. I think in some respects we do not understand clearly who the generation is that we are raising up to the Lord. Many of us have children who may well be present when the Lord comes. May this desire of Alma and of John for their children be true of us as well:

My son, I trust that I shall have great joy in you, because of your steadiness and your faithfulness unto God; . . . I say unto you, my son, that I have had great joy in thee already, because of thy faithfulness (Alma 38:2-3).

I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth (3 John 1:4).

May the Lord bless us to lead our children to the Lord, to love them, to cheer them up, to encourage them, and to support them. May he bless us to spend time with them, to teach them and prepare them for this life and, more important, for the life to come.

May the Lord bless us with the gift of sensing the thoughts and intents of our children's hearts, to be able to feel what they are feeling. May we be blessed to sense anything that may be out of order in their lives and then assist them, through the Spirit of the Lord, in putting it back in order. Above all else, may we be true to the Lord, working with him under the direction of his Spirit, to assist in the exaltation of all his children. May this promise from the Lord be true for us as parents: "For I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my spirit shall be in your hearts, and my angels round about you, to bear you up."

May the Lord bless the great parents of Zion, including the single parents and all who are struggling so valiantly to raise up their families to the Lord. May this blessing be extended to you in such a way that as you pass through the veil, you will find no empty chairs in your family circle. May the Lord bless all of us to that end, I sincerely pray in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.
