During a family scripture study focused on the New Testament book of James, I asked our two young sons, ages 9 and 7, if they knew the impact of James chapter 1 verse 5 in the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

As I suspected, they replied they didn’t.

I invited them to tell me what they knew about the Prophet Joseph Smith, and they shared his account of desiring to know which church was right and praying for an answer.

I then related that the scripture that prompted Joseph’s prayer was James 1:5.

We slowly read together this passage which states: “If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him”.

It is clear that the answer to Joseph Smith’s prayer as he acted on the invitation of James strengthened his belief and knowledge that prayers are answered and are essentially communication with a loving Heavenly Father.

I believe Joseph’s faith in the power of prayer was strengthened as he completed the assignment to translate the Book of Mormon into English by the gift and power of God.

From the book’s beginning to its end, there are countless examples of individuals and groups reaching heavenward and having their requests and petitions granted.

One striking example can be illustrated in the life of Enos, who authored the one-chapter book that bears his name.

Enos’ account opens with him paying tribute to his father, Jacob for a truly exemplary relationship, great parenting, and a loving home environment which included being brought up “in the nurture and admonition of the Lord”.

Enos then illustrates a remarkable experience in his life where he learned that he could communicate with Heavenly Father through prayer.

“​Behold, I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the words which I had often heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the ​​​joy​ of the saints, ​​​sunk​ deep into my heart.

​​​​​“And my soul ​​​hungered​; and I ​​​kneeled​ down before my Maker, and I ​​​cried​ unto him in mighty ​​​prayer​ and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens.

​​​​​“​And there came a ​​​voice​ unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are ​​​forgiven​ thee, and thou shalt be blessed.”

Years of being tutored and watching the example of his father was confirmed in this experience where Enos poured out his heart to Heavenly Father seeking help and assurance in his assignment and got the sweet privilege of getting an answer to his prayer.

Enos walked away from that experience knowing that he can communicate with Heavenly Father through prayer.

The Bible Dictionary sets forth how prayer can help strengthen our relationship with Heavenly Father in the following text.

“As soon as we learn the true relationship in which we stand toward God (namely, God is our Father, and we are His children), then at once prayer becomes natural and instinctive on our part (​Matt. 7:7–11​). Many of the so-called difficulties about prayer arise from forgetting this relationship. Prayer is the act by which the will of the Father and the will of the child are brought into correspondence with each other.”

President Russell M. Nelson invited all to include enhanced prayers as a way of thinking celestial.

“As you think celestial, your heart will gradually change. You will want to pray more often and more sincerely. Please don’t let your prayers sound like a shopping list. The Lord’s perspective transcends your mortal wisdom. His response to your prayers may surprise you and will help you to think celestial…

“Our prayers can be—and should be—living discussions with our Heavenly Father.”

President Nelson’s counsel to let our prayers become living discussions with heaven adds a layer to the teachings of the Book of Mormon prophet Jacob.

Jacob teaches that scripture study coupled with prayer can bring each of us to the point where we literally counsel with the Lord.

“Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of ​​​prophecy​; and having all these ​​​witnesses​ we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can ​​​command​ in the ​​​name​ of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea. …

“Wherefore, brethren, seek not to ​​​counsel​ the Lord, but to take counsel from his hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that he counseleth in ​​​wisdom​, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all his works.”

One sure way to seek counsel from the Lord is to reach out to Him in prayer with the assurance that He considers prayer as a two-way communication with Him and always answers in ways beyond the imagination of the petitioner.

He cherishes His relationship with us and is ever merciful to reach out in response to our prayer.

The author George Manwaring summed up this principle in the hymn titled “Joseph Smith’s First Prayer”

Oh, how lovely was the morning!
Radiant beamed the sun above.
Bees were humming, sweet birds singing,
Music ringing thru the grove,
When within the shady woodland
Joseph sought the God of love,
When within the shady woodland
Joseph sought the God of love.

​​​​​Humbly kneeling, sweet appealing—
’Twas the boy’s first uttered prayer—
When the pow’rs of sin assailing
Filled his soul with deep despair;
But undaunted, still he trusted
In his Heav’nly Father’s care,
But undaunted, still he trusted
In his Heav’nly Father’s care.

​​​​​​Suddenly a light descended,
Brighter far than noonday sun,
And a shining, glorious pillar
O’er him fell, around him shone,
​​​​While appeared two heav’nly beings,
God the Father and the Son,
While appeared two heav’nly beings,
God the Father and the Son.

“Joseph, this is my Beloved;
Hear him!” Oh, how sweet the word!
Joseph’s humble prayer was answered,
And he listened to the Lord.
​​​​Oh, what rapture filled his bosom,
For he saw the living God,
Oh, what rapture filled his bosom,
For he saw the living God.

From the beginning of the world, Heavenly Father has consistently demonstrated that to those who reach out to Him in prayer, answers will come in remarkable ways.

Whether seeking greater light and wisdom like Joseph Smith, looking for reassurance as in the case of Enos or merely seeking to know the will of the Father for our lives, He is ever available and will respond to the earnest desires of our heart.

The Savior’s promise that “all ye that labor and are heavy laden” can find rest to their souls is certainly an assurance that we can communicate with Heavenly Father through prayer.

May each of us find solace and comfort in the promise of our Savior and Master Jesus Christ as we look unto Him in every thought, doubting not, and fearing not and this is possible through the means of daily prayer.
