eUrOPe

Olbia

One Queen, Two Identities

After Vashti is stripped of her crown, the king finds a new queen: a young, beautiful

Black Sea

woman whose identity seems irrelevant at the time. Her name is Esther. On

Mordecai’s instructions, Esther hides her Jewish identity and successfully blends into

Caspian

skodra Sinop Byzantium

Sea

to the Persian culture. The king is so pleased with his new queen that he throws a

Pteria arMeNIa

great banquet in her honor and proclaims a holiday throughout all the provinces.

Sardes

EphesusSardeS CaPPadOCIa Van

BaCTrIaNa

Naxos

Tigris River

HYrCaNIa

What’s In A Name?

CYPrUS Salamis aSSYrIa Euphrates River MedIa ParTHIa The books of Daniel and Esther both depict life for Jews in exile. They show that

Jews in prominent places had both Hebrew and Babylonian names.

Cyrene Mediterranean Sea Sidon Damas eLaM BaBYLONIa

Tyre

Susa

SaGarTIa

LYBIa

Jerusalem araBIa Babylonia

PerSIa Hebrew Name Meaning Alternate Name Meaning

Memphis

Pasargadae

Persepolis

eGYPT Nile River

Daniel

God is my judge Belteshazzar

Bel protect his life. (Bel is

Persian

another name for Marduk.)

Gulf

Extension of the

Persian Empire

Hadassah Myrtle Esther

Star

Royal Road Elephantine

(No Jewish name

Mordecai

Related to the Babylonian

mentioned)

chief god Marduk

Persia

in the 6th century Persia became the dominant power of the ancient world King Xerxes (486-465 bc) In 722 Why Were the Jews in Persia? bc. Under the leadership of Cyrus the

bc the powerful king of Assyria, Sargon II, conquered and destroyed

Great, the Persian Empire (also known as the Achaemenid

Empire) conquered Babylon in 539 bc. Besides being a • Called Ahasuerus in Samaria. Almost two hundred years later, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,

conquered the kingdom of Judah.

brilliant warrior and conqueror, Cyrus was also a great the Bible

politician. He created a policy to send people previously • Known for his war From 597 bc through 586 bc, Nebuchadnezzar systematically undermined Judah homelands. conquered in Babylonian and Assyrian times back to their against the Greeks: Despite until he destroyed Jerusalem and its temple.

The “Cyrus Cylinder” his famous loss at the To avoid rebellion and exert complete dominance, both Assyria and Babylonia proclaims Cyrus as Battle of Thermopylae in deported people. By uprooting people from their land and their gods, they were Babylon. It also the legitimate king of 480 BC (the basis for the easier to control. Some of the Jews who were taken from their homes during these describes how Cyrus famed Leonidas of Sparta years went to Persia.

God’s presence in the Jerusalem temple was a direct source of assurance and security

and favor of the won the respect and his 300 warriors), for the Israelites, God’s chosen people. If God was with them and dwelt among them, Babylonian priests Xerxes led his armies to who could dare challenge them? However, the Babylonians not only conquered when he restored the sack Athens.

them but also destroyed their temple. Because every region had its own local gods,

© Arvel Witte

temples in Babylon. • A year later, however, the wars were also representations of divine wars. In conquering Judah, the Babylonians

The Bible portrays Cyrus as God’s instrument to free and Greeks expelled the Persian could claim that their god, Marduk, was superior to the Jewish God, Yahweh—a

tremendous spiritual blow to the Jews (see for example 2 Kings 18:31–35).

restore the Jews to the Promised Land (Ezra 1:1–6, 6:1–5; army from the Greek

Isaiah 44:23–45:8; 2 Chronicles 36:22–23). Thus, a group islands to Asia Minor. Exiled Jews not only lost their homes and their land, but also the certainty of God’s of Jews returned to Jerusalem to rebuild the walls and • Much of the information presence. In light of this desperation and spiritual grief, the words of the prophet the temple around 515 bc. Other Jews, like Mordecai and about this war comes Isaiah echo powerfully: “Comfort, comfort my people, says your God” (Isaiah 40:1). Esther, remained in Persia.

The Persians remained in power until 330 bc when from the accounts of the When King Cyrus allowed the Jews to return to Jerusalem about 70 years later, an

event Isaiah prophesied as God’s own action (Isaiah 44:28–45:13), many who had

Alexander the Great, the Macedonian conqueror, defeated historian Herodotus.

already begun a new life in exile stayed in Babylon and Persia.

the armies of Darius III and occupied Persepolis, the

capital of the Persian Empire.

This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet Esther ISBN 9781596363113. The full-color, glossy, and easy-to-understand pamphlet brings © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but do not post on

© 2008 Rose This free Bible e-Chart is just 2 pages taken from the 14-page pamphlet Esther that includes charts illustrating the theme, Bible overview, historical Click here to receive FREE Rose Bible

a message of hope through this biblical story to all who face trouble by showing how God works even through the fears and dangers. Save the internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for Free Rose

Publishing Inc. background, strengths and weaknesses of each character in the story, symbolism of the two banquets, each character’s life lessons, the irony of human e-Charts via email.

www.rose-publishing.com choices and God’s power, and the important historical and cultural events going on in other parts of the world during the life of Esther. ISBN 9781596363113. www.rose-publishing.com

$5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Women of the Bible: Old Testament

Many women in the Bible became unexpected

heroines and were surprising instruments in God’s

story. Women of the Bible: Old Testament looks at 11

women in the Bible, featuring women such as Sarah,

Hagar, Miriam, Rahab, and Esther.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596361713 ...........$3.99

Also available as PDF and PowerPoint®.

Feasts of the Bible

Throughout the Old Testament, God commanded the

children of Israel to observe his holy days (holidays)

to remember the mighty things that he had done in

the lives of Israel’s forefathers. The Feasts of the Bible

pamphlet celebrates and explains the meaning behind

the different feasts and why they are important to God.

Pamphlet............9781890947583............$3.99

Esther

Also available as PDF, in Spanish, andf eBook.

It’s easy to dismiss Queen Esther as the lucky orphan girl who won the

heart of the king. But in reality, she was a young woman with a tragic

background and dangerous secret that could cost her life and the lives of

Christ in the Passover

her family. Esther had to keep a low profile, keeping her secret, and hoping

The Passover is the Old Testament feast that

her enemy wouldn’t make the connection. For Esther, life was unfair. But

celebrates and remembers God’s liberation of Israel

her story brings a message of hope to all who face trouble by showing

from Egypt. It also foreshadow’s Christ’s sacrifice on

how God works even through the fears and dangers. There can be happy

the cross. In just 14 pages, you will learn the history

endings in perilous times!

of this special day and the symbolism in the Passover

that points to Jesus Christ.

Pamphlet ....................9781596363113 ................$3.99

Also available as a PDF and in Spanish. Quantity discounts available.

............................ 9781596361850 ...........$3.99

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
