Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Introduction

IF THERE IS A GOD IN heaven and if we are his children, as holy writ attests, then he must have a plan for our salvation, for surely the purpose of our creation must reach beyond the experiences of this mortal state. And if indeed he has a plan for our salvation, it must follow as the night the day that those entrusted with that saving knowledge receive it with the sacred covenant that they will share it with all who will listen. Again, we would reason that if there be but one God, there can be but one plan of salvation and that all his children have equal claim upon its blessings. Surely no church could profess to be his Church without at the same time professing the responsibility to take the gospel given them to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we have been entrusted with the message of salvation and the commission to take that message to the ends of the earth. To do so, we must have a clear and certain understanding of what we are to teach. We cannot teach what we do not know, any more than we can come back from where we have not been. Ours is the message of the Restoration. It is founded on the testimony that the Father and the Son appeared to the youthful Joseph Smith in a grove, now called sacred, in the spring of 1820. That event signaled the beginning of a great gospel dispensation, one destined to embrace the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ in its pristine purity once again to the earth. That restored gospel is our message.

The rock upon which the latter-day Church of Jesus Christ rests is not the revelation of Christ to Peter or to the meridian Twelve. It is the revelation of Christ to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove coupled with the revelation of Christ to each individual member. We are not borrowing the testimony of the ancients. We stand independent. Our testimony is immediate and personal. It is of a God who lives and manifests himself to the pure in heart in this day as he did in ages past. We glory in the testimony of prophets of ages past, but we do not seek salvation in the promises made to others. We know God other than by hearsay. The house of our understanding is fashioned like that of the Saints of earlier ages, but the stones of our faith are of our own cutting: like them we have living prophets, and like them we have a God who speaks.

We part paths with historical Christianity in that we believe that shortly after the death of Christ and his apostles, there was a universal apostasy, or corrupting of the doctrines of Christ, and a subsequent loss of the authority to minister in his name. Just as there is no salvation in the worship of a false Christ, so there can be no salvation in corrupted doctrines or false priesthoods. If it can successfully be argued otherwise, there is no need for the real Jesus or pure doctrines. If salvation can be had independent of Christ or by the acceptance of false notions of him or his doctrines, then his ministry and word are without purpose. We exist as his Church because we believe that a true knowledge of Christ, the purity of his doctrines, and the authority to act in his name were restored to the earth through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In the context of missionary work, or the labor of sharing the restored gospel, if someone were to say to us, "I accept your message and believe what you are teaching to be true except the part about Christ," we could only conclude that he had missed the heart and soul of our message. In the gospel cause, to believe the right things for the wrong reasons or even to do right things for the wrong reasons—whatever those reasons might be—is to cast the seeds of faith by the wayside where they can neither obtain depth of root nor produce good fruits. Again, if someone were to say, "I can accept everything you teach except the part about Joseph Smith," we would know that he had not understood the message we have been commissioned to teach. We could hardly imagine someone claiming to have embraced Judaism while rejecting "the part about Moses." To embrace the law of Moses, in any meaningful way, certainly requires the acceptance of Moses as the Lord's prophet and the covenant spokesman. Were it not for Moses, there could be no law of Moses. That, however, does not justify confusing the messenger with the message. Ancient Israel did not expect to find salvation in Moses, nor do they today. They did, however, expect to be blessed by obedience to the law, or covenant, that Moses brought in the name, or authority, of God. To reject Moses would be to reject that authority. As with Moses, so with Joseph Smith. We cannot reject him and profess to accept the message he brought. He stands at the head of the greatest of all gospel dispensations, and every valid testimony must be founded on the witness of the Spirit that Joseph Smith is the revelator of Christ for all that live in this dispensation and that he is the conduit of restored authority for every ordinance of salvation that is performed.

This truth is simple enough to illustrate. Every priesthood holder should be able to trace his priesthood back to Christ himself. In this dispensation no one can do so without going through Joseph Smith. To be of "efficacy, virtue, or force" in this world or the next, all ordinances must be performed by authority restored to Joseph Smith and under the direction of keys given to him. Every doctrine and ordinance of salvation that we profess as a Church traces itself to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Simply stated, he links us to Christ. We do not baptize in the name of Joseph Smith, or administer the sacrament in his name, or pray to him or any other supposed saint. Our faith is in Christ, and Joseph Smith is his great witness and spokesman for this dispensation. Just as you cannot talk about the events of Sinai without talking about Moses, so we cannot testify of the restored gospel without testifying of the divine role played by Joseph Smith.

In sharing our message, we find those who fear that if we mention Joseph Smith, we will be accused of worshiping him rather than Christ. Two observations ought to be made in response to such feelings. First, any response that is born of fear is devoid of the Spirit. Second, we can hardly profess to be on the Lord's errand, to be his messengers, if we let the adversary dictate our agenda. If someone can find a doctrine that does not make the minions of hell protest, then he has found a doctrine that does not matter. A doctrine that Satan does not seek to distort and attack is hardly worth preaching. Those that he rants the most about are obviously those he fears the most and thus the ones we ought to be preaching the most.

If we attempt to hide every doctrine that our critics distort, we are going to be left speechless. It is as if we revel in the fruits of the gospel but are ashamed of the tree from which they come. That notion reminds me of a woman I met in Jerusalem some years ago. She professed a belief in the prophets of the Old Testament while proclaiming herself an atheist. Somehow it never dawned on her that there isn't any reason to have a prophet who is supposed to be God's spokesman if there is no God. What she was really saying was that she was angry with God for the Holocaust and so had rejected him. The ancient prophets were not responsible for her suffering, and so she continued to reverence them. Hers was a contorted form of reasoning, but no more so than those who attempt to dissociate the fruits of the restored gospel from the reality of the First Vision or the role of the Prophet who stands at its head.

It is fashionable among many attempting to share our message to first seek common ground with those they desire to teach. That is a rather strange notion. Can you imagine a salesman attempting to convince you that his product is just like the one you are using? If he is right, why in the world would you want to change? I witnessed a perfect illustration of this approach in a priesthood meeting in a small branch. The missionaries had an investigator present. He was a very intelligent and fine man who was active in the Catholic faith. During the meeting the branch members did everything they could think of to convince this man that we, as Latter-day Saints, were just like him. They succeeded. At the end of the meeting he got up, walked out the door, and never came back. He told the missionaries on the way out he could see no reason to leave an established church to join one that was trying so hard to be just like what he already had.

Our inconsistencies may be more apparent to others than they are to us. A letter recently addressed to the editor of a Utah Valley newspaper by a local pastor illustrates this point. Bearing the title "On Common Ground," it chided Latter-day Saints for not knowing where they stood. "Most Mormons I meet," the minister wrote, "seem to be looking for common ground with the Christian community at large. Mormonism then relates to the outside world in two ways. On the one hand, there is the desire for acceptance, the desire to be able to say, 'We are Christians too.' [The not-too-subtle implication here is that Mormons are not Christians.] On the other hand, there is the actual theology of Mormonism that grows out of the idea of the Apostasy and the belief that the LDS Church is the restoration of Christ's one true Church. This theology motivates the missionary movement of the LDS Church, which seeks to win converts from churches that are a part of apostate Christianity. The two different approaches are not compatible. What I find myself asking is why the LDS Church is so intent on finding common ground with the very churches it considers to be apostate? Why does it seek acceptance from the very people it seeks to convert?"

The minister's criticism is a little embarrassing. It gives us the feeling that we have been caught. Certainly we want to avoid giving offense and of course we want to be accepted as Christians, but at what cost? Should we trade our birthright to be thought acceptable by a corrupted form of Christianity? And what becomes of our faith if we embrace the notion that we are sharing common ground with the churches of the world? In religion classes that I teach at Brigham Young University I have found with some consistency that if I say, "We are members of the only true and living Church on the face of the earth," not even a ripple passes through the classroom. If, on the other hand, I say, "We believe all other churches to be false," I can expect someone to take offense at my intemperate and intolerant expression. It is as if we thought we could stand for something without being against anything. It is as if we could pick up one side of a stick while leaving the other undisturbed.

The message of the Restoration centers on the idea that it is not common ground we seek in sharing the gospel. There is nothing common about our message. The way we answer questions about our faith ought to be by finding the quickest and most direct route to the Sacred Grove. That is our ground. It is sacred ground. It is where the heavens are opened and the God of heaven speaks. It is where testimonies are born and the greatest truths of heaven are unveiled. It is of this sacred ground that we say, here we stand.
