Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter One

A Sure Foundation

Remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall.

—Helaman 5:12

THE CHRISTIAN FAITH has always claimed to be in possession of a body of truth that exceeds in dignity and value all other knowledge. It responds to the most important issues of our existence. It reconciles humankind to God, teaching not only of his character and attributes but how we may commune with Deity and obtain both communal and individual revelation of his will. It explains the origin of the universe and of humanity. It answers such questions as, Where did we come from? Why do we exist on this earth? and What becomes of us at death? It is an unmatched source of peace and assurance. It gives meaning, purpose, and direction to all that we do. It embraces a saving provision, which, if properly acted upon, has the effect of establishing a filial relationship with God, of changing character, and conveying a promise of life beyond the grave in conditions of endless happiness.

Building a Sure Foundation

How, it ought be asked, is the Christian claim to the truths of salvation to be sustained? That is, how are we to know that God is the source of the answers that are being given in his name? I suggest there are three essential parts to the answer to this question. The first is to establish the authority of the agent through whom the message comes. Only if the agent is trustworthy should serious consideration be given to his message. Second, the message must evidence itself. That is, it must have the ring of truth. It must have a light and power of its own. Third, it must give offense where offense ought to be given. The principle here is the simple verity that we cannot do the Lord's work without offending the adversary. If there are truths that lead to salvation, then of necessity they will be opposed by falsehoods that lead to damnation.

Jesus as the Messenger of Salvation

In establishing his claim of being the promised Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth professed no authority from the Jews. In priesthood and doctrine he stood independent. All that he espoused professed divine revelation as its source. We are told that "he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him" (JST Matthew 3:25). When he taught, "the Jews marveled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" (John 7:15), which is to say, how is it that one who has not been to our schools and trained for the ministry can have such understanding?

Matthew tells us that Jesus taught as "one having authority, and not as the scribes" (Matthew 7:29). The rabbis knew no authority save that of tradition; they could quote endlessly from those of ages past but made no pretense to priesthood or the spirit of prophecy. The Joseph Smith Translation rendering of Matthew 7:29 states that Christ taught as one "having authority from God, and not as having authority from the Scribes" (JST Matthew 7:37). Again, Jesus said, "As my Father hath taught me, I speak these things" (John 8:28). Christ had the audacity to edit and even eclipse scripture. Repeatedly, in the Sermon on the Mount, he said, "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time," and then, having quoted something from the law of Moses, he would say, "but I say unto you" and give differing instruction (Matthew 5:21; see also vv. 22, 27, 28, 32, 34, 39, 44). In each of these instances, he was forcing a choice between the loyalty his disciples had for scripture and the loyalty they had for him as the living voice of God. Many have argued about the authority that Christ professed. Their arguments can be sustained only by denying the legitimacy of the scriptural texts that have been preserved for us. If one is paying attention, it is hard to miss the implications of such statements as "I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city" (Matthew 23:34). If Christ is the one who sends the prophets, as he declares, he must hold a position of authority over those whom he sends.

Where the prophets would have said, "Hear the word of the Lord," Jesus said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you" and proceeded to establish the word of the Lord. This expression could just as well have been translated, "Amen, Amen, I say unto you." We expect to find "Amen" at the end of a sermon. Jesus often used it to introduce what he was going to say. The difference is that the prophets were speaking in the name of God; he was speaking as God. [^1]

As offensive as this practice was to the Jews, had Christ done anything less than speak by the authority of the Father, it could hardly have been supposed that he was the Hope of Israel, their long-sought Redeemer, the Savior of all mankind. The prophetic description of the Messiah recorded by Moses embraced the promise that he would speak the words God placed in his mouth (see Deuteronomy 18:18). In fulfillment of that promise, as Jesus concluded his earthly ministry, he reported to the Father, "I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me" (John 17:8).

It is true that Christ taught from the Jewish scriptures but only to the extent that those records had not been perverted (see JST Luke 11:53). He interpreted scripture by the Spirit of revelation, finding in them truths hidden from the understanding of their Jewish caretakers. He also meticulously observed the law of Moses but only as that law was given by Moses. He had no use for the uninspired trappings in which the Pharisees and rabbis had wrapped it (see Mark 7). He called them hypocrites and said they fit the words of Isaiah when he said: "This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men" (Matthew 15:8-9). He rejected the authority of the temple priests and yet submitted himself to the baptism of John, who had been ordained by an angel of the Lord to "overthrow the kingdom of the Jews" (D&C 84:28). Indeed, he described the religious leaders of his day as "whited sepulchres" (Matthew 23:27) and prefigured their destruction with the cursing of the fig tree (Mark 11:12-14, 20-24).

Christ stood independent of the wisdom of men, as have his people in all ages. The true followers of Christ do not seek justification for their faith in the doctrines or practices of others. While respecting the law and freely rendering unto Caesar that which was Caesar's (see Matthew 22:21), the Savior sought no alliance with earthly kingdoms. "God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are" (1 Corinthians 1:27-28). Such is the profile of Christ, "the messenger of salvation" (D&C 93:8), and such is the profile of all who truly come in his name.

The Message of Salvation

Having given a brief profile of the Messenger of Salvation, let us now, in like manner, briefly profile the message of salvation. "Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion" (D&C 132:8). Could it be otherwise? Are the doctrines of salvation, like the creeds of men, to be the children of contention? Are they to be determined by the councils of men? Are they to rest upon philosophical speculations? Can they be in constant flux, ever changing? Are they for sale? Are they negotiable? Can they be contradictory? Are they to favor a chosen few? Do they justify persecution of the nonbeliever? Each affirmative answer given to such questions, as they have been given by historical Christianity, affirms anew our testimony of a universal apostasy.

"Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?" (D&C 132:9). Many have professed the right to speak for God and to perform ordinances in his name. Many of these profess the Bible as their source of authority. If the powers of heaven can be obtained in such a manner, what of civil authority? Would reverence for Blackstone's book of laws grant one the right to enter into treaties with other nations or empower one with the authority to bestow citizenship or, better still, to impose taxes? Would not a principle that made havoc of earthly governments have the same effect upon a heavenly one? Others profess a certificate of authority granted by a school or community. We ask, What school can empower its graduates to remit sins, resurrect the dead, and speak for God? In it all, we are left to wonder why people recognize the necessity of authority at all levels of society and in all kingdoms save only the kingdom of God, which announces itself to be a house of order.

"Will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?" (D&C 132:10-11). And so we have it: all principles of salvation must trace themselves directly to the God of heaven. Further, they must be absolute and eternal; that is, the price appended to heavenly treasures must be everlastingly the same. They cannot be granted to those of one age at a price either greater or lesser than that of another age.

Revelation both ancient and modern affirms that the gospel was taught to all the children of God long before their birth into mortality (see Alma 13:3; D&C 132:11). I have no recollection of such a thing, one may argue, but when the truths of salvation are declared, the honest in heart sense a distant echo from the past; the memory of the heart is quickened, and a reunion of spirits takes place. "My sheep hear my voice," the Savior declared. "I know them, and they follow me" (John 10:27). All people have been born with sufficient of the light of Christ to find their way to the waters of everlasting life and even to the fountainhead, if it is their desire to make the journey (see D&C 84:46-47).

Those Who Opposed Christ

Among the Jews at the time of Christ, the source of divine authority was said to be the law of Moses and the oral traditions that were also traced to Sinai. "And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel" (Exodus 34:27). Thus the revelation of Sinai was held to be of two parts: the written law and the commentary on that which was written ("the tenor of these words"), which together were to constitute God's covenant with his chosen people. It was held that the oral law was faithfully transmitted from generation to generation in an unbroken chain: "Moses received the Law from Sinai and committed it to Joshua, and Joshua to the elders, and the elders to the Prophets; and the Prophets committed it to the men of the Great Synagogue." [^2]

It was after the death of Christ and his apostles that the oral tradition was first committed to writing in the Mishnah and the Talmud. It was the oral tradition that made Pharisaism the source of authority in official Judaism. It was tradition, not the law, by which the rabbis made countless additions to the revelation of Sinai. The traditions were born, at least such was the pretense, as a fence around the law. They in turn gave birth to the scholarship of the rabbis, for only one well learned in the law could divine the multitude of traditions. Jacob, brother of Nephi, though a continent away, described by the Spirit of prophecy this pattern of apostasy: "The Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for God hath taken away his plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot understand, because they desired it. And because they desired it God hath done it, that they may stumble" (Jacob 4:14).

It was not the law given on Sinai that governed the people to whom Christ and his disciples preached but the traditions that like wild vines had overgrown it. "The Law—not the Law in its simplicity but the Law modified, transformed, distorted by Tradition—the Law robbed of its essential significance by the blind zeal which professed to defend it—became the centre of an abject servility. It came to be regarded as the only means of intercourse with God, and almost as the substitute for God. Immeasurable evils ensued. Piety dwindled into legalism. Salvation was identified with outward conformity." [^3] Pharisaism reigned supreme. So important did study of religious traditions become that it would yet be said by one of the famed rabbis that God himself spent three hours a day studying Torah. [^4]

The cycle of events is as easy to identify as the cycle of the seasons. That which had been written by the finger of God on Sinai was to govern the people, but someone must explain that which had been written. What does the Law mean and how is it to be applied? The oral tradition became the answer, giving definition and form to the law. Thus, what began as a supplement to the law was gradually substituted for it, and because the rabbis were the interpreters of tradition, they became the voice of God to his people. Farrar said it well: "Claiming too much for the Law the Rabbis left it too little. By adding to God's commandments so largely they also took from them. By imposing additional restrictions they broke down proper safeguards." [^5]

When scribes succeeded prophets, tradition superseded priesthood, and revelation ceased. Liberty of thought was abrogated by the trained religious leader who stood between his people and the God of heaven. Instead of truth making people free, error made them slaves to an unyielding orthodoxy. The rabbinic yoke was much larger and heavier than the one forged by their Roman captors, for it dominated the whole existence of a person, intruding into even the most trivial actions of daily life. Thus Christ was rejected in the name of loyalty to the law that he himself had given as a preparatory gospel for him. Faced with the choice between loyalty to their traditions and hearkening to a Living Voice, the greater part of the people chose tradition.

It may be difficult to determine which is the most destructive to the soul, spiritual lethargy or excessive zeal, though it can be said that the chances are greater that the lethargic soul will awaken and correct his course than that the excessively zealous soul will seek an appropriate spiritual balance. Having declared the principles of salvation, the Savior warned: "And whoso shall declare more or less than this, and establish it for my doctrine, the same cometh of evil, and is not built upon my rock; but he buildeth upon a sandy foundation, and the gates of hell stand open to receive such when the floods come and the winds beat upon them" (3 Nephi 11:40).

That For Which We Look

Having identified the three principles that combined to bring assurance to those of the meridian day, namely a credible source, a message of light and truth, and the opposition of the kingdom of darkness, we now proceed to the matter of applying those principles to our own day. We begin with the principle of a credible source. Following the scriptural pattern, we look for a prophet, one with the same rugged independence from the kingdoms and powers of the world that typified the prophets and apostles of both the Old and the New Testaments. We do not look for reformers. Theirs was a courageous work, but they did not profess the kind of authority that has been distinctive to those holding the prophetic office. Reformers speak for a disgruntled society; prophets speak for God. Similarly, we do not look for men of letters. The wisdom of men is hardly that of heaven. "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts" (Isaiah 55:8-9).

For whom, then, do we look? We look for someone who stands independent of extant religious traditions. We look for someone untutored in the ways of men but known to God. We look for someone who again can say, "Thus saith the Lord," someone whose knowledge of heavenly things comes not from books but from experience. We look for someone who dreams dreams, sees visions, entertains angels, pens scripture, and professes all spiritual gifts and signs that we have been assured will follow them that believe. And what of his message? How are we to know it? Given that truth is everlastingly the same, the message of a true messenger will accord with that spoken by all the holy prophets since the world began. Thus in one of the earliest revelations ever recorded we read these words: "I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh. . . . If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of Mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you" (Moses 6:51-52).

The economy of heaven is not in disarray, nor are the fruits of righteousness seasonal. With God there is constancy, and if God is the same, then the ordinances of salvation are the same, and the faith and obedience required for their purchase must be the same. And what then of the opposition to such truths? We have every assurance it too will be the same, for light and darkness will never meet.

Light Cleaveth unto Light

There are so many forms of Christianity in the world today that it has been suggested that the term Christianities would be more accurate. It is generally supposed that this is a wholesome thing quite acceptable to the original Author. We will consider this matter in Chapter 8, but for the moment let it suffice to say that the Lord's house cannot be a house of confusion. There are no bargains where eternal principles are concerned. To suggest that such is the case is to change the principles. You can dress truth up in a variety of ways, but you cannot change it and still have it be the truth. Jesus of Nazareth marked a course for all humankind to follow. That path alone leads to the salvation he promised. To follow any other path, no matter how slight the change in direction may initially seem, is to pursue a different course and thus to follow a different Christ. There is no salvation in following false Christs.

What ought to be immediately identifiable as a corrupt form of Christianity is any doctrine that cannot bear examination—a doctrine shrouded in the guise of mystery or one that is so incomprehensible that even when pounded on an anvil cannot resemble anything that fell from the lips of the Savior or those commissioned by him. Light and truth are the glory of God, not darkness and ignorance. Certainly there are things we do not presently understand. Our life's labor is to reduce their number. What we don't do is worship them. When the wise men from the East sought the Christ Child, they followed the light of a heaven-sent star. Without that light they would have been left to wander in the dark.

The Truths of Salvation Are Accessible to All

Two absolute and eternal truths are involved here. First, when matters of salvation are at stake, the channels through which the waters of everlasting life flow must be accessible to all. True it is that Moses ascended Sinai alone to stand in the presence of God, but having done so, he sought to sanctify his people that they might behold "the face of God" (D&C 84:20-24). The true test of a prophet is not in his conveying the revelations given him but in his qualifying his followers to receive their own. "Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets," Moses said, "and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Numbers 11:29). It was "a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" that he sought to create (Exodus 19:6). Like Christ's, his doctrine was not "reverence me" but "follow me" (Matthew 4:19; 8:22; 9:9). There is nothing exclusive in the invitation to "ask of God," save it be done in sincerity and with real intent (see James 1:5-6; Moroni 10:4). The true and living God is no respecter of persons (see Acts 10:34).

Second, the truth of every revelation from heaven will be found within the revelation itself. Truth has its own spirit, and that spirit is identifiable to all who have eyes to see and ears to hear. The truths of salvation are not hidden in a heavenly monastery to be unveiled after our mortal sojourn. Eternal life is found in knowing God, not in ignorance of him (see John 17:3). The best defense of truth is simply to state it.

When a religious leader forbids members of his congregation to speak to those of other faiths, which frequently happens, we are left to wonder what he is hiding. Well might we ask, Has he left his parishioners without a message to share with others? Is their faith so frail that it does not bear examination? Only a false religion would demand acceptance without examination. True religion requires all to ask of God, for all must gain sufficient faith to stand and walk alone.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See W. P. Paterson, The Rule of Faith (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1912), pp. 31-35.
[^2] Edward Backhouse, Early Church History to the Death of Constantine, ed. Charles Tylor (London, 1884), pp. 417-18.
[^3] See Jacques Le Goff, The Birth of Purgatory, trans. Arthur Goldhammer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984), p. 4.
[^4] See F. L. Cross, ed., The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990), p. 692.
[^5] Paterson, Rule of Faith, pp. 35-37.
