Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter Two

The Rule of Faith

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

—Doctrine and Covenants 84:19

IN SCRIPTURE AND ALL TRUE theology, the word faith is used to link us with those principles that are assuredly and certainly true. The rule of faith is the message, the word, or the revelation upon which all else rests. The rule of faith is government by unalterable truths. Faith does not and cannot stand alone; it obtains life only as an expression of belief in a given principle. The power of faith comes from the principle to which it is appended. For instance, we do not properly speak of faith alone but rather of faith in Christ. Only when the object of faith becomes Christ does faith obtain the power of salvation. Were the object of our faith a falsehood, then the power accrued could only be that which comes from false or nonexistent principles.

If there are no absolute truths, no fixed principles that are the object of our faith, then there can be no faith. Our faith may be uncertain or weak, but the principle to which it is appended cannot. Thus faith cannot be exercised in principles that are untrue, nor can the principles in which it is exercised be changed. The spirit that directs self-styled intellectuals in their efforts to redefine established principles and thus change the rule of faith is the same spirit that motivated Lucifer in the grand Council in Heaven. Their efforts, like his, are to dispose of the plan of the Father for the salvation of his children in order to place themselves upon the throne of glory.

Let us consider what constitutes the rule of faith in Catholic, Protestant, and Latter-day Saint theology.

The Rule of Faith among Catholics

Roman Catholic theology holds that Christian doctrine is revealed doctrine. The church acknowledges that human reason, the wonders of nature, and the hand of Providence all reveal the existence of God, but the revelation upon which the church claims to rest is a special and unique revelation received from Christ and the teachings of his apostles and prophets. Only in this revelation are those things necessary for salvation found. The idea that Rome teaches any doctrine that has not been received by revelation is emphatically repudiated. All revelation must trace itself to Christ or the Holy Ghost. Thus to treat any doctrine as uncertain is to be guilty of unbelief, and to treat any doctrine as secondary or as unimportant is to impugn the wisdom of the source from which it came.

The channels through which the revelation of Christ and his gospel came are said by Roman Catholics to be two: the scriptures and oral tradition. By scriptures is meant the Bible, including the fifteen intertestamental books generally known as the Apocrypha. By oral tradition is meant that body of teachings that are said to have been handed down orally from Christ and his apostles to succeeding generations. During the first century the only scripture available to the church was the Old Testament. That scripture and the testimony of the leaders governed the church. Many points of doctrine, worship, and discipline would have been left unanswered were it not for an oral tradition. Such a tradition was also necessitated by the obscurity of much that is in the scriptures. This tradition is believed to be wider in scope than the books of the New Testament, which the church subsequently collected and elevated to the status of scripture. The concept of oral tradition called upon a time when people remembered and related things concerning the Savior and his apostles that the writers of the New Testament did not record. In the first century, the spoken testimony of those professing a commission to preach the gospel of Christ rather than written records were of prime importance in the propagation of the gospel both in the congregation of believers and among investigators. [^1]

Significantly, the Catholic claim to spiritual authority repeats the arguments used by the Jews from before the time of Christ, that is, scripture and tradition. In like manner, they too have come to acknowledge tradition as preeminent to scripture. That accounts for today's church bearing little resemblance to that of the New Testament. That in turn is seen simply as the result of the oral tradition being more fully developed than the written tradition. "The worship of the Apostolic age was without altars, without temples, without images; but as sacerdotal ideas entered and prevailed, ancient simplicity disappeared. The common meal, in which the early Christians united to commemorate their Savior's love, became a sacrifice; the table at which they sat to partake of it became an altar; the community which Christ designed to be one body, was divided into clergy and laity. When the liberty of prophesying was lost, and the spiritual gifts promised to the congregation were exercised by a restricted order of ministers alone, those ministers became priests; whilst the simple effusions of Gospel love prompted by the Holy Spirit, and therefore powerful to break in pieces the stony and bind up the broken heart, were replaced by learned and eloquent discourses, which were even at times received with plaudits, as in a theater. Lastly the room or simple meeting-house was exchanged for a stately temple, rich furnished with gold and silver vessels." [^2]

Critics have not been slow to point out that the Catholic claim to such a rich body of apostolic tradition is without historical evidence. That is to say, nothing survived the first or second centuries to sustain Catholic doctrines and practices. The most significant doctrinal pronouncements for which apostolic tradition is claimed as the source of authority came very late and only then after considerable contention within the ranks of the Church. If the Church was in possession of the answers, why the lengthy and fractious disputes? The parade example is their creedal statement about the nature of God, out of which the all-important doctrine of the Holy Trinity grows. Not only is the language unscriptural but we are without any evidence that any reference to apostolic tradition was made at the historic council of Nicaea in A.D. 325. Nor is any reference made to such a tradition during the generations of contention that followed. Five times Athanasius, the great champion of this doctrine, was banished as the winds of doctrine twisted and changed. As to infant baptism, we have no reference to it before the third century, and the doctrine of Purgatory was unknown before the end of the twelfth century. [^3] As to the doctrine of immaculate conception, it had to wait until the year 1854 to be announced. [^4] The point here is that if the church was in possession of a body of apostolic tradition by which such doctrinal pronouncements were to be made, it must at the same time be guilty of a grave dereliction of duty in withholding such knowledge from the understanding of the faithful for so many generations. It is difficult to argue, for instance, that the doctrine of immaculate conception is a point of faith, on the one hand, and on the other that the church was in possession of that knowledge for eighteen hundred years without acknowledging it.

To embrace the Catholic claim to authority requires that its adherents accept, without question, two propositions: first, that the church was indeed established by Christ and his apostles in the meridian of time; and second, that the church, through the years, has been true to the principles of its founder. Historical and doctrinal inquiry, however, is officially closed by an appeal to the dogma of infallibility, or the inability of the church to err in teaching revealed truth. [^5] This determination was made at the First Vatican Council (1870), which "declared that the Pope was infallible when he defined that a doctrine concerning faith or morals was part of the deposit of divine revelation handed down from apostolic tradition and was therefore to be believed by the whole Church." [^6]

The doctrine of infallibility is another doctrinal pronouncement that would have to trace itself to oral tradition, for neither the idea of a pope nor the idea of infallibility can be found in holy writ. If we are to bring into discussion the matter of the holiness and the divine character of the church, we would feel pressed to inquire why the heavenly power that is said to preside over such an institution would have such concern to maintain all tenets of belief as infallible while maintaining no such interest in the behavior of the church. [^7]

The Rule of Faith among Protestants

The chief characteristic of Protestantism, one common to all its denominations, is the acceptance of the Bible as the only source of revealed truth. The conservative view of the Protestant norm of doctrine is expressed in the uncompromising formula that "the Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but the Bible" is the religion of the Protestants. The view taken of the rule of faith among Protestant churches has also been to some extent a dividing factor. The alienation of the Reformed Church from the Lutheran was at least confirmed by a difference of attitude towards religious authority. The Lutherans were content to retain traditional elements so long as they did not conflict with scripture, whereas the churches of the Reformed group required scripture to justify anything that was accepted as part of the system of doctrine or worship.

In understanding the Protestant view, it is important to realize that the Reformers in proclaiming the scriptures to be the supreme standard [^8] did not have in mind the whole Bible but rather the authority of the Bible as a whole when interpreted from its center—that is, a reinterpretation of everything in the Bible as seen through the lens of the Protestant doctrine of justification by faith alone. The Bible is a complex and in many ways contradictory book. No system of theology actively uses the whole of its contents; everyone chooses those parts of its revelation that they want to have stand center stage. The Reformers were no different. They chose certain passages from Paul through which they interpreted the place, value, and meaning of everything else. Thus the rest of the Bible assumes importance as it provides proof texts to that end or as it is seen to be instructive in sustaining traditional values. There is, of course, the haunting suspicion that both tradition and scripture have been believed for convenient reasons and that those reasons are the true fathers of the belief, not the traditions or the scriptures.

Four assumptions underlie the Protestant understanding of scripture, none of which is justified by scripture: authority, sufficiency, perspicuity (meaning clarity), and efficacy. [^9] Let us briefly consider each.

First, authority. The scripture, meaning the Old and the New Testaments, constitutes the source of authority for the Protestant world. The authority of scripture is held to be exclusive, in contrast to the limited authority it is allowed in the Roman Catholic system. Maintaining this position rids the gospel message of the doctrines and practices that are not justified by scripture. Taking Martin Luther as a point of reference, it is important to note that he never sought to create a new church, least of all a Lutheran church. For Luther there was only one church, the Church of Christ. Luther held that the church had ceased to be catholic and had become papist instead. Basic doctrines, such as justification by faith, the true meaning of the Lord's supper, the priesthood of all believers, and the authority of scripture, he felt, had been neglected, and other doctrines had been added in their stead. These included penance, the mass, papal infallibility, indulgences, and the interdict (the barring of a person or place from ecclesiastical functions). [^10] To find the original plan of worship, it was argued, one had to go back to the New Testament. "No man can get nearer the source than that. It was the ultimate, objective, historical authority, the criterion of all judgment, the canon or norm by which we are to live." This meant that all humanly devised innovations were to be discarded. This back-to-the-scripture movement was to be a re-formation of that which had suffered a de-formation. Luther's desire was not for some kind of idyllic pattern of church life (which never existed in New Testament times) but to return to a true apostolic doctrine. What Luther sought was a church that the apostles would have known and recognized had they been allowed to return to the sixteenth century. Lutherans were to be the successors of the apostolic church. [^11]

All the reformers of the sixteenth century, German, Swiss, and British alike, believed that God had spoken to them through the scriptures. They believed that every man, woman, and child, if granted access to the scriptures, could enjoy that same revelation and thus through the scripture have immediate access to God. Sola scriptura, the scriptures only, is the doctrine that binds all the branches of the Reformation together. What cannot be proved from scripture has no authority in the church. When Martin Luther faced the emperor at Worms in 1521, he concluded the defense of his faith: "Unless I am convinced by the testimony of Scripture, or evident reason (for I put my faith neither in Pope nor Councils as authorities in themselves, since it is established that they have often erred and contradicted one another), I am bound by the scriptural authorities cited by me, and my conscience is captive to the Word of God; I will recant nothing and cannot do so, since it is neither safe nor honest to do ought against conscience. Here I stand! I can do no other! God help me. Amen." [^12]

Two primary concerns are raised by the doctrine of sola scriptura. First, the moment Luther claimed that the authority of the Bible superseded that of the tradition of the Church, he invited criticism because the selection of books that constitute the Bible were determined by nothing other than tradition! No revelation identifies them or even directs that they be gathered together. The church was the father of the Bible, not the child. That is to say, if there had been no church with its traditions, there would have been no Bible as Martin Luther knew it. The question then challenging Luther was how he could accept one line of tradition as inspired while rejecting the other. Second, the doctrine of sola scriptura makes Bible worshipers of its adherents. The Catholics claim an infallible pope; the Protestants counter with the claim to an infallible book. For them the scriptures, not God, are the Supreme Judge of all things.

Next, we turn our attention to the doctrine of sufficiency, or the doctrine that holds that the Bible contains and makes known all that is necessary to salvation. Again, two paramount concerns suggest themselves. First, this doctrine seals the heavens and imposes upon God a vow of silence that neither scripture nor God ever intended; and second, it assures that the true meaning of that scripture will be lost, for that which comes by revelation can only be properly understood by revelation. None has stated it better than Nephi, who warned: "Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough! For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:29-30).

The third assumption is that of perspicuity, or clarity. The idea is that the scriptures are sufficiently clear, that neither the church nor tradition is necessary to properly interpret them. That is not to deny that some passages are difficult to understand but rather to avow that in the general tenor of its teaching as it pertains to our salvation the message of the Bible is clear and that difficult passages can be understood with the help of those which are plain. Thus the doctrine is that scripture is its own interpreter.

The official policy of the church during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries was to condemn Bible societies and to regard unrestricted access to the scriptures as both a danger to laymen's souls and a challenge to the authority of the church. Luther, for instance, had never seen a Bible before he entered the monastery, and when he was there, he was discouraged from reading it. Nathin, his mentor, told him that it would only breed unrest and thus tried to divert him to a study of church traditions. [^13] It was in opposition to such practices that Protestantism affirmed so vigorously the efficacy of scripture and promoted the circulation of the Bible in the common tongue.

In actual practice there is little to sustain the doctrine of biblical perspicuity. The doctrine of scriptural plainness and clarity is called upon to sustain the indescribable mystery of the Trinity, which can only be arrived at by rejecting the plain meaning of hosts of scriptural texts that must be declared metaphorical. No lay reader without the aid of a trained minister would ever have arrived at the notion that Christ was actually his own father. Nor would they suppose the plain statements relative to baptism could be supplanted by a profession of faith, or the countless texts sustaining the necessity of good works be superseded by the dogma of justification by grace alone. Who among the readers of the Bible in times past would have supposed that in a future day both those supporting and those opposing homosexual and lesbian movements could sustain their cause with scriptural arguments?

And finally, the doctrine of efficacy, which is the claim that the truth and goodness of the Bible are self-evident. Though true, such a claim is not without its own bounds or limits. In response to a skeptic, reformer John Calvin frankly admitted that he knew of no scriptural argument that would convince him so long as he chose to maintain a carnal nature and an unspiritual mind. [^14] The believer can adduce arguments that are weighty enough to justify faith in scripture, but they have not the force of a mathematical proof for the mind of the natural man. Scripture is convincing only to the convinced. Paul said it well: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God" (1 Corinthians 2:9-11).

No principle of truth can retain its meaning in isolation from other truths. Faith must be anchored to Christ, baptism must be preceded by repentance, mercy cannot rob justice, and so forth. So it is with the Bible. It finds its true meaning only in the Spirit of revelation. In the hands of a scoundrel, it becomes the source of endless mischief.

The Rule of Faith among Latter-day Saints

Mormonism stands independent of the claims to authority professed by either Catholicism or Protestantism. Singularly, it does so while embracing the Bible as God's word. Yet it rejects the Catholic claim of an apostolic tradition and the Protestant claim of Bible sufficiency. Apostolic tradition is unnecessary in a church that has living apostles, as is the need to depend on revelations given to dispensations past. A written record of God's word was never sufficient for those who had the power to obtain revelations of their own. This was the case with those of whom we read in the Bible. We dare not rest the hope of our salvation on the tangled vines of tradition, nor do we suppose that a living church can be led by a written record.

"We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God" (Articles of Faith 9). We place no limitations or bounds on what God can reveal to us. Some have supposed that God can do or say nothing that cannot be sustained or justified by some Bible texts. The Latter-day Saints do not worship a God who is bound in such a manner. Indeed, we anticipate a future day when things not yet seen nor heard by mortals, things that have not yet entered into the heart of mankind shall be revealed (see D&C 76:5-10). "God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit," we have been promised, "yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, that has not been revealed since the world was until now;

"Which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be revealed in the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels, as held in reserve for the fulness of their glory;

"A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be manifest.

"All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ.

"And also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—

"All the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years, and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times—

"According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was, that should be reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof, when every man shall enter into his eternal presence and into his immortal rest" (D&C 121:26-32).

The revelations now known to the Latter-day Saints are but a pittance compared to what we expect to receive. Joseph Smith taught the principle thus: "How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints" (D&C 121:33).

Where We Must Stand

We claim no priesthood, keys, power, authority, or doctrines that do not trace themselves directly to heaven. We have not built upon the theological rubble of the past. All that we have, and this includes our faith in the Bible and our understanding of it, has come to us by direct revelation in this dispensation. Doctrines from any other source are without authority among the Latter-day Saints. All doctrine and authority must come through the channels the Lord has ordained for our dispensation, and that channel is the priesthood and keys restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith. "The Melchizedek Priesthood," he said, "is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven." [^15] The Melchizedek Priesthood administers the gospel and holds the key of the mysteries of heaven and the key of the knowledge of God (see D&C 84:19).

The essence of virtually every argument directed against Mormonism centers on the critics' refusal to acknowledge that revelation, as known to the ancients, can be had in our day. Paradoxically, most of these critics profess a preference for the revelations of dispensations past. They claim those revelations as their own, declaring that the Spirit speaks to them through the ancient writings. What they cannot tolerate is the thought that God could speak anew, that other words could be penned that are of equal worth to those of an ancient day, and that those words should rightly be added to the canon of scripture. They profess prophets, but not living prophets; they reverence revelation, but only that revelation given to another people in another time.

I have an indelible memory of a family night held a few days before I was to leave to serve in the military in Vietnam. I listened that evening as my father gave inspired blessing to my brothers. Each was given wise counsel and remarkable promises. I could not help coveting the promises they were receiving, and I prayed in my heart that I too could be so blessed. But because I had received a special blessing from my father when he set me apart to be a missionary, I did not think he would give me another blessing. Thankfully, he chose to do so. That blessing, like those given to my brothers, was distinctively personal. The nature of the counsel and promises were different, for they were mine and were thus suited to my circumstances.

So it is with the revelations of this dispensation. We may desire to steal some of the promises given to the ancients, but the greater blessing is always that which is distinctively our own. It is the one suited to our circumstances and needs. Thus as Latter-day Saints we have neither borrowed our doctrines nor our understanding of them from the ancients. Our doctrines and authority all bear the label of modern revelation. Our God speaks directly to people of this day. Such is the message that we seek to declare to all the world. The living voice of God constitutes our rule of faith.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Jews combine the twelve Minor Prophets into one book. They also combine 1 and 2 Samuel, 1 and 2 Kings, 1 and 2 Chronicles, and Ezra and Nehemiah.
[^2] F. W. Farrar, The Bible: Its Meaning and Supremacy (New York: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1897), p. 34.
[^3] See Williston Walker, Richard A. Norris, David W. Lotz, and Robert T. Handy, A History of the Christian Church (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1985), pp. 67-69.
[^4] Walker, et al., History of the Christian Church, pp. 71-72.
[^5] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 14:280.
[^6] Floyd McElveen, God's Word, Final, Infallible, and Forever (n. p., 1985), pp. 139-42.
[^7] Another illustration would be the New English Bible, which reads: "For this people's mind has become gross . . ."
[^8] In verse 9 Jude is telling a story not found in the Old Testament text as it has come to us, but it was available to him and he obviously regarded it as scripture. He does the same thing in verses 14 and 15, this time quoting from an Enoch manuscript.
[^9] See The Westminster Confession of Faith (Inverness, Scotland: John G. Eccles Printers, Ltd., 1983), chap. 1, sec. 6, p. 22.
[^10] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), p. 61).
[^11] Westminster Confession of Faith, chap. 1, sec. 10, p. 24.
[^12] John Henry Cardinal Newman, An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine (Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press, 1989), pp. 342-44.
[^13] David Noel Freedman, "How the Hebrew Bible and the Christian Old Testament Differ," Bible Review 9 (December 1993): 36-37.
[^14] See Marcus J. Borg, "Jesus in Four Colors," Biblical Review 9 (December 1993): 10.
[^15] 15. Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), pp. 166-67.
