Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter Four

Vanity and Unbelief

And your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received— Which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation. And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all. And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I have written— That they may bring forth fruit meet for their Father's kingdom; otherwise there remaineth a scourge and judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion. —Doctrine and Covenants 84:54-58

EMBARRASSMENT IS OFTEN a very effective teacher. One of my lessons centered on a Christmas gift from my parents. I had been away at college, and when I got home, Dad asked if there was something I wanted for Christmas. I told him that I would like to have the seven-volume set of the History of the Church. On Christmas morning I received those volumes. Nevertheless, my initial reaction was one of disappointment. I had not been given a new set, as I had anticipated, but an old, worn one. In fact, those books had been around much longer than I had. My grandfather had given them to my father years before when he had moved out of the old family home into an apartment and no longer had room for all his books. The second volume was partially covered with white paint, a reminder of the hurry with which we had built and painted a bookshelf to house Dad's new library. I didn't say anything about my disappointment with my hand-me-down books, but I must have been wearing it on my face because I heard my father say to my mother, "Well, Joseph seems disappointed." With the passing of the years I have come to regard those books as a special treasure. More than a few people would think it a privilege to own a set of books that had in turn been owned and used by both their father and their grandfather. The embarrassment associated with that memory has caused me to reflect. Just how often have we taken lightly the most sacred of treasures that we have been given and thus failed to accrue the blessings associated with them?

A People under Condemnation

As part of a great revelation on priesthood given in September 1832, the Lord said of the infant Church, "Your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received" (D&C 84:54). Let us consider what the Saints had received. For the first time in nearly eighteen hundred years, the heavens had been rent and revelation had commenced to flow from the royal courts on high. The priesthood of Aaron, with the attendant right to entertain angels and the authority to baptize for the remission of sins, had been restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by John the Baptist himself. Within weeks of that event, the heavens were opened again, and Peter, James, and John appeared to Joseph and Oliver to confer upon them the priesthood of Melchizedek and its keys. This restoration of priesthood authority included the key of the knowledge of God, meaning the power and authority by which men in the flesh could stand in the divine presence and be tutored as were the prophets of old. It also included the authority by which the ancient apostles taught the gospel, presided over the Church, and unlocked the mysteries of heaven. Simultaneously with these nearly peerless events, Joseph and Oliver had been translating the Book of Mormon, a record of the dealings of God with the ancient inhabitants of the American continent, which record had also been received at the hands of an angel. Other revelations had flowed from heaven relative to the organization of the Church and the kingdom of God again on the earth and the restoration of all the knowledge, keys, and power ever enjoyed by any of the ancient Saints. By the time this revelation was given, eighty-five of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants had been received.

Never in earth's history had so many marvelous and miraculous things happened in so short a time. So much was happening so fast there can be little wonder that the Lord found it necessary to warn the Saints not to take lightly the deluge of spiritual power and knowledge that was being poured out upon them. To treat lightly events of such magnitude could only cause the powers of heaven to withdraw; and so it is that we hear the voice of the Lord saying that their "vanity and unbelief" had "brought the whole church under condemnation" (see D&C 84:55). As all were to share the blessings of heaven's light, so all must weather the storm of heaven's displeasure. The condemnation was to rest on all and was to remain until they repented and remembered "the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments," meaning the deluge of revelations they had received. These were to constitute the basis of their preaching and the standard by which they were to live. Only in following such a course could they "bring forth fruit" worthy of their Father's kingdom. Failure to appreciate what they had received would not only offend the heavens but demean the faith and courageous labors of the faithful in ages past, for they had longed to see that great day of restoration taking place. Such indifference, the Lord warned, would bring "a scourge and judgment" upon them. It would "pollute" the Lord's holy land, for this was a land that had been consecrated and set apart by prophets of old for the building of Zion in the last days (see D&C 84:56-59). It was a land that had been preserved by the hand of the Lord for that very purpose (see 2 Nephi 1:5). It was a land that had been redeemed by the shedding of blood, even the blood of their own noble forebears (see D&C 101:80).

Thus God in his mercy and patience said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you who now hear my words, which are my voice, blessed are ye inasmuch as you receive these things; for I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment—that you remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing testimony to all the world of those things which are communicated unto you." Then came the charge to go into all the world carrying the testimony of the marvelous work and wonder that had been wrought, even as the meridian apostles had done before them (D&C 84:60-61).

"My Word through You"

The revelations of the Restoration are both plain and emphatic about the message that we as a people have been charged to declare to the world. In what we know as the Lord's preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, we are told that he spoke to Joseph Smith from heaven and gave him commandments and that these commandments were in turn to be announced to all the children of men. The words of a living God were to be heralded again among men even as they had been anciently! The significance of such a thing is overwhelming. In an earlier revelation the Lord had said: "Thou shalt preach the fulness of my gospel, which I have sent forth in these last days, the covenant which I have sent forth to recover my people, which are of the house of Israel" (D&C 39:11; emphasis added).

Those commandments, or the "fulness of his gospel," as the Lord described them, were to be "proclaimed by the weak and the simple" even "before kings and rulers" (D&C 1:23). In an earlier revelation, the Lord had said, "I call upon the weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised, to thrash the nations by the power of my Spirit; and their arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them." The Lord then confirmed that he had "sent forth the fulness" of his gospel by the hand of Joseph Smith and "in weakness have I blessed him . . . . And I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming" (D&C 35:13-14, 17-18). In a subsequent revelation, the Lord told Joseph Smith that he had been raised up so that the Lord might show forth his "wisdom through the weak things of the earth" (D&C 124:1).

"The weak and the simple," the Lord said, were to declare the fulness of his gospel (D&C 1:23). And that fulness was to be found in the Book of Mormon (D&C 20:9), which in turn constituted "the foundation of his church," which church, he said, was to come "forth out of obscurity and out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30).

In March 1829, while Joseph Smith was laboring with the translation of the Book of Mormon, the Lord told him, "This generation shall have my word through you" (D&C 5:10). That principle is profoundly significant. All who receive the gospel must receive it from those whom the Lord appoints in their own age and generation to declare it. We can read about the baptisms performed by John the Baptist countless times, but such reading will never remit our sins, nor will it give us the authority to baptize or the right to preach the gospel he taught. If it is a remission of sins we seek, we must seek it at the hands of a living administrator. The authority to preach baptism or to baptize must in like manner trace itself to one who held it, and had the keys, or the right, to give that authority to others.

When Christ commenced his mortal ministry, the ordinances of salvation ceased to be available through the law of Moses. For fifteen hundred years, the law of Moses was the only system on earth that had been ordained of God to teach his gospel and perform the ordinances of salvation. With the coming of Christ, salvation could no longer be found in the law of Sinai. Indeed, loyalty to that law demanded that its adherents leave it and embrace Christ, who was the living Law. After Christ had placed the twelve apostles at the head of his earthly Church and ascended into heaven, they became the conduits of the doctrines and covenants of salvation to all people, as Moses had been before them. So it remained until the day in which the apostles were taken.

In Adam's day, salvation was ministered through him, for he received the priesthood and its keys from the Creator [^1] and had been taught the doctrines of salvation by angels sent from the presence of the Lord (see Moses 5:58-59). To reject Adam was to reject the authority and gospel that had been given him. That principle extends itself to all gospel dispensations. Those of each dispensation have been required to accept the message of salvation at the hands of prophets called from among their own number. A living church does not have dead prophets at its head. Those of Moses' day could not be saved by professing allegiance to Abraham, and those of Abraham's day could not be saved by professing allegiance to those of Noah's day. Thus, when the Lord told Joseph Smith that his generation (meaning dispensation) was to receive the word of the Lord through him, it was tantamount to saying that the hope of salvation could no longer be rooted in the words or authority of earlier prophets. Such instruction does not justify ignorance or neglect of the testimony of the earlier prophets; it simply places the voice of living prophets at the head. The faithful of all gospel dispensations have found salvation in and through the law of the gospel as that gospel was ministered to them by a living oracle.

We see this truth evidenced in the Book of Mormon when the nation of the Nephites at the time of Christ were all required to be baptized, notwithstanding that many, if not all, of them had been baptized previously (see 3 Nephi 11:21). Indeed, the only way we can be loyal to the prophets of ages past is to sustain the prophet called to stand at the head of our own dispensation and his lawful successors. Our profession to accept Christ is found in our willingness to accept those whom he sends to us. The covenant associated with the Melchizedek Priesthood is that those who hold the priesthood will sustain those called to preside over them, not those called to preside over another people in another time (see D&C 84:36).

Christ came not to destroy the law of Moses but to fulfill it. In like manner, the restoration of the gospel in our dispensation in no way nullifies the power or glories of the gospel in any past dispensation. Rather, it fulfills the promises made to the faithful of those dispensations. We reverence the teachings of their prophets; but when we go to general conference we sustain living prophets, seers, and revelators, not those sent to others in times past. As long as the church is the Lord's, it will be guided by his living voice, not by a distant echo from the hills of Judea.

We Must Teach the Gospel Revealed to Us

We must teach the gospel as it was given to us. John the Revelator, who foresaw our day, said, "I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters" (Revelation 14:6-7). After that angel had come and that gospel had been restored, Joseph Smith received the following revelation: "And now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth. And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (D&C 133:36-37). This revelation confirms that the long promised restoration of the "everlasting gospel" had taken place and that the gospel restored by that angel was to go to all the nations of the earth. Moroni did not come to Joseph Smith and tell him that it was the duty of the elders to take the Bible to all the world. Rather, he told him that the Book of Mormon was to go to all the world, for it is the Book of Mormon that is destined to gather Israel.

How is it that we speak of the importance of the living voice on the one hand and the gathering of Israel through the testimony of ancient prophets on the other? It is the obligation of those of every gospel dispensation to declare those things revealed from the heavens to their dispensation. Though the Book of Mormon is the testimony of ancient prophets, it is a book written to people of our day; it is not a record known to the ancients. The first person to read it, other than those who wrote or compiled it, was the Prophet Joseph Smith. He is the spokesman for Mormon spoken of by Lehi (2 Nephi 3:18). [^2] By contrast, the Gospels and Epistles that compose the New Testament were directed to the people of the meridian dispensation.

The Measure of Spiritual Stability

April 6, 1830, was designated by revelation as the day upon which the Church was to be organized (D&C 20:1-4). On that day, a revelation was given describing the role of the prophet and the relationship of the members of the Church to him. They were directed to "give heed unto all his words and commandments," which the prophet received from the Lord. His word, we are told, is to be received as if it came from the mouth of the Lord (see D&C 21:5). Those who so receive it are promised that the "gates of hell" shall not prevail against them, and that the Lord will "disperse the powers of darkness" from before them, "and cause the heavens to shake" for their "good, and his name's glory" (D&C 21:6). In addition, the Lord said that he would bless all those who labored in his vineyard with "a mighty blessing" for their faith on the words of Joseph Smith, which were given him by the Comforter (see D&C 21:9). This statement, Elder Bruce R. McConkie declared, constitutes the test of discipleship. The measure of one's spiritual stability, he said, lies in "how totally and completely and fully we believe the word that was revealed through Joseph Smith, and how effectively we echo or proclaim that word to the world." [^3]

Ordinances and Doctrines Must Come from the Same Source

No one in the Church would claim validity for a priesthood ordinance that was not performed by the authority restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Yet many have the idea that they can bypass the revelations of the Restoration in preference to those of the Bible in teaching the need for these same ordinances. The question that must be asked is, Can we get our doctrines from a source different from the source from which we obtain our authority? And if the doctrine can be had from some other source, then why not the authority also? Surely our source cannot be important in one case and not in another.

The Lord told Joseph Smith that the priesthood is to "administer the gospel" (D&C 84:19). All doctrines must originate with the priesthood and must flow through its channels. For us to find evidence that baptisms were performed anciently does not give us the authority to teach the necessity of baptism today. If we are to possess the same faith enjoyed by the ancient Saints, we must obtain it in the same way they did. Our claim to authority must be the same as theirs, and theirs never stood independent of living oracles. The plain fact of the matter is that no one has a legitimate claim to the doctrines of salvation without the authority to perform the ordinances of salvation, and both must trace themselves directly to God. Either there are living prophets, men to whom God speaks and who trace their authority directly to him, or there is no valid claim to priesthood. If there is no valid claim to priesthood, there is no valid claim to the gospel, either.

For the first paper I wrote as a college student, I read widely in popular periodicals and confidently quoted from them. I worked hard on the paper and expected a good grade. To my disappointment the grade was barely passing, and that due to the mercy shown a freshman student. The critique of the paper emphasized the importance of my using primary, or original, sources. The lesson was a good one. You get a lot of muddy water when you drink downstream. That is especially true when you are dealing with the doctrines of salvation. In school, no one wants to prepare for an important test by using someone else's notes. Certainly no sane teacher wants to be held responsible for saying everything that finds its way into his students' notes. On matters that count, we want our sources to be reliable. Courts of law have found hearsay evidence to be the source of so much mischief that they simply refuse to admit it. Strangely, most people ignore this important lesson when it comes to the source of their faith. Women who wouldn't buy a tomato without squeezing it trust their hope of eternal life to whatever religious tradition happens to prevail in their neighborhood. Men who wouldn't think of buying a car without kicking its tires and test-driving it likewise trust their eternal life to the traditions of their fathers, even when they don't believe those traditions. When salvation is at stake, we ought to know that both the message and the messenger are reliable. That can be the case only when both trace their authority directly to God.

The restoration of the authority to perform the ordinance of baptism is a classic illustration of this principle. Briefly, the story is as follows. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were translating the Book of Mormon. In doing so they learned of the instruction that the Savior gave the Nephite nation relative to baptism. It was a simple matter for them to reason that the principles involved were eternal and that if baptism was of such importance then, it must be so now. What is significant in this story is that they did not assume from what they read that they had any right to practice the ordinance. The authority to baptize does not come from reading an ancient text, no matter how perfect the translation. What Joseph and Oliver did was find a secluded place in the wilderness along the banks of the Susquehanna River where they could inquire of the Lord about the matter. In response to that prayer, a messenger from heaven appeared. He introduced himself as John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament. Joseph and Oliver were instructed about baptism and received the authority to perform it directly from the heavens (see Joseph Smith-History 1:68-75). Now all who desire the blessing of that saving ordinance can receive it at the hands of someone who traces both their understanding of the ordinance and the authority to perform it directly to its original source.

As Latter-day Saints, we are not practicing the ordinance of baptism because we find it in the New Testament. Nor do we refuse to practice it because it is not found in the Old Testament. If all copies of both Testaments were to disappear from the face of the earth, we would still baptize. We would do so because a messenger from heaven came to us bringing both the charge to practice the ordinance and the authority to perform it. The source of our authority is as important as the source of our knowledge. That becomes more obvious when we consider why we practice baptism for the dead. Ask any returned missionary why we do so. He or she will immediately refer to 1 Corinthians 15:29. It reads: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?" The question is, What does that have to do with it? Are we practicing baptism for the dead because we found some obscure passage in the book of Corinthians that suggests that the Corinthians for some unstated reason were practicing it? Is that the thread that must bear the weight of all the pain and effort associated with this practice and the building of temples? Are we going to reason that Mormonism is true because we had the good fortune to find two sentences in the Bible that everyone else overlooked? Are we also going to argue that finding them somehow commissions us to do whatever it was that the ancients were doing? If so, are we going to afford that same license to everyone else who lays claim to some long-forgotten passage of scripture?

We do not practice baptism for the dead because we found an ancient text that suggests someone else once did. We would still practice baptism for the dead if we didn't have Paul's obscure and much-debated reference to it. In declaring our message, we would do much better to identify the real reason: we baptize for the dead because God commanded us to (see D&C 124:29-36).

In presenting our message, the question is, What kind of an approach is most likely to be sustained by the witness of the Spirit? In this instance is it the announcement that we have found an obscure Bible passage to justify our doctrine? Or is it the fact that the God of heaven still speaks, that he spoke through a prophet, and that he gave us the direction to do so? If the latter is a more appropriate way to teach baptism for the dead, then is it not also a more appropriate way to teach about baptism for the living?

Trusting What We Have Been Given

When John the Baptist came to restore the Aaronic Priesthood, he promised that the Melchizedek Priesthood would be restored shortly thereafter. Between those events, while Joseph and Oliver continued translating the Book of Mormon, a revelation was given in which Oliver was assured that the things which he was writing were true. "I have manifested unto you, by my Spirit in many instances, that the things which you have written are true; wherefore you know that they are true," said the Lord. "And if you know that they are true, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that you rely upon the things which are written; for in them are all things written concerning the foundation of my church, my gospel and my rock." Thus Oliver was instructed that if he was to build up the Lord's church, he must do it "upon the foundation" of that gospel they were restoring in the Book of Mormon. Oliver was promised that by trusting in this restored gospel, the gates of hell would not prevail against him (D&C 18:2-5; emphasis added).

Also while the Book of Mormon was being translated, Hyrum Smith was instructed by the Lord to prepare himself to declare His word. "Study my word which hath gone forth among the children of men (meaning the Bible), and also study my word which shall come forth among the children of men, or that which is now translating, yea, until you have obtained all which I shall grant unto the children of men in this generation, and then shall all things be added thereto." Emphasizing the importance of the things revealed "in this generation," the Lord cautioned Hyrum to "deny not the spirit of revelation, nor the spirit of prophecy, for wo unto him that denieth these things; therefore, treasure up in your heart until the time which is in my wisdom that you shall go forth" (D&C 11:22, 25, 27). That instruction, the Lord said, applied to all who desire to declare his work.

Similar instruction was given after the organization of the Church, when the Lord again emphasized that those who represent him do so by the proper authority and with the proper message. "Obey the law which I shall give unto you," the Lord said (D&C 42:2). As to the matter of who could declare his gospel, he said: "Again I say unto you, that it shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has the authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church" (D&C 42:11). As to the message they were to deliver, the Lord said: "And again, the elders, priests, and teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel. . . . And all this ye shall observe to do as I have commanded concerning your teaching, until the fulness of my scriptures is given [this being a reference to the Prophet's labors on what we now call the Joseph Smith Translation]. And as ye shall lift up your voices by the Comforter, ye shall speak and prophesy as seemeth me good" (D&C 42:12, 15-16). Both the revelation given to Hyrum Smith and the more general instruction given in the latter revelation affirm the Bible as a source of our gospel understanding, though they emphasize that its teaching should be viewed from the light of the restored gospel.

The faith of the Church embraces ancient revelation but is not founded on it. The constitution of the Church is the voice of the living prophet. Instructing the early missionaries, the Lord said: "You shall declare the things which have been revealed to my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun. You shall begin to preach from this time forth, yea, to reap in the field which is white already to be burned" (D&C 31:4). Again the Lord said: "I have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by the hand of my servant Joseph: and in weakness have I blessed him; and I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming, if he abide in me, and if not, another will I plant in his stead" (D&C 35:17-18).

Those going forth with the gospel message were to go forth in power. "Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit; and ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken" (D&C 43:15). That is, they were to teach the revelations the Lord had given them. In fact they were given a revelation by the Lord to read to the Shakers that addressed their peculiar beliefs. Elder Leman Copley, who had been one of their number, was told that he was to "reason with them," not according to that which he had received from them, but rather according to that which he would be taught by his brethren in the priesthood. "By so doing," the Lord said, "I will bless him, otherwise he shall not prosper" (D&C 49:4; see also headnote). We have every reason to suppose that this principle is fundamental to all missionary work.

Being True to the Revelations of the Restoration

In January 1832, a conference of the Church was held at Amherst, Ohio. At that conference a revelation was given to counsel the elders who had been laboring as missionaries. Not unexpectedly, they had encountered considerable difficulty in their effort to declare the message of the Restoration. They were instructed by the Lord not to tarry or to be idle but rather to labor with their might—lifting up their voices "as with the sound of a trump, proclaiming the truth according to the revelations and commandments which," the Lord said, "I have given you." That which the Lord had given them was the Book of Mormon. They were also promised that if they would be faithful in declaring the message they had been given, they would "be laden with many sheaves, and crowned with honor, and glory, and immortality, and eternal life" (D&C 75:3-5).

One is not a true messenger save he is true to his message. Ours is the message of the Restoration. It began in a grove of trees in upstate New York where both the Father and the Son appeared to the youthful Joseph Smith. It involved the appearance of a host of angels, the restoring of the powers and authorities that were theirs, the restoring of ancient scriptural texts, and a flood of light from heaven in the form of modern revelation that surpasses anything known in any past dispensation of the gospel. As Latter-day Saints we make no profession to any priesthood, keys, powers, authority, ordinances, or doctrines that we borrowed from another people. We stand independent. Our testimony is of a universal apostasy from the faith known to the ancient Saints. All was lost, and all requires restoring; ours is the story of that restoration. All that we profess must bear the label "modern revelation." Joseph Smith said it well: "Take away the Book of Mormon and the revelations (meaning those revelations he had received) and where is our religion? We have none." [^4]

Such is the message that we have been commissioned to take to all the earth. To be faithful in that labor brings with it the promise of honor, glory, immortality, and eternal life; conversely, failure to be true to that divine commission on account of vanity and unbelief places us under condemnation.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), p. 120.
[^2] Hubert Howe Bancroft, History of Utah (San Francisco: The History Company Publishers, 1890], p. 333.
[^3] Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 334.
[^4] See Edwin Hatch, The Influence of Greek Ideas on Christianity (Gloucester, Mass., 1970), pp. 324-25.
