Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter Five

We Believe the Bible

And again, the elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel. —Doctrine and Covenants 42:12

BELIEF IN THE BIBLE IS AN article of faith with Latter-day Saints. No one can be baptized into the Church who does not believe that the Bible contains the word of God. All members of the Church in good standing hold the Bible to be divinely inspired. When Joseph Smith was asked if Mormons believed the Bible, he responded, "If we do, we are the only people under heaven that does, for there are none of the religious sects of the day that do." Asked how the Latter-day Saints differed from other sects, he replied, "In that we believe the Bible, and all other sects profess to believe their interpretations of the Bible, and their creeds." [^1]

We Believe the Plain Meaning of the Book

In his History of the State of Utah, Hubert H. Bancroft thought it necessary to evaluate the faith of the Mormon pioneers who were the state's first settlers. In so doing he concludes that "Mormonism in its religious aspect is simply the acceptation of the bible, the whole of it, literally, and following it to its logical conclusions." Bancroft does not intend such a statement as a compliment. In his mind, the Christian world had advanced in civilization and in intelligence from the time when people actually believed in Bible stories dealing with the likes of Moses, Jonah, and Job and had "thrown aside as unseemly blood-sacrifice and burnt offerings, sins of uncleanness, the stoning of sabbath breakers, the killing in war of women, children, and prisoners, the condemnation of whole nations to perpetual bondage, and many other revolting customs of the half savage Israelites sanctioned by holy writ." This, he observes, the ancients "did of their own accord, not because they were so commanded," but rather "in spite of commandments." He saw the religious world's abandonment of Old Testament practices as an expression of higher intelligence and of their outgrowing "the cruder dogmas of the early ages." Turning his attention to the New Testament, he notes that in like manner, as an expression of a higher cultural refinement, the Christian world had discarded such practices as speaking in tongues, going forth to preach without purse or scrip, the laying on of hands for the healing of the sick, raising the dead, casting out devils, the performance of miracles, and so forth. "There will be further repudiations as time passes," he accurately predicted, "further ignoring of portions of the scriptures by orthodox sects, a further weeding out of the unnatural and irrational from things spiritual and worshipful." [^2] For the Mormons, however, he held no such hope, for they had chosen to interpret the Bible literally.

To Mormons, he explains, the Bible is "the inspired record of God's dealings with men in the eastern hemisphere; the Book of Mormon is the inspired record of God's dealings with the ancient inhabitants of this continent; the book of Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints consists of revelations from God concerning the present dispensation to Joseph Smith, who was inspired to translate the Book of Mormon and organize the church of Christ anew. Joseph Smith to the present dispensation," he explains, "is as Moses was to Israel; there is no conflict, either in personages or books. The statements, assertions, promises, and prophecies of the books, and the precepts and practices of the personages, are accepted, all of them, and held to be the revealed will to man of one and the same God, whose will it is the duty and endeavor of his people to carry out in every particular to the best of their ability." [^3] The great danger in Mormonism, as Bancroft saw it, is that loyalty to the plain reading of the Bible.

The classic illustration of the Latter-day Saints' literal reading of scripture, in contrast to the figurative interpretation placed on it by traditional Christianity, deals with the nature of God himself. From Genesis to Revelation the Bible depicts God as an anthropomorphic being, one who created man in his own image and likeness. Holy writ declares us to be his offspring and records God introducing Christ to us as his Beloved Son. Christ, in turn, never referred to God by any title other than Father. Similarly, the Apostle Paul commences thirteen of his fourteen epistles with the announcement that he represented God "our Father" and "Jesus Christ our Lord." He began the book of Hebrews a little differently; there Paul declares the Son of God to be in the express image and likeness of the person of his Father. Latter-day Saints accept such descriptions of God according to the plain, direct, and obvious meaning of the words. When God is spoken of as being our Father, we believe him to be such; when we are spoken of as his children, we believe ourselves to be such; and when we are told that Mary was the mother of the Christ child, we believe her to have been such.

We recognize that there is much in the scriptures that is figurative, but we do not believe that God has been represented to us in a mystical metaphor. We believe ourselves to be the offspring of God, who fathered our spirits. We also believe that Christ, the firstborn among all the spirit children of our Father, was born into this physical and temporal state with God as his Father. In so believing we stand alone among all who profess allegiance to the teachings of the Bible. Again, we read literally; others read figuratively.

In his masterful work on the hellenization of Christianity, Edwin Hatch tells us that the great battle of the second century was between those who asserted that revelation had ceased and the canon closed and those who argued for continuous revelation. The victory went to the closed canon. The great battle of the third century, he says, was between those who claimed that the scriptures were to be taken in their literal sense and those who claimed that they required a philosophical interpretation. The victory went to the philosophers. [^4] The gospel taught by Christ and his apostles was simply remodeled to make it more attractive to the highly educated Greeks. For instance, the philosopher-theologian Clement of Alexandria labored to show that the original revelations of the Bible and Greek philosophy were both threads of the divine intended to be woven together. "Abraham represents faith," he said, "Sarah, wisdom; Hagar, pagan culture; and the fact that Sarah gives birth to her son after Hagar signifies the contribution of Greek learning to the progress of true wisdom." [^5] Origen, another of the ante-Nicene Fathers, who wrote extensively to prove that God had neither body, parts, nor passions, said: "With regard to Scripture as a whole, we are disposed to admit that all of it has a spiritual significance, but not all of it has a literal significance, since in several places it can be seen that a literal sense is impossible." [^6] The efforts of such men were to eliminate through allegorical interpretation "passages too crudely anthropomorphic in their representation of divinity, which disconcerted educated Greeks and encouraged the rejection of the Old Testament by Gnostics." [^7] The scriptures are of little use, Origen explained, to those who understand them as they are written. [^8]

Justo L. Gonzales in his work The Story of Christianity tells us that two means were used by the church in the early years after the death of the apostles to harmonize what the Bible taught about God with the classical Greek notion of the supreme being. Those means were the doctrine of the Logos and the allegorical interpretation of scripture. The Logos doctrine holds that Christ is not really the Son of God but rather a representation of the mind of God in human form. All scriptural references to Deity are thus deemed to be figurative, or allegorical. The "allegorical interpretation was fairly simple to apply," Gonzales tells us. "Wherever Scripture says something 'unworthy' of God—that is, something that is not worthy of the perfection of the supreme being—such words are not to be taken literally. Thus, for instance, if the Bible says that God walked in the garden, or that God spoke, one is to remember that an immutable being does not really walk or speak." [^9] So it was that God was robbed of both form and speech.

Belief in the Bible Requires Belief in Revelation

All the great doctrines of modern Christianity trace themselves back to the tradition that the Bible is to be interpreted in a mystical or allegorical sense. Christian orthodoxy demands that the Bible be read figuratively. [^10] This so-called orthodoxy, born of philosophical speculations, replaced the simple faith declared by Christ and his disciples. Given this bent of mind, it does not matter how many hundreds or even thousands of passages of scripture declare God to be a personal being. All such statements, no matter how plain they may be, are simply brushed aside as metaphorical. To suppose that words mean what they say is thought to be simplistic and primitive.

This concept dramatizes the difficulty of our centering our proselyting efforts on the Bible. The plain meaning of words is neutralized by the declaration that they are simply metaphorical. Thus in our dialogues with people of other faiths, we often find that the same words and texts have very different meanings. Before the Bible can become a truly effective proselyting tool, we must find a way to take it back nearly two thousand years and redecide the figurative vs. literal issue. Indeed, we must also redecide the question about whether the heavens are open or sealed. Significantly, that is exactly what the Book of Mormon does! It comes to us as an independent scriptural record contemporary with much of the Bible. Its doctrines affirm that we are to trust the plain meaning of words, and its testimony about the necessity of continuous revelation is unmatched.

The honest truth-seeker can neither neglect nor reject the opportunity to increase his or her understanding. I enjoyed acquaintance with a man who was a devoted student and teacher of the Bible. In his retirement years the opportunity came to him of going on a tour of the Holy Land. He refused that experience, explaining that over the years he had created his own mental picture of the events of the Bible and he didn't want them unsettled or disturbed. This same man would have been greatly chagrined if one of his students, having read the Gospel of Mark, refused to read Matthew, Luke, and John, claiming that what he had read was sufficient and that he didn't want to read something else that might unsettle his perspective on things. Undoubtedly my friend would have attempted to explain to his student the importance of learning all he could about the Savior and that much may be learned from the other Gospel writers that cannot be found in the book of Mark. We could also assume that my friend would have some concern about why anyone would be anxious to find security in a partial understanding of the ministry and teachings of Christ. Could it be that additional understanding might require greater devotion or commitment, that it might require change or even repentance? Returning our thoughts to the teacher, what of his attitude in not wanting to know more of the physical setting in which Christ taught? Could a knowledge of those circumstances sharpen or even change in some instances his understanding of the purpose and meaning of certain texts? And is it not axiomatic that a teacher who ceases to be an eager student also ceases to be an inspiration to those he teaches?

As we struggle to gain a true perspective on what it means to believe in the Bible, we ask, Does a belief in the book of Mark require a belief in the books of Matthew, Luke, and John also? Does the true believer have the prerogative of choosing one or two of the Gospels and setting the others aside, claiming sufficiency in what he has chosen? If the answer is that we cannot pick and choose where the word of God is concerned, the question must be asked, Can we believe in the New Testament without believing in the Old Testament? Can we disregard what God said to those before the time of Christ and still lay claim to the title of honest truth-seekers? If acceptance of the word of God in one dispensation embraces the responsibility to accept that word in all dispensations, could we not say that to truly believe the Old Testament requires that we accept the truth of the New Testament?

Such was the way the Book of Mormon prophets reasoned. Nephi concluded his record by addressing himself to all the ends of the earth: "Hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all men that they should do good" (2 Nephi 33:10). In like manner we find Mormon testifying that the Bible is true because he knows that the Book of Mormon is true. "For behold, this is written [the Book of Mormon] for the intent that ye may believe that [the Bible]; and if ye believe that [the Bible] ye will believe this [the Book of Mormon] also; and if ye believe this [the Book of Mormon] ye will know concerning your fathers, and also the marvelous works which were wrought by the power of God among them" (Mormon 7:9).

In teaching this principle Brigham Young said: "There is not that man that hears the sound of my voice this day, that can say that Jesus lives, whether he professes to be his disciple or not; and can say at the same time, that Joseph Smith was not a Prophet of the Lord.

"There is not that being that ever had the privilege of hearing the way of life and salvation set before him as it is written in the New Testament, and in the Book of Mormon, and in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, by a Latter-day Saint, that can say that Jesus lives, that his Gospel is true; and at the same time say that Joseph Smith was not a Prophet of God. That is strong testimony, but it is true. No man can say that this book (laying his hand on the Bible) is true, is the word of the Lord, is the way, is the guide-board in the path, and a charter by which we may learn the will of God; and at the same time say, that the Book of Mormon is untrue; if he has had the privilege of reading it, or of hearing it read, and learning its doctrines. There is not that person on the face of the earth who has had the privilege of learning the Gospel of Jesus Christ from these two books, that can say that one is true, and the other is false. No Latter-day Saint, no man or woman, can say the Book of Mormon is true, and at the same time say that the Bible is untrue. If one be true, both are; and if one be false, both are false. If Jesus lives, and is the Savior of the world, Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, and lives in the bosom of his father Abraham. Though they have killed his body, yet he lives and beholds the face of his Father in heaven; and his garments are pure as the angels that surround the throne of God; and no man on the earth can say that Jesus lives, and deny at the same time my assertion about the Prophet Joseph. This is my testimony, and it is strong." [^11]

The true believer in Christ will not be found picking and choosing among the things Christ taught, nor will he be found insulating himself by declaring mental retirement in the fear that additional knowledge will unsettle his present understanding. Gospel understanding comes "line upon line, precept upon precept," and it is not the prerogative of the true believer to stop a few precepts short, declaring his understanding to be sufficient. When the Spirit by which revelation comes is lost, the Spirit by which it is understood is also lost (see 2 Nephi 28:27-30).

It is fundamental to the faith of the Latter-day Saints that to believe in the Bible is to believe in the necessity of continuous revelation. In the physical world all species of life reproduce in their own image and likeness. So it is in the realms of spiritual things: faith begets faith, righteousness begets righteousness, and revelation begets revelation. Could it possibly be otherwise? To believe otherwise is to suppose that gospel principles are self-destructive and that by living by them, God would cease to be God. Indeed, the simple truth is that belief in one revelation is but the preparation to believe another and yet another. For us the Bible is a marvelous evidence that God can and does speak and that he will speak to those of this day if they but choose to listen.

Asking God

The God of Mormonism is a God who speaks, and thus one of the distinctive characteristics of our faith is that all are required to obtain a personal witness by the Spirit that the message is true. Members of the Church are expected to have their own gospel dispensation. That is not to say that John the Baptist, or Peter, James, and John must appear to them personally to restore priesthood or that all the revelations of this dispensation must be given to them again; but it is to say that each and every member of the Church is required—and this is a matter of commandment—to seek and obtain his own sure knowledge of the verity of this great latter-day work. For instance, in announcing the Book of Mormon to be true, we always read the promise in the last chapter of Moroni to those we are teaching. It states that if they will read, ponder, and pray, they will come to know by the power of the Holy Ghost that the Book of Mormon is true (Moroni 10:3-5). Everyone we bring into the Church comes in on the condition that such prayers have been asked and that an affirmative answer has been received.

I have frequently asked classes of returned missionaries if they ever met anyone who, while professing a belief in the Bible, could at the same time honestly say they had prayed to know if it was true. I have yet to receive an affirmative response to that question. Even Latter-day Saints who have prayed fervently to gain a testimony of the Book of Mormon or of the Joseph Smith story have never thought it necessary to pray about the Bible. The matter is rather ironic. Nearly two thousand years ago, a Jew named Saul on the road to Damascus had a remarkable visionary experience. The scriptural accounts of his experience are contradictory, and for that matter were not recorded until at least twenty-eight years after the event. [^12] Nevertheless, the Bible-believing world (that is, the Christian portion of it) accepts the story without reservation. No other proof is necessary than the simple fact that the Bible says it. If we change the name from Saul to Joseph, the time from two thousand years ago to less than two hundred years ago, and the place from Damascus to Palmyra, somehow the story becomes incredible to professed Bible believers. Virtually every missionary has heard someone say, "I would join your church if it were not for the Joseph Smith story." You would never hear anyone say, "I would be a Christian and believe the Bible if it were not for the story of Saul on the road to Damascus."

At issue here is whether revelation can be had in modern times. That is the reason Joseph Smith said that the Latter-day Saints were the only people on the earth who believed in the Bible. Why? Because they are the only ones willing to believe it when it says, "Ask God." They are the only ones who believe that God can still speak. If you don't believe that he can still speak, you don't really believe the Bible. Joseph Smith believed it. He tested it, and he found it to be true. Those who say, "I would join your Church if weren't for the part about Joseph Smith," ought to be reminded that if it weren't for Joseph Smith, there would be no church to join! We don't hear anyone say, "I would accept the Ten Commandments if it weren't for that part about Moses and Sinai," or, "I would accept the Sermon on the Mount if it weren't for the part about Jesus." Those who had the faith to listen to and follow Moses did so because they accepted the reality of miracles and revelation in their own time. So it was with Christ. He worked miracles and spoke by way of revelation. To follow him required the same faith necessary to follow Moses. Can it be any different in our day? To share the faith of those of whom we read in the Bible, must we not also be willing to accept contemporary prophets, revelation, and miracles? Surely the ancients would think so, and so did Joseph Smith.

A Divine Commission to Defend the Bible

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is founded on the principle of revelation. Christ is and must be the direct and immediate source of all authority and doctrines in the Church. If revelation were to cease, the Church would no longer be Christ's church. Of necessity the Church must always have a living prophet at its head. The prophet is to the Church as Moses was to the children of Israel (see D&C 107:91). He is the covenant spokesman and speaks to the whole Church for and in behalf of the Lord. No authority or doctrine within the Church stands independent of his voice, for his is the voice of God to his people (D&C 1:38).

In any instance in which the Church embraces as doctrine revelations given to another people at another time—for instance, those revelations that constitute the Bible—they must first be confirmed as the mind, will, and word of the Lord by direct revelation. That is, they become a revelation to us only if the Lord designates them to be such. Many in the world today profess the Koran to be the word of God. The Latter-day Saints do not. Were we to accept it as scripture, we must do so under the Lord's direction. In like manner, many in the Bible-believing world profess a belief in what is known as the Apocrypha; we do not. The Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith that many things contained in it are true and that it is for the most part translated correctly, yet there are many things in it that are not true, for those fifteen intertestamental books have also been subject to interpolations "by the hands of men" (D&C 91:1-2). The attentive reader will be struck by the absence of the prophetic element. At the same time, we accept the Bible as being divinely inspired and have the Lord's confirmation that such is the case.

Though Joseph Smith grew up in a family in which faith in the Bible was a natural inheritance, the spiritual validity of the book was confirmed for him by Moroni, who in his first instruction to the youthful prophet quoted liberally from both the Old and the New Testaments. [^13] The work of translating the Book of Mormon would also have confirmed this, as its prophets quoted frequently from the Brass Plates, which contained Old Testament writings from the time of Adam to the time of Jeremiah (1 Nephi 5:10-13). In his discourse to the Nephites, the resurrected Christ quoted from such sources as Deuteronomy, Isaiah, Habakkuk, and Malachi (see 3 Nephi 20-25). [^14] In April 1830, when Joseph Smith received the revelation to organize the Church, he was told that one of the Lord's purposes in bringing forth the Book of Mormon was to prove that "the holy scriptures" (meaning the Bible) are true. Of the Book of Mormon, the revelation stated it had been translated by "power from on high," that it was originally written "by inspiration," and that it had been and would be "confirmed" by angels (D&C 20:8-11).

In an earlier revelation, speaking of the Book of Mormon, the Lord said that Joseph Smith "has translated the book, even that part Quite generally, we as Latter-day Saints have not paid proper attention to such marvelously significant prophecies. For instance, for generations we have attempted to prove that the Book of Mormon is true by quoting biblical texts. Our chain of thought embraces Isaiah's prophecy about a marvelous work and wonder that is to come forth in the last days. In the prophecy recorded in 2 Nephi 27, Isaiah describes a sealed book that is taken to a learned man, who says he cannot read (translate) it. Then it is taken to the unlearned man, who by the gift and power of God brings forth that which causes the wisdom of the wise to perish (see Isaiah 29). Next we quote Ezekiel 37, which tells the story of how Ezekiel went among his people with two sticks, or writing tables. Upon the first he had written, "For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions," and upon the other he had written, "For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions." He then joined them together and held them in one hand. When the people asked the meaning of his demonstration, he described a future day when the writings of Judah and Joseph would be joined together for the purpose of gathering Israel, that she might become again one nation, with one God, having their lands and their temple restored to them. Two key passages are then quoted from the New Testament. First, we quote John 10:16, in which the Savior says he has other sheep that are not of that fold, sheep that must also be brought so that there can be one fold and one shepherd. This reference foreshadows his visit to those of the house of Israel on the American continent. Then we quote a passage from the book of Revelation, in which the promise is given that an angel will come to the earth in the last days to restore the everlasting gospel, that it might be preached to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people (Revelation 14:6-7). The angel we know to be Moroni and the everlasting gospel to be the truths found in the Book of Mormon.

Without question the honest truth-seeker ought to be deeply impressed with the chain of thought illustrated by these passages of scripture—two witnesses from the Old Testament and two from the New. The difficulty, however, is that such an approach to declaring the message of the Restoration is opposite to what the Savior directed. Our instruction is to use the Book of Mormon to prove the Bible true, not the Bible to prove the Book of Mormon true. When this truth is pointed out, the usual response is, Well, the Bible is common ground—we need to begin our discussion on common ground.

In fact, as we have shown, the Bible is not common ground; it is battleground and has been from long before the time of Christ. What if, when the Lord directed the children of Israel to march from Sinai to the promised land, they had said, No, we think it would be better for us to go to Egypt because that's common ground. They would not then have ended up where they were supposed to be. They would simply have returned to their previous bondage. The point is that it is not common ground we are seeking; it is holy ground. If we want to stand on holy ground, we had better follow the instruction the Lord has given us. Bruce R. McConkie stated it well when he said, "It is easier to convert people to the Book of Mormon than it is to convince them of what the Bible is really saying." [^15]

Why have those of the Bible-believing world not read the words of Isaiah, Ezekiel, the Savior, and the Revelator and found themselves saying, My goodness, these passages are speaking of the Book of Mormon—we had better get hold of the Mormon missionaries! And how do we as Latter-day Saints know with such confidence that we have interpreted those passages correctly? The answer is simple: revelation. It takes revelation to understand the full and proper meaning of any scriptural text. We are confident in professing the meanings of those texts because we have a revealed understanding of them, and were it not for that revealed understanding, we would probably not see any more in them than do our sectarian friends. We know what those texts mean because the Lord told us. And where did he tell us? In the Book of Mormon, of course! If we want to understand the Isaiah prophecy, we must read 2 Nephi 27. If we want to understand the Ezekiel prophecy, we must read 2 Nephi 3. If we want to understand the Savior's statement about his intent to visit other sheep, we must read 3 Nephi 15. If we want to understand the prophecy in Revelation 14 about an angel who is to come to the earth with a message for those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, we must simply pick up the Book of Mormon and start reading. If we need the matter stated more specifically, then we read Doctrine and Covenants 133:36-40.

The fundamental point is that to believe the Bible, one must believe in revelation, because that is what the Bible professes to be. The Latter-day Saints have no interest in being another of the squabbling sects of Christendom. Scriptural interpretations are endless. That was the lesson that led Joseph Smith to the Sacred Grove. After having read the invitation in the book of James to all who lack wisdom to ask of God, Joseph Smith said: "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did" (Joseph Smith-History 1:12).

In so saying, Joseph Smith is giving us a perfect description of the Spirit of revelation. In a sense that could be thought a greater revelation than the one he received in the Sacred Grove, because that was the revelation that got him there. That true religion can be had only by those willing to ask of God may be the most important revelation that any of us can receive, for all else must be built upon this principle. Illustrating that he had obtained that all-important understanding, Joseph continued, saying: "For how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible" (Joseph Smith-History 1:12).

On Being Competent Witnesses of the Bible

Most professing Bible believers have little or no real understanding of what the Bible is really about. They read with a blind eye, carefully choosing those bits and snatches that justify the course they have already determined to follow. They deny the Spirit of revelation and read by the light of the lamp of their own conceit. Of necessity the question must be asked, What constitutes a competent witness of Bible truths? Or by what standard do we determine which of the many voices interpreting the Bible we should give credence to?

To clarify our own position, let us simulate an interview between an honest truth-seeker and a Latter-day Saint who has a clear understanding of the significance of the message of the Restoration.

Truth-seeker: "Do Latter-day Saints accept the Bible as the word of God?"

Latter-day Saint: "We most certainly do."

Truth-seeker: "What gives you that confidence? How do you know that it represents the mind and will of Deity?"

Latter-day Saint: "Because our experience with the Bible is firsthand. We believe that there was a man Adam because the man Adam appeared to Joseph Smith and ministered to him. We believe in the reality of Noah because he too appeared to the Prophet. In like manner so did Moses, Elijah, John the Baptist, Peter, James, John and many others of whom we read in the Bible record (see D&C 2; 13; 110; 128). They were the Prophet's tutors. They instructed him and laid their hands upon his head and gave him the same keys, powers, and authorities by which they taught the gospel and performed its sacred ordinances. We believe in the Bible because we have associated with its chief characters and have been instructed and blessed by them."

Truth-seeker: "All that you are saying depends on the credibility of Joseph Smith. Isn't that a rather heavy burden to place on a single man?"

Latter-day Saint: "Joseph Smith was the recipient of many marvelous spiritual experiences, but in all those I have just mentioned, he was never alone. Whenever keys or authority were being conferred, someone else was with him. All such things can be sustained in the mouths of two witnesses. For instance, Joseph received much instruction from the angel Moroni, a prophet who had lived in the Americas about four hundred years after the resurrection of Christ. Joseph introduced Moroni to three of his closest friends, David Whitmer, Martin Harris, and Oliver Cowdery. We have their written testimony of the event."

Truth-seeker: "You mean to tell me that an angel appeared to Joseph Smith and that Joseph Smith in turn introduced that angel to three of his friends?"

Latter-day Saint: "That is exactly what I am telling you."

Truth-seeker: "Well, what about his revelations? Were they not received in private?"

Latter-day Saint: "I wouldn't want to say that he couldn't receive a revelation without others present, but that was generally not the case. Many of his revelations were received and recorded while he sat in council with his brethren or at conferences of the Church."

Truth-seeker: "You speak of the experiences of Joseph Smith as if they were your own. Does his competence as a witness make you a competent witness also?"

Latter-day Saint: "One is a competent witness only to the extent that one's experience is immediate and personal. I have not had personal association with the prophets of dispensations past, but I have experienced in a very personal way the blessings associated with the keys, powers, and authority they have restored. For instance, I have been instructed by apostles and prophets and have had them lay their hands on my head to give special blessings that have been fully realized. Because of that experience, I have no difficulty believing that people in Old and New Testament times shared the same kind of experience. I have witnessed healings, the operation of spiritual gifts, the spirit of revelation, and the performance of miracles. Indeed, I have on numerous occasions been personally involved in such experiences. Thus, I have no difficulty believing that such things were enjoyed by the ancient Saints as the holy scriptures attest."

Truth-seeker: "Are there any powers known to the ancients that are not a part of what you declare to be the restored gospel?"

Latter-day Saint: "None. Our knowledge is not bound in the covers of a book. It is found in the things we experience. We do not embrace the sectarian notion that our religion is Bible religion because the Bible is not religion—it is simply a history of those who had religion. True religion is a living thing, and our religion lives."

The Meaning of a Gospel Dispensation

Returning our attention to Doctrine and Covenants 20, the revelation that directed Joseph Smith to organize the Church, having announced that the Book of Mormon was given as evidence that the Bible is true, it also stated that it was given as evidence that God does call inspired men in our day and that he is the same yesterday, today, and forever. By these proofs, the revelation states, "shall the world be judged, even as many as shall hereafter come to a knowledge of this work." Those who receive it in faith and work righteousness are promised "a crown of eternal life," whereas those who reject it do so unto their own condemnation. Then we are told that it is "by these things" that we who have joined the Church "know that there is a God in heaven" and come to a knowledge of all other saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ (vv. 11-28). This revelation lays the foundation upon which the Church is to be built. That foundation is faith in the reality of the First Vision and the Book of Mormon as containing "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ" (v. 9). It is "by these things" that Latter-day Saints come to the knowledge "that there is a God in heaven" (v. 17) and obtain an understanding of all other saving principles (vv. 17-28). Thus the dispensation of the fulness of times was formally ushered in.

A gospel dispensation is a period of time in which all that is necessary for the salvation of men is dispensed from the heavens anew. Thus those of that dispensation stand independent of all previous dispensations, not in the sense that the truths of salvation have changed—for God is the same yesterday, today, and forever—but in the sense that they come to a knowledge of those truths by revelations that are unique to them.

Our message centers on the events that took place in the Sacred Grove. That is the story that we seek to tell. It is not common ground that we seek; it is holy ground. Our message does not center on the truth that God spoke in times past but rather that he has and does speak in our day. We honor the dead prophets by listening to the living prophets. We unfold the true meaning of the Bible only as we give heed to its living counterparts. The best possible defense for the truthfulness of the Bible is a people in our day possessing the same faith, having the same gifts and powers, and performing the same marvelous works as did their ancient counterparts. There is no better proof of the validity of ancient revelation than modern revelation.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 23 (October 1932): 175.
[^2] See Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), p. 121.
[^3] Bancroft, History of Utah, p. 334.
[^4] See Edwin Hatch, The Influence of Greek Ideas on Christianity (Gloucester, Mass., 1970), pp. 324-25.
[^5] Manlio Simonetti, Biblical Interpretation in the Early Church, trans. John A. Hughes (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1994), p. 38.
[^6] Simonetti, Biblical Interpretation, p. 45. For the original source, see De Prince 4.3.5.
[^7] Simonetti, Biblical Interpretation, pp. 45-46.
[^8] See Joseph Fielding McConkie, Sons and Daughters of God: The Loss and Restoration of Our Divine Inheritance (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1994), p. 82.
[^9] Justo L. Gonzales, The Story of Christianity, 2 vols. (New York: Harper & Row, 1984), 1:160.
[^10] See John Henry Cardinal Newman, An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1989), p. 344.
[^11] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 1:38.
[^12] The book of Acts tells the story three times (Acts 9:2-7; 22:6-11; 26:12-18). Each account differs somewhat from the others. For instance, in the first we are told that those with Paul heard the voice from heaven but did not see the Lord. In the second we are told that they did not hear the voice. The third does not address that issue but announces that the Lord spoke to Paul in Hebrew.
[^13] A reconstruction of what Moroni told Joseph Smith includes references from Deuteronomy, Psalms, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Joel, and Malachi from the Old Testament. In the New Testament he quoted from Matthew, John, Acts, 1 Corinthians, and Thessalonians. See Joseph Fielding McConkie, His Name Shall Be Joseph (Salt Lake City: Hawkes, 1980), p. 58.
[^14] In 3 Nephi 21:9 the Savior is paraphrasing Habakkuk 1:5. In 3 Nephi 21:11 he is paraphrasing Moses' great prophecy recorded in Deuteronomy 18:18-19.
[^15] Personal conversation, 1983.
