Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter Six

The Arm of the Lord Revealed

And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people. —Doctrine and Covenants 1:14

AMONG THE PROPHETS whose words are preserved in the Bible, Isaiah is known as the great prophet of the Restoration. No one else wrote as explicitly, as completely, or with as great eloquence and power as he did of the events of the last days—events he described as "a marvellous work and a wonder" (see Isaiah 29:14). Among his prophetic promises we find these words: "The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God" (Isaiah 52:10). In what day will the earth "see the salvation," meaning victory or triumph, of their God? In that day in which Israel will again have been gathered and the promises made to her ancient fathers fulfilled. Great battles will precede that day, battles in which it will be necessary for the Lord of Hosts, the Lord of Battles, to bare his arm as a warrior to bring victory to the army of Israel.

Israel's Victory Will Come in the Teaching of the Gospel

Nephi interprets Isaiah's prophecy of the Lord's making bare his holy arm in the context of fulfilling the promise of the Lord to Father Abraham. "In thy seed," the Lord told Abraham, "shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed." Nephi reasons that all the kindreds of the earth cannot be blessed save "the Lord bare his arm" among them, that is, unless he brings "his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel" scattered among all the nations of the earth. Wherefore, he will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel" (1 Nephi 22:9-12).

The word arm carries two common meanings: that of an appendage to the body and that of a weapon. Thus "to be armed" is to have a weapon, and a group of armed men is called an "army." For the Lord to make bare his arm among all people is for him to send forth an army of missionaries to declare his gospel with the covenants of salvation unto the ends of the earth. His victory is in the triumph of truth over darkness, in all men coming to know him as their Lord and their Savior. Living the principles of the gospel and keeping covenants bring great spiritual power to all who march under the Lord's banner. Of that vast army of missionaries he will send forth, the Lord has said: "And their arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them" (D&C 35:14).

"The voice of warning shall be unto all people," the Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith, "by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days." Further, the Prophet was assured, "The arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people" (D&C 1:4, 14). The language of this revelation is similar to that spoken by the Savior to the Nephites as he foreshadowed these marvelous events: "It shall come to pass that whosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him [Joseph Smith] to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant" (3 Nephi 21:11). I believe that is the single most important passage of scripture in the Book of Mormon. It binds God's covenant with Abraham to the testimony of Christ as found in that sacred volume. It means that none will be acknowledged as Abraham's seed without their having first accepted the prophetic role of Joseph Smith and the testimony of Christ as it is found in the Book of Mormon. It means that Joseph Smith, as the revealer of the Book of Mormon, stands at the head of the gathering of Israel.

The declaration by the Savior makes the patriarchal blessing given to the Prophet by his father, Joseph Smith Sr., most remarkable: "A marvelous work and a wonder has the Lord wrought by thy hand, even that which shall prepare the way for the remnants of this people to come in among the Gentiles, with their fulness, as the tribes of Israel are restored. I bless thee with the blessings of thy Fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and even the blessings of thy father Joseph, the son of Jacob. Behold, he looked after his posterity in the last days, when they should be scattered and driven by the Gentiles, and wept before the Lord; he sought diligently to know from whence the Son should come who should bring forth the word of the Lord, by which they might be enlightened, and brought back to the true fold, and his eyes beheld thee, my son; his heart rejoiced and his soul was satisfied and he said, As my blessings are to extend to the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills; as my father's blessings prevailed, over the blessings of his progenitors, and as my branches are to run over the wall, and my seed are to inherit the choice land whereon the Zion of God shall stand in the last days, from among my seed, scattered with the Gentiles, shall a choice Seer arise, whose bowels shall be a fountain of truth, whose loins shall be girded with the girdle of righteousness, whose hands shall be lifted with acceptance before the God of Jacob to turn away his anger from his anointed, whose heart shall mediate great wisdom, whose intelligence shall circumscribe and comprehend the deep things of God, and whose mouth shall utter the law of the just . . . and he shall feed upon the heritage of Jacob his father: Thou [Joseph Smith, Jr.] shall hold the keys of this ministry, even the presidency of this Church, both in time and in eternity, and thou shalt stand on Mount Zion when the tribes of Jacob come shouting from the north, and with thy brethren, the Sons of Ephraim, crown them in the name of Jesus Christ." [^1]

When Moroni appeared to the youthful Joseph Smith, he explained many passages of scripture that foreshadowed the latterday gathering of Israel. Among the passages he quoted were the words of Peter, in which the New Testament apostle spoke of a time of restitution and of the time foreseen by Moses when the ancient lawgiver instructed his people: "A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people" (Acts 3:22-23). Moroni explained that the prophet referred to by Peter was Christ, but though the day had not yet come when "they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people," it soon would come (see Joseph Smith-History 1:40).

Knowledge Without Understanding

At the conclusion of a recent Book of Mormon course I was teaching for returned missionaries at Brigham Young University, a student observed that he had been taught in another class that there were no doctrines in the Book of Mormon that could not be found in the Bible. I could only hope that what he was saying did not accurately represent what his other teacher had said. Coincidentally, just before that class period I had been grading student essays on the topic "What do we learn in 3 Nephi from the Savior about our responsibility to accept him?" The last essay that I had read left me wondering if its author had bothered to read 3 Nephi or had been attending class, and, if so, how he had so completely filtered out every meaningful thing that had been taught. Those two experiences, standing within minutes of each other, along with the class discussion that followed the student's question, did much to convince me that despite our best efforts, both faculty and students have not really understood the importance of the testimony that the Book of Mormon bears of Christ or the real necessity of the latter-day restoration of the gospel.

It is easier to reassemble shattered glass than to reconstruct a class discussion, but let me attempt to identify some of the things that were said in class that day. To give some perspective to our discussion, I asked the class if they knew of any instance in which people had devoted themselves to serious study of the Old Testament and yet had missed its most important message. They struggled with the question but after a while it dawned on them that that was precisely what the Jews had done in Jesus' day. They had "the Law and the Prophets," the primary purpose of which was to prepare them to accept Christ. Paradoxically, not only did they reject Christ but they used those scriptures as their justification in so doing. From there we moved to the New Testament. I posed the same question. Could they identify any instance in which a people had intently studied it and yet missed the heart of its message? Again the class struggled. After all, they reasoned, the Christian world has accepted Christ. I asked if studying the New Testament had helped prepare people to accept their missionary message. Their answers were both affirmative and negative. Certainly such study had helped those who were honest in heart, but it was used by others as an excuse to reject the message of the Restoration. Their experience evidenced that just as many Jews had used the Old Testament to find justification to reject Christ, so too were many Christians using the New Testament to find justification to reject the restored gospel in our day.

Having established these two examples, the class was prepared to accept the possibility that people could also study the Book of Mormon and obtain a great deal of knowledge and information about it but still miss its central point. I suggested that we might profitably consider an appropriate response to the question in the essay they had been asked to write: "What do we learn in 3 Nephi from the Savior about our responsibility to accept him?" Our discussion centered on what I told them was the most important passage in all of the Book of Mormon, namely, 3 Nephi 21:11. The plain meaning of that text is that all in our dispensation must accept the testimony of Christ as it is found in the Book of Mormon or they cannot participate in the covenants of salvation and thus will be left, in the words of Malachi (which the Savior also quoted), without "root or branch," meaning family ties, in the world to come (see 3 Nephi 25:1).

The statement clearly makes acceptance of the Book of Mormon and its testimony of Christ a condition of salvation. The testimony that Jesus is the Christ because Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John so declare is no longer sufficient. The testimony of the Book of Mormon writers is established as the standard here. Why would that be the case? Don't we honor the testimony of the New Testament prophets? Of course we do. Yet one can profess to accept the testimony of the New Testament and believe whatever one wants relative to the plan of salvation. Only when one accepts the testimony of the Book of Mormon prophets does one accept the obligation to accept the divine mission of Joseph Smith and the message of the Restoration.

Some very significant Book of Mormon doctrines relative to Christ cannot be found in the Bible. For instance, consider the role of Christ in redeeming men from the effects of Adam's fall. One can read the Bible from Genesis to Revelation and not find a definition of the word resurrection. In fact, the word is not used in the Old Testament. By contrast the Book of Mormon makes it unmistakably plain that resurrection consists of the inseparable union of body and spirit (see Alma 11:45). An understanding that the plan of salvation requires a corporeal body is essential to understanding the full effects of Adam's fall and Christ's atonement. Lehi's son Jacob teaches us that because of the Fall, body and spirit separate in death, the body to "crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more" and the spirit that inhabited it to become subject to the devil. Jacob explains that "our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself" throughout the endless eternities, save Christ had worked out his atoning sacrifice (see 2 Nephi 9:7-9). The body and the spirit have no power to reunite themselves. Because no unclean thing can enter the presence of God and because the spirit has no power to cleanse itself from sin, it would become subject to the author of sin and as such a citizen of the kingdom of darkness. Thus Lucifer would rule as king over all the dead in a kingdom that knows no light, no agency, and no freedom. All must, under such circumstances, worship him. Yet, as Father Lehi explained, the Messiah came to redeem the children of men from the Fall. "And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given" (2 Nephi 2:26). Lehi is telling us that agency, freedom, and the ability to distinguish between good and evil exist only because of the atonement, or grace, of Christ. Without those three essential elements, there could be no plan for the salvation of mankind. Expanding this concept, Joseph Smith taught us that every principle of the gospel is an appendage to the atonement. [^2] All saving principles exist because of the grace of Christ.

The Atonement, Jacob tells us, is infinite and eternal. Because of it, the twin monsters, death and hell, have no permanent hold over the souls of men. The grave must yield up every soul that it possesses, and every living thing is enabled to enjoy the inseparable union of body and spirit. From modern revelation we know that the glory of resurrected souls will differ according to the law they chose to obey. Some will come forth in a glory like unto that of the sun, others in a splendor like the moon, and still others in glory represented by the stars. These glories have been designated as celestial, terrestrial, and telestial (see D&C 88:20-32). As the atonement of Christ brought victory over the grave, so it brought victory over man's separation from the presence of God. All will be brought back to stand in the divine presence and there account for their works in the flesh. So it was that Christ came into the world that he might "save all men" if they would but "hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam. And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day" (2 Nephi 9:21-22).

Through his atoning sacrifice Christ satisfied the demands of justice. Payment was made for the sins of all mankind. Thus, in so suffering, Jesus becomes more than our Savior. He also becomes our Lord and Master, having bought us with the price of his blood. Because of that infinite act of grace, he rightfully gives us commandments, which we may obey or disobey, according to the freedom and agency he has given us. Of those who choose the path of obedience, Alma said, "These are they that are redeemed of the Lord; yea, these are they that are taken out, that are delivered from that endless night of darkness; and thus they stand or fall; for behold, they are their own judges, whether to do good or do evil. Now the decrees of God are unalterable; therefore, the way is prepared that whosoever will may walk therein and be saved" (Alma 41:7-8). "And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety," Amulek explained, "while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption" (Alma 34:16).

With such concepts clearly in mind, we return to the statement of the Savior in 3 Nephi 21:11 that all must accept the testimony of him as it is found in the Book of Mormon. Much reverence for Christ can be found in the Bible-believing world, but a knowledge of the principles just rehearsed cannot be found. They simply are not there. As marvelous as the Bible is in telling us the story of Christ's ministry, it does not, in its present state, clearly define resurrection so that we know that it is the inseparable union of body and spirit. The idea of a spirit world where disembodied spirits await the day of their resurrection is not a part of the theologies of traditional Christianity. The knowledge that had there been no atonement they would have remained in that spirit prison throughout the endless expanses of eternity, enslaved to their tyrant king, knowing no good, exercising no agency, and experiencing no joy, is not had among them. The fulness of his grace in redeeming us from both the grave and eternal bondage to the evil one is not had by them. Nor is an understanding of the eternal balance that must exist between the principles of mercy and justice. An understanding of those principles is necessary to understand that the grace of Christ does not negate but in fact creates the necessity for obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel whereby we can be saved. Thus we are freed from a false representation of Christ in theologies that append salvation to ritual performance, such as the receiving of certain sacraments, and the equally false notion that salvation is found in the suffering of Christ alone and our simple acknowledgment of it. The first doctrine creates the notion of deathbed repentance; the second, a lip-service religion. Neither represents the discipleship required of true believers.

As Latter-day Saints we may have failed to recognize the distinctive nature of the testimony we bear, but the world has not. To illustrate the point let me return to our class discussion. I asked the class members if they were called to return to the missions in which they had served (more than forty missions were represented in our class) but instead of testifying that Joseph Smith was a prophet and that the Book of Mormon was true they were asked to testify of Christ and the truthfulness of the Bible, would there be a difference in the reception they received? No discussion was necessary. Everyone agreed that to free themselves of the Joseph Smith story and the Book of Mormon would make them appreciably more acceptable to the world. Why the difference if both books contain the same message? If the Book of Mormon was without the power to overturn the theologies of the world, it would go unopposed by them.

One cannot believe in the Book of Mormon without believing in the opening of the heavens and the role of living prophets. Those who accept the Book of Mormon, like those who accepted Christ during his mortal ministry, do so in opposition to the orthodoxy and traditions of the day. The similarity between accepting the mortal Christ and accepting the Book of Mormon is too striking to be anything other than by divine design.

Righteousness and Truth to Sweep the Earth

Enoch recorded a panoramic vision that reached from his day to the time when his city would return to the earth as part of Christ's millennial reign. The prophetic account given in that vision of our dispensation is most instructive. Of necessity it is very brief, almost terse, yet it is marvelously comprehensive. It begins with the litany of signs that are to be manifest in the heavens. "And the day shall come that the earth shall rest," it promises, "but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve" (Moses 7:61). Then in broad sweeping strokes Enoch's vision depicts the great events to be associated with the dispensation of the fulness of times. "And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem" (Moses 7:62).

Consider the events of our dispensation as Enoch describes them. First, we are told that righteousness will be sent down out of heaven. That would embrace all the revelations and angelic ministrants that have been associated with the restoration of the gospel to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Christ himself, earlier in the same revelation, bears the title "the Righteous" (see Moses 7:45, 47), suggesting to me that this outpouring from the heavens begins with his appearance in the Sacred Grove. Then comes the announcement that truth will be brought forth out of the earth. Thus the testimony of heaven and earth combine to testify of Christ and the saving truths of his gospel. The description that follows in Enoch's vision tells us that the truth from the earth will testify of the Only Begotten and his resurrection from the dead and the resurrection of all mankind. No book on earth fits that description as dramatically or perfectly as the Book of Mormon.

As one of the early Brethren observed of similar prophecies in the Bible, if this is not a description of the Book of Mormon, then we wait for another book to come forth in the same manner which contains the same story and teaches the same truths. Then we are told, as Enoch's vision continues, that the truths that have been restored from the heavens and those that have come forth from the earth will unite to sweep the earth as with a flood to gather out the Lord's elect. It would take some effort to miss the message that the revelations of the Restoration in company with the Book of Mormon constitute the message that is to gather Israel. What we have not read here is that strong arguments about the true meaning of the Bible will convert and gather Israel. The testimony that will revolutionize the religious world is to come anew from the heavens and from the earth. It will bear the label "modern revelation" and come forth in a miraculous manner. Thereafter a holy city will be established and a people prepared for the return of Christ. In the midst of that city will be the Lord's tabernacle (meaning temple), and the city shall be called Zion or the New Jerusalem.

We Cannot Isolate the Book of Mormon

One most important truth to be learned from Enoch's vision is that it was not intended that the Book of Mormon carry the full burden of gathering Israel. Although it contains the doctrines of salvation in simplicity and purity and was ordained in the councils of heaven to actuate the gathering of Israel, and although no other scriptural text can match its witness of Christ and the resurrection, it was not intended that the Book of Mormon stand alone in the fulfillment of its divinely decreed destiny. As Enoch notes, the revelations of heaven in union with the truth from the earth were to visit every clime and sweep every country. We must do more than just flood the earth with copies of the Book of Mormon. Our message is not the Book of Mormon. It is the restored gospel, of which the Book of Mormon is the best evidence. To be meaningful, the Book of Mormon must be distributed in the context of the Restoration. It does not and cannot stand independent of the authority restored by John the Baptist to baptize for the remission of sins or the authority restored by Peter, James, and John by which the gift of the Holy Ghost is bestowed. The constitution of the Church must always be the voice of living prophets and the keys and authority they possess. This authority alone can authorize the performance of the ordinances of salvation.

It is not the idea that we gather the Lord's elect to a book, and for that matter, it is not the idea that we gather them to a particular land, either. Salvation is not found by professing faith in a book or by inhabiting a particular plot of ground. We gather Israel to the truths and ordinances of salvation. We gather them to the waters of baptism and the ordinances of the house of the Lord. In the performance of those sacred ordinances, the promises made to the fathers become a reality for their posterity. Lands of inheritance are simply a tangible token of promises made to those who keep their covenants with exactness and honor. Thus the promise, as we have already noted, is "in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel" (1 Nephi 22:11).

We Stand Independent

The gospel has been restored "that all that will hear may hear" the message of salvation (D&C 1:11). All are to receive that message, our revelations declare, "by the mouths of" those whom the Lord sends (D&C 1:4). Though the spreading of the gospel will be aided by mass communication media, such media will never replace personal contact between members and investigators. Reading the Book of Mormon will not remit sins, nor can radios baptize or televisions convey the gift of the Holy Ghost. The promise that the arm of the Lord will be revealed will find its primary fulfillment through those who go forth endowed with power from on high to teach his gospel and bear testimony of him. "I call upon the weak things of the world," the Lord said, "those who are unlearned and despised, to thrash the nations by the power of my Spirit; and their arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them" (D&C 35:13-14).

There is no reservation in heaven about what can be accomplished by those whom the Lord chooses to send to declare his message. Many in the world falsely suppose that when God has spoken through his prophets, the process involves what they have chosen to call divine dictation. The idea is that for the mind and will of God to be conveyed in such a manner that it is not contaminated in any way by the weakness of the flesh, all bodily functions of the Lord's spokesman are temporarily suspended when the Lord speaks through him. Thus the role of the prophet becomes that of a dummy in the lap of the divine ventriloquist. The prophet is simply the voice through whom the Lord speaks and has no more effect on the message than a radio does on the words of the one speaking through it.

Nothing could be further from the truth. Explaining the process by which revelation comes, the Lord told Oliver Cowdery that He would speak to him in his mind and in his heart (see D&C 8:2). That is to say, there are no mindless or heartless revelations. God gave us our minds to use, and the primary way in which they ought to be used is to obtain his mind and will. In like manner, he gave us our hearts, our emotions and feelings, and he expects these too to be used in obtaining his will. The more perfectly our minds and hearts are tuned to the Spirit of the Lord, the more perfect will be our communication with him. We do not suspend our God-given endowments to communicate with God; rather, we expand their capacity. That is done by the aid of the Spirit, and the Spirit in turn is aided by the preparations we have made in complying with and studying the laws and ordinances of the gospel. As puny preparation will precede puny revelations, so those who prepare themselves to be a source of light to others will find that light growing brighter and brighter until the perfect day (see D&C 50:24). Where there is no depth of soil, there can be no depth of root (see Matthew 13:18-23).

The salient point is that the way we present our message has much to do with the kind of people who accept it and the depth of commitment they have in doing so. There is a difference between the commitment of individuals who join the Church only because they were impressed with a gifted entertainer or talented athlete and that of individuals who join the Church because they have feasted on the Book of Mormon and proved it true in their own sacred grove. Likewise, there is a difference between the commitment of someone who has joined the Church because we have convinced them that we share common ground with the rest of the Christian world but have given it a new and exciting twist and that of someone who understands that there has been a new dispensation of the gospel whereby we stand entirely independent of the rest of the religious world. The more faithful we are to the message the Lord has given us, the more completely we teach the message of the Restoration, the deeper and richer the soil will be in which we plant the seeds of everlasting life, and the better the fruits it will produce in the realms of faith and loyalty to the gospel cause. Our spiritual stability is measured by our loyalty to the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The stake in which my family lives recently participated in a regional conference. A flyer dropped off at our home encouraging our attendance at this meeting made a special point to tell us that a member of the Quorum of the Twelve and two other General Authorities would be in attendance. We, of course, were excited about the prospects of a spiritual feast and made it a point to go early in the hopes of getting a good seat. On that matter we were a little disappointed because so many of our neighbors had the same idea. Conversely, however, a goodly number chose not to come. They saw it as a chance to get a break in their regular Sunday responsibilities and not be missed. I would not be surprised to discover that among those who chose not to attend the regional meeting were some who spent part of that time in prayer and scripture study. One way to test the appropriateness of such an action is to ask, What would happen if everyone did the same thing? In this instance, the answer would be that contact with the living oracles would be lost and our religion, like that of traditional Christianity, would be limited to what had been given in times past. Similarly, if such a course became the established pattern among those who stayed home, their reverence for the Lord's servants would shift from living oracles to dead ones. Scriptural history evidences that such a course always leads to disastrous results. But what of their prayers? Would they be answered? The testimony of scripture unites very eloquently to declare that our refusal to listen when the Lord sends his messengers to us will bring a very abrupt halt to any communication we might hope to obtain from him.

Does this principle apply any differently in our efforts to share the restored gospel with others? That is, if we insist in proving the tenets of our faith from Bible texts rather than from the revelations of the Restoration or the statements of our living oracles, are we not approaching the gospel in the same spirit as those who chose to stay home with their scriptures over hearing the words of those we sustain as prophets, seers, and revelators? And, if that is the example we set in teaching the gospel to investigators, do we have any right to act surprised when we discover their roots are not sunk as deeply in the soil of faith as they need to be to survive the storms that inevitably descend upon them?

The truths of salvation can be found only in the dispensation of which we are a part. For those of our day, those truths are not to be found in Enoch's city or Noah's ark, nor can they be found in a return to Sinai or the attempt to reconstruct the message of Christ from the New Testament. After writing his Gospel, John said, "And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written" (John 21:25). From the writings of Luke we learn that the teachings and experiences that converted the Twelve are not recorded within the pages of the New Testament but were associated with the forty-day ministry that began after the Gospel writers concluded their story (see Acts 1:1-4). In his epistles, Paul did not quote from the Gospel writers, suggesting that their records were not extant during the time he wrote, or, at least, that he had no knowledge of them. Paul declared the source of his gospel to be revelation (see Galatians 1:6-12).

Each gospel dispensation is rooted in a revelation of its own, a revelation that allows it to stand independent with its own oracle at the head. The great test of each dispensation is in looking past the frailties of its oracle to accept the blessings of the truths of salvation at his hand.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Peter Widdicombe, The Fatherhood of God from Origen to Athanasius (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994), pp. 15-18. See also Joseph Fielding McConkie, Sons and Daughters of God: The Loss and Restoration of Our Divine Inheritance (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1994), pp. 109-11.
[^2] Bruce R. McConkie, The Foolishness of Teaching, address delivered to seminary and institute teachers (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1981), p. 4.
