Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter Seven

Teaching Pure Doctrine

Again I say, hearken ye elders of my church, whom I have appointed: Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit;

And ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken. —Doctrine and Covenants 43:15-16

AS HE WAITED FOR HIS flight to be announced, my father buried himself in a book by a renowned New Testament scholar. He was delighted to discover material by a sectarian scholar that constituted a marvelous defense of Mormonism. As he boarded the flight he met Marion G. Romney, then a member of the First Presidency. He said, "President Romney, I have got to read this to you. This is good," and proceeded to share his newfound treasure. When he was finished, President Romney said, "Bruce, I have to tell you a story. A few years ago I found something that I thought was remarkable written by one of the world's great scholars. I read it to J. Reuben Clark, and he said, 'Look, when you read things like that, and you find that the world doesn't agree with us, so what? And when you read something like that and you find they are right on the mark and they agree with us, so what?'"

My father thought that a good lesson. The world is not the source of the doctrines we teach nor is it the source from which we seek confirmation for our doctrines. We simply do not bear testimony on the basis of the wisdom of the world. Doctrine and testimony must come from a pure source. To get that idea across to his children, Dad used a little cowboy wisdom. "Don't drink below the horses," he said. "All true religion is revealed religion." Which is simply to say, we must drink at the fountainhead.

In so saying I am not picking a fight with good scholarship. My father read widely. He had a fine library of well-read books. He read the best of Latter-day Saint writers and the best of secular scholars. His standard of measure, however, was always the revealed gospel.

Doctrines of Salvation

A doctrine is something learned, because, as the word doctrine implies, it is something taught. The source of all good doctrine must be God himself. If a doctrine cannot clearly demonstrate its divine origin, it cannot claim place in the family of saving principles. Members of the Church share a loyalty to and a faith in certain principles we accept as doctrines of salvation. By revelation the Lord said, "For thus shall my church be called in the last days, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (D&C 115:4). The in the name of the Church carries a meaning quite different from a Church of Jesus Christ. To say it is the Church is to say, as the Lord did in the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, that it is the "only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30). We hold that declaration to be a doctrine of salvation. Salvation cannot be found in any other organization, ordinances, priesthood, or doctrines. Needless to say, that announcement has given offense to many. Doctrines created in heaven never seem to find a comfortable resting place in theologies crafted by the wisdom of men.

No saving doctrine can stand independent of faith in Christ and the necessary discipline associated with membership in his church. Saving doctrines do not grow wild. Salvation is not found in everyone doing his own thing. Those who falsely suppose that they can negotiate their own salvation often choose to be offended by such declarations. If, as Latter-day Saints hold, there is only one true church, then all others are false and thus the doctrines of salvation are not found in them. Such a position, we are frequently assured, is both judgmental and unchristian. The irony of such an accusation should not go unnoticed. To be Christian, in any meaningful sense of the word, is to believe that the hope of salvation is in Christ. It is to embrace the dogma that mankind is in a fallen state from which Christ alone can redeem them. Thus, all who make a serious profession to being Christians must draw the same narrow and judgmental line relative to Christ that Latter-day Saints draw relative to his Church and its doctrines. The real issue is not the necessity of drawing such a line but rather where it should be drawn and who has the authority to draw it.

Doctrinal Decoys

The essence of our faith centers on preserving the purity of our doctrine. No principle of salvation can ever be a matter of private interpretation or of speculation. Faith cannot be exercised in principles that are not true. As we must not be seduced by false doctrines, so we must not be distracted by doctrinal decoys. Let me suggest a few of the common forms such decoys take.

Irrelevant Testimony

When I was a young seminary student, our teacher gave a lesson for which he placed pictures of a dozen world-renowned scientists in the front of the room. Then he read a quotation from each of the men represented, in which they indicated a belief in God. The idea was that we shared a faith in common with these great scientists and thus our faith was justified. In truth that is not the case. What they were calling God, we call nature. The statements he read merely illustrated that these men acknowledge that there is order in the laws of nature and that those laws govern our universe. The faith, however, that God is a personal being, that he is the father of our spirits, that he was literally the father of Jesus of Nazareth, that Jesus worked out an atoning sacrifice that assures that we will all be resurrected and if we choose to live worthy may return to the presence of God, is quite another matter. If any of those men embraced that faith, which is peculiar to Latter-day Saints, then why hadn't they numbered themselves among us? And if they had, then their testimony of God, of necessity, would have rested on spiritual, not scientific, principles. I assume they were all wise and good men, but their affirmation of God's existence rested on their wisdom, not on the revelations of heaven.

A Bible scholar of considerable reputation recently told a group of divinity students at an Ivy League school that Joseph Smith was a prophet just as Moses was a prophet. The statement loses much of its luster, however, with the discovery of what this man really thinks of Moses. Academic acknowledgments and spiritual commitment are not the same thing. Had he lived in the days of Moses, this man would not have followed him any more than he would now seek admission into the Church by confession of his sins and baptism at the hands of our young missionaries.

Proof Texts

Those advocating questionable doctrines or practices will virtually always seek to give them credibility through the use of proof texts from scripture. Two characteristics are common to such efforts. First, the texts will be obscure, in sharp contrast to the principles of salvation that are taught repeatedly throughout the scriptures. Second, they will be strained; the burden they are being forced to bear will not be natural to them. That is to say, they will not be justified by the context from which they are taken.

Let me cite two illustrations. Sectarian creeds declare God to be "without body, parts, or passions." The text that bears the weight of that declaration is John 4:24, which states, "God is a spirit." The difficulty here is at least twofold. First, an assertion of such importance, one that is announcing the very nature of God, ought not rest on a single scriptural text. The burden is simply too great for a four-word sentence to carry. That has to be particularly true when the sentence is being given an interpretation that puts it at odds with hosts of other scriptural texts that describe the bodily appearance of God to prophets and others. Second, and paradoxically, this is one of the key texts used in the early Christian era to argue precisely the opposite point. If God was a spirit, it was argued, he must have both bodily form and material substance from which his spirit was made, so he obviously could not be without body and parts. That was the notion fought against by those advocating the doctrine embraced in Christian creeds that God was without body and parts. John 4:24 was one of the passages most often quoted against those efforts. What we have here, then, is the typical obscure text being called upon to bear a burden that is out of harmony with the preponderance of Bible texts and that is out of harmony with the context in which it was originally understood. [^1]

As a second illustration, let's take the overworked statement of Christ to Simon Peter: "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church. . . . And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven" (Matthew 16:18-19). From this text it is argued that Peter was to be the rock upon which the Church was to rest and that he was to hold the keys of the same. One great difficulty here is that when Christ did in fact give the keys, he gave them to all of the Twelve rather than to Peter alone (Matthew 18:18-20; John 20:19-23). As to the immediate context, the subject being discussed is how Peter knows that Jesus is the Christ. He is being commended for having obtained that knowledge by the spirit of revelation. Having commended Peter for obtaining his understanding by the Spirit of revelation, Christ says, "Upon this rock [i.e., the rock of revelation] I will build my church." Again the greater issue becomes, can a single phrase be called upon to bear the doctrinal burden placed upon it? Or ought such matters, like all other principles of salvation, be taught both plainly and repetitiously? Surely it must stretch the credulity of honest truth-seekers to suppose that a man rather than God is the foundation of a heaven-sent kingdom.

The Wisdom of Men

The purity of the gospel is lost when scripture is mingled with the philosophies of men. The center of gravity for the Christian world was shifted in the time between the death of the apostles and the Council of Nicaea in A.D. 325. A church that had been founded on the principle of revelation was now to be founded on philosophical speculation. A form of godliness was preserved, but the power was lost, and the world entered into a period known to us as the Dark Ages. The loss to mankind has been immeasurable, and even though the gospel has now been restored, it will be generations before its influence will set at naught the influence of those dark days. Isaiah, describing these events, said people would honor the Lord with their mouths but their hearts would be far from him because their reverence for him had been taught them "by the precept of men." For that reason, he said, the Lord would "work a marvellous work and a wonder" among them, one which would cause "the wisdom of their wise men" to perish, and "the understanding of their prudent men" to be hid (Isaiah 29:13-14).

Nephi, in a prophetic description of the churches of the last days, said that all had gone astray, "save it be a few," whom he depicted as the "humble followers of Christ." Nevertheless, he said, even they had been led astray in many instances because they had been "taught by the precepts of men" (2 Nephi 28:14). We have no shortage of scriptural warnings against putting our trust in the arm of flesh, for, as Nephi said, "cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh" (2 Nephi 4:34).

One seductive danger vying for the attentions of Latter-day Saints is the temptation to substitute various "evidences" for faith. I am not suggesting that ours should be an unreasoned faith, that it cannot bear rigorous examination, or that we are expected to check our minds at the door when we go into church. I am suggesting that our doctrinal understanding must be grounded in faith and that no amount of man-made wisdom can substitute for it. Indeed, our earthly probation was intended as a test of faith, not a test of intellect. That test must of necessity include things that defy the intellect. "We speak," Paul said, "not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual." And we do so, knowing that "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:13-14).

Let me suggest an illustration. The Lord invited us to discover the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon by the power of the Holy Ghost (see Moroni 10:3-5). Significantly, Mormon, the book's editor, warned that it was given in the form it was so that it would constitute a test of faith. He said: "And when they [those of our day] shall have received this [the Book of Mormon], which is expedient that they should have first [before we get the complete account of the Savior's teachings to the Nephites and the sealed portion of the plates], to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them. And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation. Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people" (3 Nephi 26:9-11).

Now, given that it is the Lord's purpose that our testimony of the Book of Mormon rest on faith, what is our purpose in so zealously seeking evidences of all sorts to respond to whatever issues in the book require faith to accept? If such evidence supplants the necessity of faith, are we not at odds with the Lord's purposes? I do not desire to be misunderstood here. We are obligated to bring the best of our scholarship to bear on the study of the Book of Mormon and all other scriptural records. We do not have the right to do less, but we cannot substitute the evidences of men for the witnesses of the Spirit. Scholarly decoys are the danger here. Some seem to be more interested in proving the Book of Mormon true than in discovering what it actually teaches. The irony is that the only meaningful evidence that the book is true is its doctrines. Faith is available to all on equal grounds, as are answers to prayers—scholarly understanding is not. When those who do not have the necessary academic skills are induced to build the house of their understanding of blocks supplied by scholars, they become beholden to the scholars. They find themselves out of context. The scholar then stands between them and God. That is precisely what happened in the Great Apostasy and brought the meridian dispensation to an end. Scholars replaced prophets, and the gospel was declared a mystery that could be understood only by those who had been schooled and trained for the ministry. Thus the trained minister was placed between the believer and God.

Substituting Ethics for Doctrine

"We are to teach the principles of the gospel. We are to teach the doctrines of salvation," stated Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "We have some passing interest in ethical principles but not a great deal as far as emphasis in teaching is concerned. If we teach the doctrines of salvation, the ethical concepts automatically follow. We do not need to spend long periods of time or make elaborate presentations in teaching honesty or integrity or unselfishness or some other ethical principle. Any Presbyterian can do that. Any Methodist can do that. But if we teach the doctrines of salvation, which are basic and fundamental, the ethical concepts automatically follow. It is the testimony and knowledge of the truth that causes people to reach high ethical standards in any event. And so our revelation says: 'And I give unto you a commandment [again we are using mandatory language; the Lord is talking] that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom'" [D&C 88:77]. [^2]

President J. Reuben Clark Jr. observed: "One living, burning, honest testimony of a righteous God-fearing man that Jesus is the Christ and that Joseph was God's prophet, is worth a thousand books and lectures aimed at debasing the Gospel to a system of ethics or seeking to rationalize infinity." [^3]

Pure Doctrine Must Come from a Pure Source

We have in the missionary experiences of the Apostle Paul a marvelous story illustrating that if a testimony of truth comes from the wrong source it is not acceptable to God. On the Sabbath day it was the practice of the Saints in Philippi to meet outside the city wall at a place along the river that ran nearby. In one such meeting they were joined by a slave girl who was possessed by "a spirit of divination," which enabled her to tell fortunes and thus make considerable money for her masters. "The same followed Paul and us [Luke is telling the story], and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation" (Acts 16:17). This sequence repeated itself for many days.

Here was a young woman who was possessed with the spirit of the devil, yet her testimony was true. She repeatedly testified that Paul and Luke were servants of the most high God and that by listening to them the people could learn the principles of salvation. Why would one possessed with the spirit of the adversary bear such a testimony? In considering these verses the question is frequently asked, Can the devil teach truth? The answer, as the story illustrates, is yes, he can and will teach truth when it suits his purpose. What he cannot do is teach it by the Spirit of truth. Consider his purpose in this instance. Jewish law abhorred magical rites and dealings with familiar spirits. Thus, for Paul and his companions to leave the young damsel's testimony unchallenged would have closed the door to proselyting in the Jewish community. By contrast, fortune-telling was popular among the Gentiles. Acceptance of the damsel's testimony would have had the effect in the Gentile community of saying, "Look, the Christian message is not really any different from what we have. When you get down to it, all religion is really the same." As to those of the household of faith, to accept such a testimony would grant this soothsayer credence among their number and thus give the voice of the adversary place among the Saints. Because the experience was new to Paul and his companions, they were not immediately certain how they should respond, but eventually they came to realize what action must be taken, and thus Paul commanded the evil spirit to depart (see Acts 16:18).

The issue here is not one of truth, meaning correctness. What the damsel testified to was true: Paul and his companions were authorized servants of the God of heaven. They represented the source of saving truths to that people. At issue was the source of the damsel's truth. It did not come from God, it did not and could not bear his Spirit, nor could it bear the fruits of that Spirit. Pure doctrine can be taught only from a pure source and for pure reasons. Paul's experience reminds us that when those with "unclean spirits" fell before Christ and cried aloud saying, "Thou art the Son of God," he "straitly charged them that they should not make him known" (Mark 3:11-12). Similarly, when the man in the synagogue who was possessed with an unclean spirit testified that Jesus was the "holy One of God," the Savior rebuked him and cast the evil spirit out of him (Mark 1:23-25).

Nowhere is this doctrine taught with greater plainness than in Doctrine and Covenants 50. In a setting where various spirits had manifested themselves in the youthful church in false visions, phony revelations, and other strange phenomena, the Lord established a standard for pure doctrine. He did so in a series of rhetorical questions. First, he asked, "Unto what were ye ordained?" To which his own answer is: "To preach my gospel [and none other] by the Spirit," meaning "the Comforter," which has been "sent forth to teach the truth." Then, by way of commentary, the Lord said, "He that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way?" Clearly, the Lord is telling us that the gospel can be taught in ways other than by his Spirit. Thus he said, "If it be by some other way it is not of God" (D&C 50:13-18).

The message is simple enough: both the gospel and the spirit by which it is taught must come from the same source. Anything else would be an impure doctrine. It is the waters of everlasting life of which we speak. No one wants to drink water that is impure, and no one wants to drink pure water that has been placed in an impure container.

Obviously, it is important that the doctrinal waters we drink are pure. That requires that our experiences with the Spirit be immediate and personal. Generally we do that by obtaining the confirmation of the Spirit of that which the scriptures and the Lord's anointed are teaching. When the principles of salvation are at stake, we cannot afford to trust other sources. A colleague of mine bought bottled water in Egypt at discount prices from little boys on the street only to find that they had been doing their own bottling. He, as would be expected, got sick. This is not to say that we cannot obtain doc-trinal insights from other sources. Of course we can. The world and everything in it is our textbook for understanding and teaching the gospel. We do not, however, turn to the world to obtain the gospel or look to it as the source of our testimony; but, having received the gospel through the channels the Lord has ordained, we can use art, music, science, literature, or whatever resources we have at our command to illustrate its principles.

Those bearing the gospel message have been told, "Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit; and ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken" (D&C 43:15-16). Ours is a limited commission; we are to teach only those things that the Lord has given us to teach. There are many perceptive and wise things we can learn from the world. Certainly we should know and share the same, but not in the name of the Lord and not in lieu of the message he has given us to bear.

Christ in dialogue with his disciples asked, "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" Simon Peter responded, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." Jesus then said, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven" (Matthew 16:13, 16-17). Thus Peter is commended not simply for knowing the truth of Christ's divine origin but for knowing it from the right source. He had not learned it from "flesh and blood," meaning mortal man or other earthbound sources, but rather by the Spirit of revelation, which is the foundation upon which all true religion must rest.

All True Doctrine Must Come from the Father

All true doctrine, that is, all truths that have the power of salvation in them, originate with and are sent forth by the Father. He is the author of the gospel and creator of the plan of salvation. He ordained the laws whereby all his spirit children, Christ included, might advance and progress and become like him. It is his gospel. It is his plan of salvation that called for the creation and peopling of the earth, for the fall of Adam and the resultant probationary estate of man, for the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the immortality and eternal life of man, and for all the glories and wonders of eternity.

Even Jesus did not purport to originate doctrine. Malachi referred to him as the "messenger of the covenant" (Malachi 3:1), and modern revelation calls him "the messenger of salvation" (D&C 93:8). Of his New Testament teachings Christ said, "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me" (John 7:16). Among the Nephites the resurrected Christ said, "This is my doctrine, and it is the doctrine which the Father hath given unto me" (3 Nephi 11:32) and also, "I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me" (3 Nephi 27:13). A true prophet has no doctrine of his own. Like Christ, he is a messenger of the covenant. "If any man will do his [meaning the Father's] will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself," the Savior said (John 7:16-17). Nor is it any different with the word declared by any of the prophets who speak in the name of the Lord. All those who conform to the will of the Lord, walking in obedience to his commandments, shall know whether the doctrine came from God or was devised by the minds of men.

True doctrine will always trace itself to the Father. We would hardly expect the Savior to come on the scene saying, "My Father said such and such, but in my judgment it ought to be otherwise." Were that his example, it would give us all license to remake the gospel to suit our own purposes. For the same reason the prophets and apostles of the Lord don't come to us and say, "Well, the Lord said this, but I think it ought to be something else." Again, that would destroy the gospel. Their message must be one with that of the Father and the Son. And so it is with each of us. There never was a soul in earth's history who had the right to add to or take from the gospel. Plenty of people assume the prerogative to modify what the Lord or his prophets have said. For them, salvation is found in everyone's doing his own thing. A recent advertising campaign for a local church illustrates. It begins, "You don't have to see God as straight, white, and a man." It then invites those with deviant lifestyles to join in their worship service, announcing that their attitude "goes way beyond tolerance" to "encourage diversity." We are left to wonder how the statement of the Lord that "if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27) fits in with all of that.

All prophets preach the same doctrine. That is not to say that they all share the same depth of understanding. Some, a Joseph Smith for instance, have a much greater endowment in the realm of spiritual understanding than do others. And the difference between what is taught by divinely commissioned messengers in various ages is dictated in large measure by the spiritual maturity of those to whom they have been sent. "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God," Alma said, "nevertheless they are laid under strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him" (Alma 12:9). Men are given only such portion of the mind and will and word of the Lord as their spiritual stature entitles them to receive.

The word of the Lord is always the same; God does not change. Gospel truths do not adjust themselves to the winds of fashion; gospel ordinances always serve the same purposes; and the same gospel rewards always come by obedience to the same laws. Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and all the prophets and Saints of all ages had faith in the same God, believed the same doctrines, lived the same laws, and have gone on to the same eternal rewards. In each instance the people of that day were expected to learn the principles of the gospel from the prophet appointed to preside over them and to receive the ordinances of salvation under his hand. Individuals must accept the message of salvation from the prophets sent them. They cannot gaze fondly back to former days and expect to gain the blessings of heaven. One reason is that the message of salvation requires the performance of ordinances. Thus, those who embrace it must do so at the hands of a living administrator. A dead prophet, no matter how great he was, cannot baptize anyone. A second reason is that it brings us back to the necessity of faith. Little faith is needed to believe in dead prophets, who inevitably enjoy the acclaim of the world. Living prophets are another matter. To follow a living prophet always requires both faith and courage. It always places one at odds with the world. That is the reason that though we quote, use, expound, teach from, and glory in the Bible, we understand it is not the source of doctrine nor the hope of salvation to those of our dispensation. No people believe the Bible more devoutly than the Latter-day Saints. We cannot speak too highly of it, yet it is not a source of priesthood nor does it stand at the head of the Church. When we go forth to teach the doctrines of salvation, our divine commission—the commandment given us—is to teach the revelations and commandments that have come to and through Joseph Smith. "By them," meaning the revelations of our dispensation, "shall the world be judged," the Lord said, "even as many as shall hereafter come to a knowledge of this work. And those who receive it [the Book of Mormon] in faith, and work righteousness, shall receive a crown of eternal life; but those who harden their hearts in unbelief, and reject it, it shall turn to their own condemnation" (D&C 20:13-15).

The Channel Ordained for Our Day

Many in the world today profess to accept Jesus or to embrace the Christian faith. For that faith to be pure, the source of that faith must also be pure. In his visit to the Nephites, Christ reviewed the prophetic promises relative to the latter-day gathering of Israel. He told them that Israel would be gathered when the Book of Mormon came forth and that the rightful heirs of those promises would be those who accepted the testimony of that scriptural record. "Therefore it shall come to pass that whosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him [Joseph Smith] to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant" (3 Nephi 21:11). That is to say, Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon constitute the channel, or source, of the testimony of Christ for our dispensation. No other source fills the prophecy, and no other source has the power of salvation in it. Those who profess Christ while rejecting the Book of Mormon are to be "cut off" from the blessings of the covenant and will be left, in the language of Malachi, which the Savior also quoted to the Nephites, with "neither root nor branch" (3 Nephi 25:1).

To be left with "neither root nor branch," meaning ancestry or posterity, is to be left without a place in an eternal family unit on the Day of Judgment. It is to be left without progenitors or posterity, whereas the covenant made with Abraham centered on the continuation of the family unit. The promise of those blessings is found only in the temple and comes only at the hands of those authorized to perform such ordinances. To reject the testimony of Christ as it comes to us through Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon is to reject those blessings.

By revelation we have been told that the higher priesthood is to "administer the gospel," meaning that it is the source through which it is to come both to us and to all nations of the earth (see D&C 84:19). Joseph Smith said, "The Melchizedek Priesthood . . . is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven." [^4] Thus every doctrine we espouse must, if it be a pure doctrine, trace itself to that priesthood restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by Peter, James, and John. It must represent the opening of the heavens, the reality of living prophets in our day, and a people who stand independent of the world and of their religious traditions. Few waters have been as muddied as those of religious tradition. We must, if our doctrine is to be pure, drink at the fountainhead. That is tantamount to saying that any doctrine that does not bear the label "revelation" is not our doctrine and is unworthy of our faith. We have not built out of the theological rubble of the past. Every priesthood, key, power, authority, or doctrine necessary for the salvation of men must be rooted in this the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Brigham Young calls our attention to another principle relative to things coming through the proper channels. He said, "If the Lord Almighty should reveal to a High Priest, or to any other than the head, things that are true, or that have been and will be, and show to him the destiny of this people twenty-five years from now, or a new doctrine that will in five, ten, or twenty years hence become the doctrine of this Church and Kingdom, but which has not yet been revealed to this people, and reveal it to him by the same Spirit, the same messenger, the same voice, the same power that gave revelations to Joseph when he was living, it would be a blessing to that High Priest, or individual; but he must rarely divulge it to a second person on the face of the earth, until God reveals it through the proper source to become the property of the people at large. Therefore when you hear Elders say that God does not reveal through the President of the Church that which they know, and tell wonderful things, you may generally set it down as God's truth that the revelation they have had is from the Devil, and not from God. If they had received from the proper source, the same power that revealed it to them would have shown them that they must keep the things revealed in their own bosoms, and they seldom would have a desire to disclose them to the second person." [^5]

The Constitution of the Church

Living prophets are the constitution of the Church. Some have erroneously supposed that the New Testament was the guiding document of the meridian Church. This could not have been the case. None of its books was written in the lifetime of Christ. Thessalonians, written in A.D. 52, is believed to be the first of the New Testament books to have been penned. The next half century witnessed the writing of the others, and then more than three hundred years passed before these books were bound together in one cover. Thus the Apostasy was complete before the New Testament as we know it existed.

Paul testified that apostles and prophets were the foundation of the meridian Church (Ephesians 2:20). When he said, "God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers" (1 Corinthians 12:28), he was not thinking of those who had passed beyond the veil. The Old Testament, for all of its greatness and inspiration, could not direct a New Testament church. The very idea of a "new testament," or more properly a "new covenant," assured the reality of an independent dispensation—a day of revelation. As to our own day, if we are to lay claim to a "true and living church," then it must have a true and living constitution, that is, living prophets and apostles.

Joseph Smith gave a committee headed by John Taylor the assignment to write a constitution for the kingdom of God. Their efforts were fruitless. Unable to lay claim to inspiration, they reported back to the Prophet. He matter-of-factly acknowledged their failure, stating that "they could not draft a constitution worthy of guiding the kingdom of God" and that he had gone before the Lord seeking that such a constitution be granted by revelation. In response to his entreaties, the Lord said, "Ye are my constitution and I am your God and ye are my spokesman, therefore from henceforth keep my commandments." [^6]

Years later when John Taylor was president of the Church, a revelation given to the Church stated: "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. I called you by my servant Joseph, and by my servant Brigham, and by my servant John. You did not teach and instruct me; but I have taught and instructed you and organized you according to my eternal laws. Ye are my Constitution, and I am your God; and I will be acknowledged; and my will and my word and my law shall bear rule in my Kingdom, saith the Lord. If it does not, then it is not my Kingdom, and then are ye not my spokesmen; saith the Lord. For if it is by the wisdom of man, by the intelligence of man, and under the direction of man, then it is a Kingdom of man and not of me, and I acknowledge it not, saith the Lord God. Have I not instructed you in all that you know, and is not this Kingdom organized and directed by revelation from me? Is it not called the Kingdom of God? If, therefore, it is not my Kingdom, why do you make use of my name and invoke my authority and my aid? Is this Kingdom not called, the kingdom of God and his laws, with the keys and power thereof, and judgment in the hands of his servants. Amen Christ." [^7]

Where to Expect False Doctrine

"Among the Latter-day Saints, the preaching of false doctrines disguised as truths of the gospel, may be expected from people of two classes, and practically from these only," observed President Joseph F. Smith. "They are," he said:

"First—The hopelessly ignorant, whose lack of intelligence is due to their indolence and sloth, who make but feeble effort, if indeed any at all, to better themselves by reading and study; those who are afflicted with a dread disease that may develop into an incurable malady—laziness.

"Second—The proud and self-vaunting ones, who read by the lamp of their own conceit; who interpret by rules of their own contriving; who have become a law unto themselves, and so pose as the sole judges of their own doings. More dangerously ignorant than the first.

"Beware of the lazy and the proud; their infection in each case is contagious; better for them and for all when they are compelled to display the yellow flag of warning, that the clean and uninfected may be protected." [^8]

Why Some Are Uncomfortable with Doctrines

To those outside the faith, or those within the Church who are not fully converted, doctrines are often viewed as being arbitrary, authoritarian, and intolerant. Such people consistently seek to dissociate God from anything that could be associated with such behavior. They speak endlessly of God's mercy but not of his justice, forgetting that without justice there can be no mercy. Both are attributes of godliness, and no gospel system can exist without the perfect union of the two. To suppose otherwise is akin to saying that God favors mercy but recognizes no evil and that nothing is deserving of punishment. God simply cannot be broad-minded about evil. He cannot tolerate sin in the least degree. My experience, and I am sure it is not unlike that of others, is that those who profess to be the most broad-minded are very intolerant of those who do not share their broad-mindedness. Everything is acceptable to them save that which says that everything is not acceptable.

Those who are offended with the idea of doctrine seek to convince us that all that really matters is that we love one another and are gracious and charitable in all our relationships. To oppose such notions is like opposing motherhood and apple pie. No right thinking person is against love, charity, or the importance of living by Christlike standards. Nevertheless, such expressions represent a loss of spiritual focus. If love and charity have the power of salvation in them, then why the necessity of Christ and his atoning sacrifice? Why did Joseph and Hyrum Smith die in Carthage? Why were the heavens opened and angels sent to earth to restore keys and authority? What is the necessity of the ordinances of salvation? What is the purpose of temples? Why do we need scriptures and living prophets?

Paul said that if we have not charity, we are as sounding brass and as a tinkling cymbal, but that does not discount Christ's saying we must be baptized or be damned. That is hard doctrine. There is no compromise in it. It is an expression of belief out of which behavior is to grow. Proper behavior does not float around like a ship at sea without a rudder. Good doctrine must be the rudder for good behavior. All who live a kindly life will be richly rewarded by our eternal Father, but only those who are valiant in the testimony will be exalted. To be valiant in testimony is to be valiant in behavior that builds the kingdom of God. To advocate a position that does not sustain the need for the doctrines and discipline of the church Christ organized is something less than valiant.

There have always been those who claim membership in the Church while seeking to change its doctrines for one purpose or another. Such people generally like labels and refer to themselves as intellectuals or liberals. Responding to the spirit of such, Elder John A. Widtsoe observed: "The self-called liberal is one who has broken with the fundamental principles or guiding philosophy to which he belongs. He is an unbeliever. He claims membership in an organization but does not believe in its basic concepts and sets out to reform it by changing its foundations. He is forever entangling his unbelief with his membership. He wants the protection of the organization and, therefore, admits frankly that he rejects the fundamental beliefs of the cause and seeks truth elsewhere. It is a species of cowardice. In a Church the liberal refuses to accept the doctrine of the Church or the way of life it enjoins upon its members. It is undeserved compliments to designate by the noble word of liberal. They are apostates from a cause, engaged in building their own cause under false convictions, rudderless mariners, victims of every passing wave. Such men whatever they may call themselves are dangerous to human happiness. Certainly they are not entitled to be called liberals within the organization in which they are members. Their chief pastime is to sow the seeds of anarchy in the hearts of others. It is folly to speak of a liberal religion if that religion claims to and rests upon unchanging truth.

"It is well to beware of people who go about proclaiming that they are or their churches are liberal. The probabilities are that the structure of their faith is built on sand and will not withstand the storms of truth." [^9]

Those Who Would Depart from the Gospel

In like manner Elder Spencer W. Kimball described the pattern common to those who leave the Church to become cultists. He noted that they seldom direct their attention to doctrine at first but more often to the failings of our leaders. "They who garnish the sepulchers of the dead prophets begin now by stoning the living ones. They return to the pronouncements of the dead leaders and interpret them to be incompatible with present programs. They convince themselves that there are discrepancies between the practices of the deceased and the leaders of the present. . . .

"Apply this to modern times and you have the so-called reformers. Many budding apostates follow the pattern progressively. They allege love for the gospel and the Church but charge that leaders are a little 'off the beam'! Soon they claim that the leaders are making changes and not following the original programs. Next they say that while the gospel and the Church are divine, the leaders are fallen. Up to this time it may be a passive thing, but now it becomes an active resistance and frequently the blooming apostate begins to air his views and to crusade. He is likely now to join groups who are slipping away. He may become a student of the Journal of Discourses and is flattered by the evil one that he knows more about the scriptures and doctrines than the Church leaders who, he says, are now persecuting him. He generally wants all the blessings of the Church: membership, its Priesthood, its temple privileges, and expects them from the leaders of the Church, though at the same time claiming that those same leaders have departed from the path. He now begins to expect persecution and adopts a martyr complex, and when finally excommunication comes he associates himself with other apostates to develop or strengthen cults. At this stage he is likely to claim revelation for himself; revelations from the Lord directing him in his interpretations and his actions. Those manifestations are superior to anything from living leaders, he claims. He is now becoming quite independent." [^10]

Competent Witnesses

All doctrines have a spirit innate to themselves. That spirit testifies of their truthfulness. Thus everyone who lives a gospel principle will through that association know, by the witness of the Spirit, the truthfulness of the principle. For instance, through the payment of an honest tithe, one gains a testimony of the principle of tithing; by living the Word of Wisdom, one obtains a testimony of the Word of Wisdom. Every member of the Church is expected to be a living witness of its doctrines because they live them and because they have received the witness of the Spirit. Thus no one need lean on borrowed light, for all are entitled to both witnesses. All must stand as competent witnesses of the faith.

The vitality of our faith is found in its doctrines. Those doctrines have engendered a faith that is unmatched in all the world. As a people, we have passed through much bigotry and persecution. As the gospel message goes to the nations of the earth, we have every expectation that we will yet see more of the same. Were our doctrines untrue, the world would let us alone. The devil doesn't bother to kick a dead dog. Validity draws the fire.

Moroni told Joseph Smith, then an uneducated seventeen-year-old boy, that his name would be had for good and evil among all the peoples of the earth (Joseph Smith-History 1:33). It is a most remarkable prophecy. Fourteen years later, while Joseph Smith was incarcerated in the Liberty Jail, the Lord affirmed that prophecy, saying: "The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; while the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand" (D&C 122:1-2).

Our destiny as a people is to take that message restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith to the ends of the earth. We echo the testimony of the Prophet. As our testimony is the same and our doctrines the same, our experiences in bearing that testimony will be the same. Some will hold us in honor; others in derision. Such is our destiny, as it has been the destiny of the children of God in all ages of earth's history. So be it.

Our faith is not predicated on the concurrence of sectarian scholarship. As to the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, we have been sent forth to teach, not to be taught (D&C 43:15). The Savior is our exemplar; of him we read, "And he served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught: for he needed not that any man should teach him" (JST Matthew 3:25).

Whether they agree or disagree with us has nothing in the world to do with why we believe or disbelieve a particular thing. For us to court the world's approval or to attempt to sustain our faith because sources respectable in the world agree with us is, at best, shortsighted. Surely, we would not abandon a doctrine because those not of our faith did not accept it. Further, great care should be taken in quoting those not of our faith for the purpose of sustaining our faith. If those we quote were truly in agreement with us, why have they not numbered themselves among us?

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), p. 365.
[^2] Smith, Teachings, p. 58.
[^3] See also Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), 7.20, pp. 82-83.
[^4] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), pp. 166-67.
[^5] Brigham Young, Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954), p. 338.
[^6] Robert L. Millet, "'Praise to the Man': Loyalty to the Prophet Joseph Smith," in Regional Studies in Latter-day Saint History: Illinois, ed. H. Dean Garrett (Provo, Utah: Department of Church History and Doctrine, Brigham Young University, 1995), pp. 9-10.
[^7] Millet, "'Praise to the Man,'" p. 10.
[^8] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), p. 373.
[^9] John A. Widtsoe, as quoted by Harold B. Lee, Viewpoint of a Giant, address delivered to seminary and institute teachers, Provo, Utah, 18 July 1968, pp. 3-4.
[^10] Spencer W. Kimball, That You May Not Be Deceived, Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, Provo, Utah, 11 Nov. 1959, pp. 5-6.
