Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter Eight

One True Church

Behold there are save two churches only; the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil; wherefore, whoso belongeth not to the church of the Lamb of God belongeth to that great church, which is the mother of abominations; and she is the whore of all the earth. —1 Nephi 14:10

IN A DISCUSSION OF religious issues few questions are more emotionally charged than that of whether there is only one true church. The announcement that only one church can be true, with its attendant implication that all others are false, gives immediate offense to many who suppose that such a conclusion excludes great hosts of wonderful people from the love of God and the blessings of heaven. It is thought to be incompatible with the idea of a loving God and often is labeled as both intolerant and unchristian. Thus it is essential to respond to this issue. Are there false churches? The answer to the question, Are there false churches? is less threatening than the answer to the question, Is there only one true church? It would generally be agreed that just as there are false ideas, so there are false churches. Certainly the Bible speaks of false teachers, false prophets, and even false Christs. It would also be agreed among thoughtful people that no real blessings can accrue from falsehoods. To mistakenly swallow poison makes it no less harmful than taking it by design. Surely there are ideas that are as harmful to the soul as there are practices that are harmful to the mortal body.

Why would we suppose that there is but one true church? Perhaps it ought be asked, Is there law in the universe, law that governs all things? Must we discover and obey this law to obtain the desired results? If that be so, are there any fields that can be excepted from this principle, fields governed by chaos rather than law? Suppose, for instance, a dozen people add a column of figures and each arrives at a different sum—can all twelve be right? Suppose a dozen chemists set out to make a specified substance, and suppose also that they all attempt it by using different materials. How many of their number will succeed? Let us add another element and suppose that the people involved are very sincere. Can that in some way change things?

We need further ask, Could the nature of our universe be such that law governs all save that which is spiritual? Could it be that in the realm of spiritual things chaos governs? Could it be that in some instances wickedness does bring happiness and in others it does not and that there is no way for us to know what the result of our particular actions will be? If there are eternal laws, could it be that God has left it to each man, woman, and child to determine for himself which of those laws will apply to him and which will not? Is salvation simply a divine smorgasbord at which we all satisfy our own appetites, or would it be more true to all we know and have experienced to conclude that there are spiritual laws, just as there are temporal laws, and that "when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated"? (D&C 130:21).

If such principles as righteousness, peace, and order are to be found in heaven, then it must be a kingdom governed by laws; and if there are such laws, then there must be a right and proper path that leads the soul back to the presence of the Father and all must follow the same path, just as all must follow the same laws to obtain results in the physical world of which we are a part.

Does the idea that there are spiritual laws that must be lived in order to receive the blessings of heaven make God unloving or unjust? Quite the opposite. The knowledge that there is a sure path and all are invited to travel it assures us of God's universal love and of his unfailing justice. A doctor cannot respond to the plea of his sick patient by saying, "Take whatever medicine you want. Whatever you choose to do will be just fine." Nor can we expect the God of heaven to respond to the distraught soul by saying, "Oh, any church will do; choose your own plan of salvation—whatever you do will bless you." If we are going to argue that such a response from God is evidence of his love, then we must also argue that such a response from a physician is evidence of his concern for his patient.

Singularly, it is in the doctrine that there is but one true church that we find the perfect manifestation of God's love and his justice. The notion that salvation can be found by following any path of one's choosing negates the need for a Savior, for obedience, or for righteousness. It does away with the need for faith and for religion in any organized form. It excuses us from any responsibility one for another and suggests that God couldn't care less. It further suggests that to be good parents we ought to let our own children run wild. After all, to discipline them to a single standard, as the argument goes, would be unchristian.

Is a church organization necessary? No one ever started life in this world fully grown, and never has there been an infant child that survived to adulthood without the protecting care of others. The human race survives only because of its willingness to help one another. The more advanced and productive the society, the greater its interdependency. As it is in the realm of temporal things, so it is in the realm of spiritual things. No one commences life spiritually mature. All, the Son of God included, are required to advance from grace to grace in order to receive the fulness of the Father (see D&C 93:6-18). We would all be impoverished if we could read no books save those we had written, hear no music save that which we composed, played no instruments except those we made, hear no sermons except those we preached, and follow no example except our own. We are all in need of spiritual mentors, just as we are all in need of teachers in the temporal realm. We do not perform the ordinances of salvation for ourselves, nor do we determine our own worthiness to receive them. It is through the organization of the Church that the principles of salvation are taught both to those within the fold and those without.

What is the church? The true church is the kingdom of God on earth, and as such has an organization, officers to administer its affairs, and principles upon which it operates. Jesus the Christ is its heavenly King, and the senior apostle of God on earth serves as the presiding officer in this mortal sphere. He receives direction and guidance from the heavenly King by the power of the Holy Ghost. The church is thus an organized body of true believers; it is composed of those who believe the gospel and seek salvation by obedience to its laws and ordinances. Because of the atonement of Christ, all who seek salvation may obtain it by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Thus there neither is nor can be salvation outside the true church.

As the gospel is everlasting and eternal, so is the Lord's church. It has existed in all earthly gospel dispensations. It was the church in the days of Melchizedek that named the holy priesthood after that great high priest (see D&C 107:4). The Book of Mormon frequently mentions the church in what historical Christianity presumes is the pre-Christian era. Most of what we know of church organization and functioning comes from the New Testament era. Those who obtain exaltation will be members of the Church of the Firstborn in the celestial world.

Just as the gospel is the Lord's, so the church that administers it must be his also. He must be its creator, the source of its power and authority. It must teach his laws, his ordinances, and his doctrines. He must direct its affairs, even from day to day. Such a church could not exist without the Spirit of revelation, meaning ongoing and continuous revelation suited to each particular time and season through which his church must pass. The organization thus established remains his church as long as it follows his direction and stays on the course he has charted. His earthly servants, those called to administer in his name, are to say and do what he himself would say and do were he personally among us. Thus, if there is a true gospel and a true plan of salvation, there must of necessity be a true church to administer the same.

Is the gospel the same in all ages? Inherent in the verity that there is but one true church, one path to the presence of our eternal Father, is the assurance that the gospel is the same in all ages of earth's history and among all peoples. Eternal principles are as fixed and sure as the God from whence they came. If, as holy writ declares, God is the same yesterday, today, and forever; if he is a holy being in whom there is no variability, neither shadow of turning; and if souls have been equally precious in his sight in all ages—then his saving power could not be, as traditional Christianity tells us it is—restricted to the so-called Christian era. Could a just God deny the blessings of salvation to Adam, Enoch, Noah, or any other righteous soul who lived before the Flood? Could he deny the fulness of gospel blessings to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or any of their righteous contemporaries? And what of the host of Israel, his own peculiar people? Did he give them prophets but not the gospel? In writing upon the tables with his own finger, did he forget to tell them that salvation was in the name of Christ and none other? Are we to assume that such a determination had not yet been made in the heavens?

Was it not an angel from heaven who declared to John that the gospel of Christ is an "everlasting gospel"? (Revelation 14:6). As such, it has found place in the hearts and souls of the faithful in all ages and at all times. It has been dispensed from God in heaven to man on earth in a series of great dispensations. Those dispensations constitute the occasions when the plan of salvation is revealed anew through living prophets so that those of that dispensation would stand independent of that which had been given previously. This system of gospel dispensations began with Adam, the first man and primal parent of the human race. In his day the proclamation went forth that men should worship the Lord their God and him only should they serve, and that they should "believe on his Only Begotten Son, even him whom he declared should come in the meridian of time, who was prepared from before the foundation of the world." So it was that "the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof" (Moses 5:58-59).

Adam, Enoch, and Noah each in turn received a dispensation of the gospel. Enoch was one of the greatest preachers of righteousness ever to dwell on earth. Noah stood as a pillar of truth and righteousness in the midst of a wicked and evil generation ripening for destruction. "And the Lord ordained Noah after his own order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch." The message Noah proclaimed to the worldly people of his day was "believe and repent of your sins and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, even as our fathers, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, that ye may have all things made manifest" (Moses 8:19, 24).

Paul tells us that "God . . . preached before the gospel unto Abraham" (Galatians 3:8) and that "unto us [those who lived in the meridian day] was the gospel preached, as well as unto them [Israel in the day of Moses]: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it" (Hebrews 4:2). Indeed, Paul testifies that "therein [the gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation] is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, the just shall live by faith" (Romans 1:16-17). In other words, from age to age, whenever there were just men and women on earth, the Lord gave them his everlasting gospel to enable them to live by faith.

Where among all the churches of Christendom is it known and taught that the everlasting gospel has been given to men in a series of dispensations? Who among them knows that when Jesus came among the Jews, teaching that which his Father commanded him, he was restoring what had been lost by apostasy? Can any church be true that does not believe and teach that the gospel of salvation, the gospel of the Everlasting God, is itself the everlasting word of truth and salvation?

Is the organization of the Lord's church the same in all ages? As we have just seen, the principles of salvation must be everlastingly the same. The organization through which they are administered, however, can and may change. Its principles are eternal and as such are irrevocable; its policies, on the other hand, are not, and thus they properly may change as circumstances change. For example, in the early part of the Old Testament, the organization of the Church was familial. When the nation of Israel was formed, the organization of the Church became much more complex. Similarly, when the Church was organized for the first time in this dispensation, it had only a handful of members and a correspondingly simple organizational structure. Today, with millions of members, that organization is appreciably more complex, and it will, of course, continue to grow and change. Nevertheless, we will always be able to describe the Church as Joseph Smith did in the sixth Article of Faith: "We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, and so forth."

Is there a church of the devil? There has always been a church of the devil. Wherever and whenever the truths of salvation are proclaimed, Joseph Smith taught us, then the devil "always sets up his kingdom" in opposition to the kingdom of God. [^1] The devil first organized his church in the premortal existence. Its purpose was to oppose the plan of salvation established by the Great Elohim and to substitute for it a devilish proposal to save all men by denying them their agency. Lucifer's proposition meant salvation without righteousness, without testing, and without progression. The members of his church came out in open rebellion against God in our first estate, in consequence of which there was war in heaven. Lucifer and his legions were cast out, losing the privilege of obtaining bodies in this mortal probation. Thus they became perdition, which means hopelessly lost.

The devil and his church existed in the days of Adam. Cain, who "loved Satan" and entered into covenants with him, became its first prophet. When Adam and Eve taught their children that salvation was in Christ and in the Atonement he would bring to pass, "Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it [the gospel of Christ] not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And [the posterity of Adam] began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish," signifying that they loved Satan more than God, and thus they have chosen to be citizens of his church and kingdom (Moses 5:13).

Our concern, however, is not with the church of the devil and its various sects, cults, and branches as they existed in the day before the coming of the Son of God in the flesh. Rather, we need be concerned with the organization, doctrines, ordinances, and system of worship of that church in our day. John the Revelator, in Revelation 17 and 18, tells us of the fall of this great church, which is destined to occur when the Lord comes to usher in the millennial reign. John designates the church as "MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH" (Revelation 17:5). He tells of her evils and iniquities, of her sorceries that deceived nations, of the blood of prophets and Saints that drenches her hands, and of how she made merchandise of the souls of men. These two chapters of holy writ are deserving of careful and attentive study.

But for this discussion let us take the similar passage found in the Book of Mormon. It has the advantage of being accurately placed in its proper historical setting. Nephi foresaw the ministry of John the Baptist; the birth, ministry, and crucifixion of the Son of God; and the persecutions that were heaped upon the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb (1 Nephi 11:27-36). Then, after all this, he saw the formation of the church of the devil among the Gentile nations, which were separated from the Americas by many waters (1 Nephi 13-14).

"I saw among the nations of the Gentiles the formation of a great church." That occurred after the days of the original Twelve. "And the angel said unto me: Behold the formation of a church which is most abominable above all other churches, which slayeth the saints of God, yea, and tortureth them and bindeth them down, and yoketh them with a yoke of iron, and bringeth them down into captivity" (1 Nephi 13:4-5). There are many abominable churches, many that run counter to the mind and will of the Lord, many that teach false doctrines in which there is no salvation; but there is one that ranks as the most abominable of them all.

"And it came to pass that I beheld this great and abominable church"—the one that is more depraved and devilish than any of the others—"and I saw the devil that he was the founder of it." He may be the founder of them all, but more of his influence and more of his evil ways are manifest in this particular church than in any of the others. "And I also saw gold, and silver, and silks, and scarlets, and fine-twined linen, and all manner of precious clothing; and I saw many harlots. And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the gold, and the silver, and the silks, and the scarlets, and the fine-twined linen, and the precious clothing, and the harlots, are the desires of this great and abominable church. And also for the praise of the world do they destroy the saints of God, and bring them down into captivity" (1 Nephi 13:6-9).

A few verses later, Nephi again uses the word harlot to describe apostasy from the truth. The "abominable church," he says, "is the mother of harlots," meaning that the great and abominable church spawns daughter churches, also apostate in their nature, which are also likened unto harlots (1 Nephi 13:34). And he also saw the perversion of the Bible in an earlier age by the great and abominable church, which caused mankind to stumble and fall away from the true gospel.

Then Nephi saw the day of restoration, in which we live. "And it shall come to pass, that if the Gentiles shall hearken unto the Lamb of God in that day that he shall manifest himself unto them in word, and also in power, in very deed, unto the taking away of their stumbling blocks" (1 Nephi 14:1), they shall be marvelously blessed. That is, if the Gentiles, in the latter days, in the day of the restoration of the gospel, shall hearken unto the Lord, he will remove the stumbling block of a perverted Bible by giving them the Book of Mormon and other latter-day revelations, and they shall be numbered with the blessed ones in the house of Israel. Then "that great pit, which hath been digged for them by that great and abominable church, which was founded by the devil and his children, that he might lead away the souls of men down to hell—yea, that great pit which hath been digged for the destruction of men shall be filled by those who digged it, unto their utter destruction" (1 Nephi 14:3).

Then, of the Restoration, of the day when the Lord will have done "a great and a marvelous work among the children of men," the angel said to Nephi, "Look, and behold that great and abominable church, which is the mother of abominations, whose founder is the devil" (1 Nephi 14:7, 9). This time Nephi sees not one church in particular that ranks as the most abominable of all churches but rather all false churches lumped together under the one flag of abomination.

These are the angelic words describing churches in the day of the restoration of the gospel: "Behold there are save two churches only; the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil." This could not have been said of earlier days, for the true church, once lost through apostasy, was now restored. "Wherefore, whoso belongeth to that great church, which is the mother of abominations; and she is the whore of all the earth" (1 Nephi 14:10).

Nephi, recording what he saw of our day, said: "And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the whore of all the earth, and she sat upon many waters; and she had dominion over all the earth, among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people" (1 Nephi 14:11). This evil church is thus an organization composed of all false churches, of all evil powers, of everything that is carnal, sensual, and devilish. All of these are part and parcel of the church of the devil, for their power is not to prepare mankind for heaven but to send them to hell.

"And it came to pass that I beheld the church of the Lamb of God, and its numbers were few, because of the wickedness and abominations of the whore who sat upon many waters; nevertheless, I beheld that the church of the Lamb, who were the saints of God, were also upon all the face of the earth; and their dominions upon the face of the earth were small, because of the wickedness of the great whore whom I saw" (1 Nephi 14:12). Nephi then saw the wars and desolations that would result from the warfare between the Saints of God and the worldliness of Babylon, with the wrath of God being poured out upon all that is evil, wicked, and degenerate.

"And when the day cometh that the wrath of God is poured out upon the mother of harlots, which is the great and abominable church of all the earth, whose founder is the devil, then, at that day, the work of the Father shall commence, in preparing the way for the fulfilling of his covenants, which he hath made to his people who are of the house of Israel" (1 Nephi 14:17).

Finally, after giving assurance that the Lord "will preserve the righteous by his power" in the last days, Nephi summarizes the state of all the sects, cults, and branches of the church of the devil: "The time speedily shall come that all churches which are built up to get gain, and all those who are built up to get power over the flesh, and those who are built up to become popular in the eyes of the world, and those who seek the lusts of the flesh and the things of the world, and to do all manner of iniquity; yea, in fine, all those who belong to the kingdom of the devil are they who need fear, and tremble, and quake; they are those who must be brought low in the dust; they are those who must be consumed as stubble" (1 Nephi 22:17, 23).

We are left, then, with the sure witness, taught in the holy word, that the kingdom of the devil has many churches, some of which are more abominable than others, and that each one standing alone, as well as all of them combined, constitute the church of the devil.

Are there churches of men? Are there churches that have been founded by honorable men for uplifing purposes? Are there churches that have a mellowing effect on the hearts of individuals, that teach honesty, chastity, charity, and good family values? Are there churches that teach Jesus of Nazareth as the promised Messiah, the source of salvation? The answer is an unhesitating yes. Yet, as already noted, Nephi testified that "there are save two churches only; the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil; wherefore, whoso belongeth not to the church of the Lamb of God belongeth to that great church, which is the mother of abominations; and she is the whore of all the earth" (1 Nephi 14:10). The context of Nephi's division of churches into one of two camps, those bolonging to the Lamb of God and those who are disciples of the devil, comes only after the Church of Jesus Christ was restored in April of 1830. Before that time, many courageous and honorable people had bound themselves together in various church organizations to search for freedom of worship and for greater light and knowledge. In many cases such churches did the work of an Elias in preparing the way for the restored gospel and in so doing represented the inspiration of heaven (see D&C 35:4). Like the disciples of John the Baptist, who left him to follow the Christ, the members of such churches, if they truly have the Spirit of Christ, will respond to the fulness of the gospel message when it is presented to them. A classic illustration is the preachers gathered at Benbow's famm under the title United Brethren, to whom Wilford Woodruff preached the Restoration with such great effect. Nevertheless, when the members of the churches of men have some greater sense of loyalty to their own traditions than to the truths of salvation and thus reject the fulness of the gospel when it is brought to them, they are working a great evil. There is no neutrality on such matters. We wither get on the good ship Zion or we are left behind. The favorite litany of those left behind is "We have the Bible, and that is sufficient for us." Thus in the false security of the doctrine of sufficiency, they reject living prophets in a misguided reverence for those who are dead.

Those who argue in defense of the churches of men cite the good things they have done, asking, Could God disapprove of that? No, he does not disapprove of any good work. But that is the wrong question. The questions that need to be asked are, Do individuals who have done good works have the power to resurrect themselves? Do their good works grant them the power to remit their own sins or to create their own celestial kingdom? Can they ordain laws that will assure themselves or others glory in such kingdoms? In short, can a person save himself? It would be well for all to be reminded that "everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God, for whatsoever things remain are by me; and whosoever things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed" (D&C 132:13-14).

Can faith be found in other than the true church? Faith cannot be exercised in principles that are false. No amount of faith can turn a falsehood into a truth or allow the unrepentant soul place in the kingdom of God. Speaking of the wickedness of his people, Mormon lamented that he had led them into battle many times "and had loved them, according to the love of God which was in me, with all my heart; and my soul had been poured out in prayer unto my God all the day long for them; nevertheless, it was without faith, because of the hardness of their hearts" (Mormon 3:12). Using the sacrifices of Cain and Abel to teach this principle, Joseph Smith explained: "By faith in this atonement or plan of redemption, Abel offered to God a sacrifice that was accepted, which was the firstlings of the flock. Cain offered of the fruit of the ground, and was not accepted, because he could not do it in faith, he could have no faith, or could not exercise faith contrary to the plan of heaven. It must be shedding the blood of the Only Begotten to atone for man; for this was the plan of redemption; and without the shedding of blood was no remission; and as the sacrifice was instituted for a type, by which man was to discern the great Sacrifice which God had prepared; to offer a sacrifice contrary to that, no faith could be exercised, because redemption was not purchased in that way, nor the power of atonement instituted after that order; consequently Cain could have no faith; and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin." [^2] Alma said, "Faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true" (Alma 32:21).

To pray to a god concocted from the speculations of philosophers is no different from praying to a god carved from wood or chiseled from stone. Ten thousand times ten thousand prayers cannot confer any authority upon it. To suppose otherwise would bring all the heavens into a chaotic state, making falsehood of equal worth with truth and rewarding sin the same as righteousness.

Can faith be found outside the Church of Jesus Christ? Certainly it can be found anywhere we can also find the truths of heaven. We can exercise faith only to the extent that we are in possession of those truths. That is why membership in the Church becomes so important. The Church is the school and its curriculum is the principles out of which faith grows.

What Are the Characteristics of the True Church?

Name

The name of the Church is among the plain and precious things lost from the Bible record. The word church cannot even be found in the Old Testament. Though the necessity of a church organization is acknowledged in the New Testament, the name of the Church is not given. The Book of Mormon announces the matter in plainness. The Nephite Twelve asked Christ: "Lord, we will that thou wouldst tell us the name whereby we shall call this church." His response included a mild rebuke. Had they not read the scriptures, which say one must take upon one the name of Christ? Then he reasoned with them, saying: "For by this name shall ye be called at the last day; and whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day. Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake" (3 Nephi 27:3, 5-6). Now we might ask, How could a person truly take upon himself the name of Christ unless he were a member of a church that bears his name?

The Savior continued: "And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel. Verily I say unto you, that ye are built upon my gospel; therefore ye shall call whatsoever things ye do call, in my name; therefore if ye call upon the Father, for the church, if it be in my name the Father will hear you" (3 Nephi 27:8-9).

In this dispensation the Church was formally named The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by revelation on April 26, 1838 (D&C 115:4).

Authority in the Ministry

From whence comes the right or authority to speak for the Lord? Is it the rightful province of any man or woman who feels moved upon to do so? Does it come from reading the Bible? Can it be granted by a college or seminary to its graduating class? Should the answer be found in such suggestions, then God has surrendered control of his kingdom both in heaven and on earth and the church may well become a refuge for scoundrels and rogues. Surely it is for the Lord to choose who will speak for him, and it is also for him to tell them precisely what they are to say. "Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion. Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?" (D&C 132:8-11).

Priesthood and Keys

Priesthood, that is, the authority to act in the name of the Lord, cannot be had by any who do not believe in revelation that is immediate to the circumstance at hand. One cannot profess to be God's agent on the one hand and on the other to teach that God has quit speaking. As there can be no priesthood without revelation, so there can be no priesthood without order. The principle that brings order and discipline to the priesthood is known as the keys, or the keys of the kingdom. The keys are the right of presidency, meaning the authority of one to preside and give direction to all who hold the priesthood. Thus all who hold the priesthood will always be found functioning according to the laws of heaven. That requires, as do all organizations, a system of rank and authority.

Doctrines

The issue of pure doctrine—its nature and source—having been discussed in the previous chapter, it will suffice at this point to say that to be true, a church must be the source of the knowledge of the plan of salvation for all the inhabitants of the earth. Thus we find the Lord telling the Prophet Joseph Smith, "This greater priesthood [that is, the Melchizedek Priesthood] administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God" (D&C 84:19). One distinguishing feature of the plan of salvation is that it must be everlastingly the same. It is not like a product that we bid for in the market place whose cost may rise or fall. It cannot be granted in one dispensation by grace alone and at the cost of exacting discipleship to those of another. The law of the gospel and the ordinances of salvation must be one and the same for all the sons and daughters of God.

The law of the gospel is administered by covenant, and thus the Lord's people always have been and always will be a covenant people. For instance, all must enter into the covenant of baptism, and all must endure in faith to the end, "not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in all things, should have eternal life, as well as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and of the Son; which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, infinite and eternal, without end" (D&C 20:26-28).

A true and living church will be in continuous communion with the God of heaven. Could you imagine a marriage in which one of the partners was expected to record what the other one said in the early years of their marriage and then let that written word suffice as communication for the rest of the relationship? Could you imagine parents who chose to communicate with only one of their children, who in turn was expected to record what they said and pass it on to the other children with the explanation that what had been written was sufficient for them also? As to prophets, they are to the church what inspired parents are to a family. The knowledge of the goodness of my great-grandparents will never replace the need my teenage children have for parents of their own.

A church that does not respect the sanctity of agency, seeking to impose its will by the sword, by inquisition, or by an alliance with the governments of men, has no claim on either the love of God or the authority of heaven. The powers of heaven must rest upon principles of righteousness. "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge" (D&C 121:41-42).

A church that does not actively assume the responsibility to take the message of salvation to the ends of the earth, to every nation, kindred, and tongue, cannot even for a moment suppose itself to be the legitimate representative of the God of heaven. To say otherwise would be to make God a respecter of persons, the creator of races not entitled to the fulness of his blessings, and rob him of any pretense to justice. Of necessity the God of heaven will have a divine timetable by which the fulness of his gospel will reach out to each and every soul, but that all must have a full and equal chance before the Day of Judgment is beyond refutation. Implied in such an announcement is the doctrine of teaching the gospel in the world of departed spirits, those souls who have lived and died without the opportunity to embrace its truths in this mortal sphere. I once had a discussion with two ministers of another faith. They roundly denounced Mormonism as a heresy and condemned me to the lowest depths of hell. I asked if salvation could be found only in their brand of theology. They assured me that such was the case. I pointed out to them that since the Second World War II more than a billion people had lived and died without hearing their message. What of them, I asked? To which the response was "Well, that's their tough luck, isn't it!"

Could you imagine God responding in such a manner? The Bible, for which these men profess such a love, tells us that a sparrow does not fall save he knows it and that a hair cannot fall from our heads without his knowledge of it, and yet these ministers would have us believe that he has no provision in the gospel plan to teach the greater part of his own family! In such a theology, the system of salvation resembles a lottery more than the plan of a loving Father seeking the interest of his children.

The Church of Jesus Christ must always be distinguishable by the fruits of faith, for faith is an anchor to the soul and makes those who possess it "sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God" (Ether 12:4). Thus there will always be sure signs that follow them that believe. Those signs will include dreams, visions, revelations, the ministration of angels, the working of miracles, healings, and all manner of wonderful works. They will also include apostles, and prophets, and the same gifts and powers that existed in the Primitive Church (see D&C 84:64-73). [^3]

The Discipline of Discipleship

The arguments against the doctrine that declares that there can be only one true church reduce themselves to a rejection of the discipline associated with true discipleship. Such arguments are popular among those professing a loyalty to the gospel cause while having no intention of enlisting in the army of the Lord. As to the straight and narrow path, they talk it but do not walk it.

To suppose that the church you are a member of doesn't matter is to suppose that truth doesn't matter and that whoever chooses to do so can act in the name of the Lord, that it is for God to allow his kingdom to be taken over by others. It is also a rejection of the truth that the Lord's house is a house of order.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Will Durant, Caesar and Christ, vol. 3 of The Story of Civilization (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1944), p. 660.
[^2] The Cambridge History of the Bible, ed. P. R. Ackroyd and C. F. Evans, 3 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), 1:452.
[^3] The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, ed. F. L. Cross (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990), p. 576.
