Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter Nine

We Believe in Christ

And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness; And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever. And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father— That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. —Doctrine and Covenants 76:20-24

WE BELIEVE IN GOD, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost." Those words penned by the Prophet Joseph Smith are what is known today as the first of the Articles of Faith. These thirteen single-sentence statements respond to often-asked questions about Latter-day Saint theology. The first article affirms our belief in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but it does not detail the manner in which our belief differs from that of other professing Christians.

As Latter-day Saints we believe God to be a personal being possessing body, parts, and passions. We wholly reject the descriptions of him given in the creeds of Christendom and the philosophical speculations upon which those creeds are based. We claim the testimony of both the Father and the Son in declaring the dogmas of those creeds to be an abomination. The gospel dispensation of which we bear witness began with the appearance of God the Father and God the Son to the youthful Joseph Smith. Calling Joseph Smith by name, the Father introduced the Son: "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Joseph Smith-History 1:17). The Savior instructed Joseph Smith not to join any of the churches of the day, saying that not only were their creeds an abomination but their "professors were all corrupt; that 'they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof'" (Joseph Smith-History 1:19).

The Long Night of Apostate Darkness

The creeds of Christendom are a perfect evidence of the apostasy. All Christian creeds trace themselves to Nicaea, where a great council of bishops met under the direction of the Roman Emperor Constantine, himself a sun worshipper. His desire was to unite his newly conquered kingdom, and he saw the Christian church as a means to that end. The difficulty was that Christianity was a host of squabbling factions, and he had first to bring unity to it. Primary among the issues of contention was the relationship between the Father and the Son. To admit the existence of both was to offend the teachings of Plato, who had determined that the Good (to which Christians related as God) constituted the perfection of all things. His chain of thought held that there could be only one Absolute, and thus the idea of two gods was inconceivable. The Christian world had become so enamored of the philosophers' speculations that they viewed them as a pre-Christian Christianity. For the Council of Nicaea, it was monotheism at all cost and thus the decision of that assembly that Christ was his own Father. The result of such absurd reasoning, known to us today as the doctrine of the Holy Trinity, is covered with the explanation that it is a divine mystery. Athanasius, the great champion of this doctrine, explained "that reason must bow to the mystery of the Trinity." [^1] It is not reason alone, however, that is offended by this doctrine. It also stands in contravention of countless passages in the Old and the New Testaments. This difficulty was resolved by declaring all positive affirmation about God in scripture to be metaphorical. Thus The Cambridge History of the Bible explains that "Eusebius [an early church apologist and theologian] is a faithful enough disciple of Origen [a partially converted pagan philosopher who labored to convince the church that God could have neither body or form] to agree with Plato that it is sometimes necessary for the lawgiver to lie in order to persuade people rather than coerce them, and to suggest that this is an explanation of the anthropomorphism of the Old Testament." [^2] To the advocates of these creeds it is more acceptable to have a God who, in their language, "lies" than it is to suppose the scriptures actually mean what they say in their descriptions of him. By way of further explanation, The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church explains that "all affirmations of Scripture and the Fathers are but metaphors devised for the ignorant." [^3]

Historical, or traditional, Christianity is founded on what traditional Christians themselves describe as a philosophical speculation. It formally begins at Nicaea where scripture became the bride of philosophy in a wedding performed by the authority of Rome, a pagan state. The church in turn bound itself to the state. This union of Bible and sword marked the end of religious freedom for more than fourteen centuries, until the God of heaven would, according to prophecy, raise up a nation to reestablish it. Truths, once carried from heart to heart on the wings of the Spirit, were now supplanted by the dogma of creeds that forced mankind to kneel by the threat of an unsheathed sword. The church that once had been symbolized by love and light, was now housed in cold stone and dark naves. The dove that had been the sign of the Spirit's presence was replaced by the Roman cross of crucifixion.

The war against the testimony of Christ was as unremitting as the darkness of night. It allowed no hallowed place into which the light of heaven could shine. The apostles, those specially chosen to carry his name to the ends of the earth, were killed. We have been told that they died at the hands of heathens, but was it so? Consider carefully what Christ told them three days before his own death at the hands of a corrupt priesthood: "Take heed that no man deceive you; for many shall come in my name, saying—I am Christ—and shall deceive many; Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all nations, for my name's sake" (Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:5-7). Surely the message was sobering: You will be hated of all nations, and they will both afflict you and kill you. But who in those nations were the disciples being warned against? According to what we have just read, it was false Christs. Two important implications here are, first, the Twelve would be betrayed by professing Christians, not by those in the world, as we have so often been told; and second, the betraying of the faith would spread to all the world. It didn't matter where the Twelve went; they would be opposed and betrayed. That conclusion is sustained by Nephi in his prophetic dream: "Behold the world and the wisdom thereof: yea, behold the house of Israel hath gathered together to fight against the twelve apostles of the Lamb" (1 Nephi 11:35). The Book of Mormon confirms that it was a love of the world, its traditions, and its sophistry, that caused the house of Israel to betray the apostles and their testimony.

We can reconstruct the story only in part, but that is sufficient to establish a pattern. The apostles took the message to the various nations. Many were converted but not in full. The Christian convert stood alone, overshadowed by the influence of the Jewish temple on the one hand and the Greek academy on the other. From the temple came the Judaizers, who wouldn't let go of their traditions; while from the academy came those indoctrinated in the monotheism of Plato. As if that were not enough, there were also the Gnostics, who were truer than true, straining everything through the veil of mysticism. And so the newly converted, wanting neither to give offense nor to appear as fools, sought common ground and a spirit of conciliation. In so doing, they modified the Christian message until it passed as it were into a new dialect, one that would have been very strange to the ear of those initially commissioned by Christ. [^4]

The God of scripture, the God of the prophets, the God testified of by Christ, is not the God of Christian creeds. When Jesus said to Philip, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John 14:9), he did not have in mind a bodiless, partless, passionless essence with a center everywhere and a circumference nowhere. When he told the Twelve that "my Father is greater than I" (John 14:28), he did not have in mind the idea that he and his Father were of the same essence. In his great intercessory prayer, when he said, "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (John 17:3), he did not have in mind the notion that God is an incomprehensible mystery. When he prayed, "Abba, Father [meaning Papa, Papa], take this cup from me" (Mark 14:36), he was not praying to another part of his own essence, nor was he doing so when he pleaded on the cross, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46). And when he on that first Easter morning said to Mary, "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God" (John 20:17), he was not suggesting that we are only the children of God in some vague and metaphorical sense.

The Restoration of Divine Truths

Historical and scriptural evidence affirms that the Saints at the time of Christ believed in a God who was a personal being, one who was both corporeal and anthropomorphic. This God of whom the scriptures speak spoke face to face with the prophet called to stand at the head of each major gospel dispensation. Adam, scripture attests, walked and talked with God in Eden. Enoch testified that having ascended Mount Simeon, he was clothed with glory and "saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face" (Moses 7:3-4). Noah, we are told, "was a just man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God" (Moses 8:27). In the Abraham papyri we read, "Thus I, Abraham, talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made; and he said unto me: My son, my son (and his hand was stretched out), behold I will show you all these. And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made, which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the end thereof" (Abraham 3:11-12). As for Moses, the book that bears his name begins: "The words of God, which he spake unto Moses at a time when Moses was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain, and he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence" (Moses 1:1-2). Peter, who succeeded Christ as the head of the dispensation of the meridian of time, testified, "For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount. We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts" (2 Peter 1:16-19).

From such testimony we conclude that the God of the ancients was a personal being who thought it not beneath his dignity to appear to his prophets and instruct them face to face. He had body, parts, and passions. He had gender, speech, and family, of which he claimed us to be a part. In textual restorations given us through the Prophet Joseph Smith, we learn that God is an exalted, glorified, resurrected man. We are told that we are his children, created in the image and likeness of his body (Moses 6:9). We neither quibble nor hedge the words of the psalmist, who said: "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High" (Psalm 82:6). We accept Christ's affirmation of the literal rendering of those words (John 10:34-36). Our revelations declare Adam to be the "firstborn" of the Father into this earthly sphere (Abraham 1:3; Moses 6:22) and affirm that Christ was the first of his children born in our spirit or premortal state (D&C 93:21). In the pure and undefiled language of Adam, God was known as Man of Holiness and Jesus Christ, his Only Begotten Son (meaning his only son begotten of a mortal woman), is known as Son of Man or Son of Man of Holiness (Moses 6:57). We believe that Mary was the literal mother of Jesus Christ in the flesh and that God was his father. In testifying of Christ, we do not use language in a deceptive or metaphorical sense. Our scripture declares Christ to be the Son of God "after the manner of the flesh" (1 Nephi 11:18). President Ezra Taft Benson explained: "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims that Jesus Christ is the Son of God in the most literal sense. The body in which He performed His mission in the flesh was sired by that same Holy Being we worship as God, our Eternal Father. Jesus was not the son of Joseph nor was He begotten by the Holy Ghost. He is the Son of the Eternal Father!" [^5] We claim ourselves competent witnesses of the reality of his resurrection and of his divine Sonship. In bearing such a testimony we stand alone, for historical Christianity has branded us heretical.

We Believe in the Grace of Christ

As Latter-day Saints we believe in Christ. We believe in salvation by his grace. In so saying, our belief in the doctrine of grace expands far beyond that of our sectarian friends. Only in and through him can we be reconciled with God. As we were without the power to create ourselves, so we are without the power to resurrect ourselves. Nor do we have the power to remit our own sins. Our spirits tainted with sin, having no way to cleanse themselves of its effects, would be (save it were for Christ) subject to the author of sin. We would be citizens of his kingdom. Lucifer would be our king, and we would have to worship him because there would be neither freedom nor agency. Indeed, there would be no light or truth, for Christ is the author of both. In testifying of the grace of Christ, we have in mind more than the idea that he cleanses us from sin. He frees us from the dominion and power of the adversary. He makes possible the inseparable union of our body and spirit that we might experience a fulness of joy, which embraces our becoming heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ, having claim on the fulness of the Father. Through his grace we can become equal with God in power, might, and dominion. Thus Christ's atonement frees us not only from spiritual death (the separation from the presence of God) but from physical death (the separation of our spirit from our physical body). Exaltation consists of our having an exalted, resurrected, and glorified body. It consists in the continuation of the love between a man and his wife, between parents and their children throughout endless generations.

No such blessings or promises are known in the sectarian world. Only Mormonism holds the hope of our obtaining perfected corporeal bodies in the resurrection. Only Mormonism contains the doctrine of eternal marriage and the continuation of the family unit as a tenet of belief. We claim such blessings only in and through the grace of Christ.

Why We Believe in Christ

We believe in Christ because we know him. We are his special witnesses in this dispensation. Our tradition does not embrace the idea that the canon of scripture is complete or that the heavens are sealed or that God is some abstract mystery. We will take the testimony of Christ as it is found in the Book of Mormon to those of every nation, kindred, and tongue. We will tell the story of the First Vision describing the appearance of both the Father and the Son. We will build temples among all peoples in order that "the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his people" (D&C 109:5). We will continue to sustain living prophets, seers, and revelators. We possess the Spirit of revelation, and we accept the promise that he will make himself known to us. By revelation he has said: "It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am" (D&C 93:1). The very purpose for which the priesthood was restored was so that the heavens might be opened and that we might commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn and "enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant" (D&C 107:19).

We believe in Christ because of our own experiences and association with him. All accountable persons are invited to the waters of baptism; all are to have hands laid upon their heads and receive the promise of the companionship of the Holy Ghost. All are invited to the house of the Lord to be endowed with power from on high, and all are entitled to a perfect knowledge of both the Father and the Son.

Belief in Christ Is a Call to Discipleship

We accept the witness of Christ, which is ours as a call to discipleship. This we understand to be more than the invitation to learn of him. It involves an obligation of discipline and obedience. The principles taught by the Master must find application in the life of the true disciple. In the New Testament, discipleship was not confined to the Twelve but rather included all true believers. All these enjoyed his love and sought in that spirit to share their knowledge and testimony with others. They sought to imitate the Master. They sought neither to add to nor take from his teachings but rather to follow him. They understood that by sharing his gospel with others they would draw closer to him. Theirs was a close and intimate relationship involving the following seven principles.

To believe in Christ is to believe the doctrines of Christ. Many profess a belief in Christ, but it is a belief without the discipline of true discipleship. James would call it faith without works (see James 2:14). Often it is a belief devoid of any serious doctrinal commitment. As long as it can be maintained that God is an incomprehensible mystery, it can also be maintained that what we believe is of no particular importance. Once the God of heaven manifests himself, then knowledge becomes sure and mankind immediately becomes accountable to follow his path.

To believe in Christ is to accept those who come in his name. The angel of the Lord instructed Adam and Eve that they were to do all that they did "in the name of the Son" and that they should "repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore" (Moses 5:8). In the concept of a name we find both power and authority. Thus we find the expression, "Blessed be the name of God" in Adam's testimony (Moses 5:10), King Benjamin exhorting his people to exercise "faith on his name" (Mosiah 3:9, 21), Alma promising that "he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name" (Alma 34:15), and the Lord instructing Joseph Smith "that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God" (D&C 20:29). The emphasis in such expressions centers on the name of Christ rather than on the person of Christ. No slight to the person of Christ is intended, but rather the emphasis is on the authority of Christ as it is manifest in such as Adam, King Benjamin, Alma, and Joseph Smith, for in such is found the authority to teach his doctrine and perform the ordinances of salvation.

"Whosoever receiveth my word receiveth me," the Savior said, and "whosoever receiveth me, receiveth those, the First Presidency, whom I have sent, whom I have made counselors for my name's sake unto you" (D&C 112:20). To the meridian Twelve the Lord said, "He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward" (Matthew 10:40-41). This principle finds expression in what we know as the oath and covenant of the Melchizedek Priesthood. "All they who receive this priesthood receive me," the Lord said, "for he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him" (D&C 84:35-38).

Clearly the message in these and many similar passages of scripture is that it is not enough for us to profess an acceptance of Christ to have claim to salvation. We must also accept those whom he has sent in his name.

To believe in Christ is to live the doctrines of Christ and endure in faith to the end. The true disciple cannot say to God, "I will be your disciple but without chastity," or "I will consecrate myself but leave my wealth intact," or "I will follow you but not your prophet," or "I will be your servant, but I will not comply with the ordinances of salvation."

Responsibility attends true discipleship. Such discipleship must recognize Jesus as Lord and Master. It is with bowed knee that we have been invited to present to the Lord the full measure of our "heart, might, mind and strength" that we might "stand blameless before God at the last day" (D&C 4:2).

A young man told me once that his uncle, who was not a member of the Church, was the most Christian man he had ever known. To illustrate his point he told me about some of the kind and generous things this man had done for others. I enthusiastically agreed that his uncle was a generous man but I could not agree that he was a Christlike man. I asked him if his uncle had been baptized. He said no. I asked if Christ was baptized. He said yes. I asked if his uncle kept the Sabbath holy. He said no. I asked if Christ kept the Sabbath holy. He said yes. I asked if his uncle was a man of prayer. He said no. I asked if Christ was a man of prayer. He said yes. I asked if he remembered Abinadi's description of Christ as one whose will was swallowed up in that of his Father (Mosiah 15:7). He said yes. I asked if he could say that his uncle's life was consumed with doing the will of God. He said no. I asked if the bishop or home teachers invited his uncle to church, would he come? He said that his uncle had been invited to church countless times but that he would not come. I told him that I didn't think his uncle resembled Christ very much, though I knew a lot of members of the Church who did.

To believe in Christ is to accept the reality of the remission of our sins. Stephen Robinson observes: "Unfortunately, there are many members of the Church who simply do not believe this. Though they claim to have testimonies of Christ and of his gospel, they reject the witness of the scriptures and of the prophets about the good news of Christ's atonement. Often these people naively hold on to mutually contradictory propositions without even realizing the nature of the contradiction. For example, they may believe that the Church is true, that Jesus is the Christ, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, while at the same time refusing to accept the possibility of their own complete forgiveness and eventual exaltation in the kingdom of God. They believe in Christ, but they do not believe Christ. He says, 'Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. I can make you pure and worthy and celestial,' and they answer back, 'No, you can't. The gospel only works for other people; it won't work for me.'" [^6]

To believe in Christ is to trust the verity of his word. It is to believe that he "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance" and that "he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven" (D&C 1:31-32).

To believe in Christ is to constantly grow in the knowledge and testimony of Christ. "He that doeth truth," wrote John the Beloved, "cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God" (John 3:21). Singularly, John describes "truth" as something we "do" rather than something we are expected to "believe." To those who thought they could divorce belief from action, John said that to say we have fellowship with God while we are walking in the dark "we lie, and do not the truth" (1 John 1:6). His doctrines, Christ said, were not his but the Father's, who sent him. "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:16-17). The Christ of whom we bear witness advanced from grace to grace in the realm of spiritual things until he received the fulness of his Father. Those who truly worship him will be found doing likewise.

To believe in Christ is to seek to share the gospel with others. Inherent in membership in the family of true believers is the responsibility of sharing the message of salvation with others. As we have noted previously, no church could seriously claim to be the rightful steward of the message of salvation without at the same time assuming the obligation of taking that message to every nation, kindred, and tongue. The message of salvation must be available to all and the terms of salvation everlastingly the same. Those terms as declared anew in this dispensation are faith in Christ and his divine Sonship, repentance of sin, baptism by immersion by one having authority, obtaining the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and enduring in faith to the end.

The responsibility of declaring the gospel rests primarily with those who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. Those "embracing this calling," the Lord said, "shall be ordained and sent forth to preach the everlasting gospel among the nations—crying repentance, saying: Save yourselves from this untoward generation, and come forth out of the fire, hating even the garments spotted with the flesh. And this commandment shall be given unto the elders of my church, that every man which will embrace it with singleness of heart may be ordained and sent forth, even as I have spoken" (D&C 36:5-7).

To believe in Christ is to bring forth works of righteousness continuously. Having placed ourselves on the path that leads to the mansions of the Father, we "must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life" (2 Nephi 31:20-21). This, we are told, is the way, for there is none other way nor name whereby mankind can be saved. Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated: "Everyone in the Church who is on the straight and narrow path, who is striving and struggling and desiring to do what is right, though is far from perfect in this life; if he passes out of this life while he's on the straight and narrow, he's going to go on to eternal reward in his Father's kingdom.

"We don't need to get a complex or get a feeling that you have to be perfect to be saved. You don't. There's only been one perfect person, and that's the Lord Jesus, but in order to be saved in the Kingdom of God and in order to pass the test of mortality, what you have to do is get on the straight and narrow path—thus charting a course leading to eternal life—and then, being on that path, pass out of this life in full fellowship. I'm not saying that you don't have to keep the commandments. I'm saying you don't have to be perfect to be saved. If you did, no one would be saved. The way it operates is this: You get on the path that's named the 'straight and narrow.' You do it by entering at the gate of repentance and baptism. The straight and narrow path leads from the gate of repentance and baptism, a very great distance, to a reward that is called eternal life. If you're on that path and pressing forward, and you die, you'll never get off the path. There is no such thing as falling off the straight and narrow path in the life to come, and the reason is that this life is the time that is given to men to prepare for eternity. Now is the time and the day of your salvation, so if you're working zealously in this life—

though you haven't fully overcome the world and you haven't done all you hoped you might do—you're still going to be saved. You don't have to do what Jacob said, 'Go beyond the mark.' You don't have to live a life that's truer than true. You don't have to have an excessive zeal that becomes fanatical and becomes unbalancing. What you have to do is stay in the mainstream of the Church and live as upright and decent people live in the Church—keeping the commandments, paying your tithing, serving in the organizations of the Church, loving the Lord, staying on the straight and narrow path. If you're on that path when death comes—because this is the time and the day appointed, this the probationary estate—you'll never fall from it, and, for all practical purposes, your calling and election is made sure. Now, that isn't the definition of that term, but the end result will be the same." [^7]

"By their fruits ye shall know them," the Savior said (Matthew 7:20). If a tree ceases to bring forth good fruits, we would know it no longer as a good tree. The true believer in Christ does not long for some future time when he can cease praying, quit keeping his covenants, and depart from the straight and narrow path. To believe in Christ is to be constant in works of righteousness.

To believe in Christ is to experience the signs that follow them that believe. Joseph Smith stated: "When faith comes it brings its train of attendants with it—apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, gifts, wisdom, knowledge, miracles, healings, tongues, interpretation of tongues, etc. All these appear when faith appears on the earth; . . . for these are the effects of faith, and always have attended, and always will, attend it. For where faith is, there will the knowledge of God be also, with all things which pertain thereto—revelations, visions, and dreams, as well as every necessary thing, in order that the possessors of faith may be perfected, and obtain salvation." [^8] To those holding the priesthood restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by Peter, James, and John, the Lord said: "As I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost. And these signs shall follow them that believe—in my name they shall do many wonderful works; in my name they shall cast out devils; in my name they shall heal the sick; in my name they shall open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf; and the tongue of the dumb shall speak; and if any man shall administer poison unto them it shall not hurt them; and the poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm them" (D&C 84:64-72).

Joseph Smith's Testimony of Christ

From the First Vision in the spring of 1820, when Joseph Smith was told by Christ that he should join none of the churches of the day because they were "all wrong," their "creeds were an abomination," and their professors "all corrupt," until his tragic death in June 1844, Joseph Smith was prepared to stand alone in the testimony that he bore (Joseph Smith-History 1:19). On one occasion he said: "The object with me is to obey and teach others to obey God in just what He tells us to do. It mattereth not whether the principle is popular or unpopular, I will always maintain a true principle, even if I stand alone in it." [^9]

Joseph Smith made no attempt to reconcile what he taught with popularly held tenets of the day. Relative to his testimony of Christ he stood distinctively alone. He boldly set forth his position: "The great designs of God in relation to the salvation of the human family, are very little understood by the professedly wise and intelligent generation in which we live." [^10] In the preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, Joseph Smith recorded: "They [referring to those who fail to heed the ordained servants of the Lord] seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall" (D&C 1:16).

Joseph Smith was a competent witness. His testimony was not based on philosophical speculation but rather on revelation. He read the injunction of James to ask of God, and he did so. Having had the heavens opened to them, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon penned this testimony: "We beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness; and saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever. And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God" (D&C 76:20-24).

Joseph Smith drank at the fountainhead. On one occasion he said, "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." [^11] On another occasion he said, "One truth revealed from heaven is worth all the sectarian notions in existence." [^12]

Of his testimony of God, the Prophet said, "I defy all the learning and wisdom and all the combined powers of earth and hell together to refute it." [^13] On another occasion he taught, "If any revelations are given of God, they are universally opposed by the priests and Christendom at large; for they reveal their wickedness and abominations." [^14] In one of his sermons about God, Joseph Smith said, "The sectarian priests are blind, and they lead the blind, and they will all fall into the ditch together." [^15] As to the source of his knowledge, Joseph Smith asked, "Did I build on any other man's foundation? I have got all the truth which the Christian world possessed, and an independent revelation in the bargain, and God will bear me off triumphant." [^16]

Such is the doctrine and spirit of the Latter-day Saint testimony of Christ. The first paper published by the Church was the Evening and Morning Star. One of its first issues set forth the Latter-day Saint source for finding truth: "Search the Scriptures—search the revelations which we publish, and ask your Heavenly Father, in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, to manifest the truth unto you, and if you do it with an eye single to His glory, nothing doubting, He will answer you by the power of His Holy Spirit. You will then know for yourselves and not for another. You will not then be dependent on man for the knowledge of God; nor will there be any room for speculation." [^17]

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Dedication of the Temple," Independence, Missouri, 17 Apr. 1994. Copy of the program in possession of the author.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), p. 121.
[^3] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 6:280.
[^4] Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971), pp. 297-98.
[^5] Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), pp. 260-61.
[^6] B. H. Roberts, Life of John Taylor (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965), pp. 39-40.
[^7] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 144.
[^8] David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay, comp. Clare Middlemiss (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1955), pp. 22-24.
[^9] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 1:93.
[^10] Howard W. Hunter, "Come to the God of All Truth," Ensign, Sept. 1994, p. 72.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 285.
[^12] Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 2 (October 1835): 199.
[^13] Messenger and Advocate 2 (October 1835): 199.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed. rev., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 4:461.
[^15] Smith, History of the Church, 5:426.
[^16] 16. Smith, History of the Church, 6:479.
[^17] 17. Evening and Morning Star 1 (July 1832): 22; emphasis added).
