Joseph Fielding McConkie, Here We Stand ( 1995)

Chapter Ten

Here We Stand

There is not a man or woman that loves the truth, who has heard the report of the Book of Mormon, but the Spirit of the Almighty has testified to him or her of its truth; neither has any man heard the name of Joseph Smith, but the Spirit has whispered to him—"He is a true Prophet." —Brigham Young

THERE IS A SPIRIT AND A POWER we enjoy when we are true to the message the Lord has given us that can be experienced in no other way. Surely the Spirit is anxious to bear witness to the truths we have been commissioned to declare. We can go out under the guise of telling the world about family home evening, but Christ did not shed his blood on Calvary, nor Joseph and Hyrum Smith theirs in Carthage, so that we might take the family home evening manual to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. As wonderful as that program is, it is powerless to remit sins or seal families for time and eternity. The message we have been given to deliver has the power of God in it, and no one worthy of the company of the Spirit can declare that message without enjoying that companionship.

Our Own Ground

For generations it has been the practice to seek to give the gospel message respectability by sustaining it with proof texts from the Bible. When I went into the mission field more than thirty years ago, we were all armed with our pocket edition of Ready References to which we could turn to find biblical support for all Mormon doctrines. Upon our arrival in the mission field, we were handed a long list of scriptures and told to memorize a passage every day. We conscientiously tried to do so. Virtually all of those passages came from the Bible. Our reading assignments consisted of the standard works and books that reinforced the idea that all we do and believe can be justified by the Bible. Quoting from the Doctrine and Covenants in a cottage meeting was unheard of.

I remember a cottage meeting in which a man we were teaching asked about John 4:24, which says, "God is a spirit." My senior companion, who was then an assistant to the mission president, said, "Yes, it is true that the scriptures say 'God is a spirit,' but they also say 'Man is spirit.'" That, of course, is true, but the second text is found in Doctrine and Covenants 93:33, not in the Bible. Because the room was crowded, my companion was sitting slightly in front of me. As he gave his answer he put his hand behind his back, where only I could see it, and crossed his fingers. We were both greatly relieved that no one asked for the source of his text. After we left that home, my companion put his arm around my shoulder and said, "Well, we really got away with one in there, didn't we!" We felt like a couple of schoolboys who had cheated on an exam without getting caught.

The story is a sad one. Neither my companion nor I understood the message that we had been commissioned to teach. How ironic that we thought we had "cheated" by quoting one of the revelations of the Restoration, when in truth those revelations were the very reason the Lord had sent us out as missionaries! Our whole message centers on the reality of living prophets, modern revelation, and authority restored anew from the heavens. If we had truly understood the reason the Lord had sent us, we could have responded, "Certainly, it is true that God is a spirit, even as man is a spirit. But through a revelation given to a prophet in our day, we know that God is a personal being, a loving Father who has body, parts, and passions. When the scriptures say we are in his image and likeness, they mean it in a very literal sense." The Holy Ghost would have sustained us in making such a declaration, and it would have opened the door to a meaningful gospel discussion. Perhaps the fact that those people, like so many others we attempted to teach, did not continue with the discussions and did not join the Church had something to do with our failure to be true to the message the Lord had given us. That we had learned to rely on Bible texts may not only have made it more difficult for our investigators to understand but also more difficult for the Spirit to witness to its truthfulness.

The need to understand the necessity to be true to our message is not confined to missionaries alone. A woman called our home one evening to tell me that she was having a discussion with a nonmember neighbor—not an argument—and what she needed, she said, was a scriptural reference to prove that God has a body. I directed her to Doctrine and Covenants 130:22, which reads: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us." Surely that is as plain and to the point as language permits.

My caller immediately objected. "What I need," she said, "is a Bible passage."

Now, I happen to know that there are more than five hundred passages of scriptures in the Bible that can be used to argue that God has a body, but I also know that such an argument is fruitless. We read our Bible text and say, "See, there's the proof." But no one ever responds by saying, "Wow, I didn't know that! May I be baptized?" What they say is, "The scriptures you are reading were not intended to be understood literally. They are simply figurative representations of God. If you are going to accept everything in the Bible as being literal, then when it says God is 'the rock of our salvation' you must believe he is a rock; or when it says he will keep us under the shadow of his wings, you must believe God is a bird and has wings." The discussion gets silly very quickly, and the silliest thing about it is that we allow ourselves to be a part of it.

So I told my caller that the way we knew that God had a body was that he told us and that we had no better authority than that. We hadn't learned it from the Bible. With a tone of disappointment in her voice she said, "Well, thanks, anyway. I'll see if I can find someone else who can help me," and hung up.

I have been through that kind of experience again and again. A young man came to my office one morning before class and told me that he just about had his nonmember roommate converted. "All I need," he said, "is a passage of scripture that proves that marriages are supposed to be eternal. Can you help me?" he asked.

"That's easy enough," I said. "We have God's word on the matter in Doctrine and Covenants 132."

"No, no," he interjected, "what I need is a Bible passage."

"We are not practicing eternal marriage because of any Bible text," I responded. "We do it because God commanded us to do so through a living prophet."

"You mean you don't know of any Bible text that proves it?" he asked, tension and anxiety ringing in his voice.

"I don't even know a Bible text that I can torture into saying such a thing," I replied.

He responded, "I'd better see if there isn't someone else who can help me," and left abruptly.

The perspective represented by these exchanges, which is not an uncommon one, is a matter of considerable concern. It ignores the fact that there has been a restoration of the gospel. It represents a retreat to the Protestant position that the Bible is the final word on all things. It makes us a part of the argument over the meaning of the Bible instead of the solution to that argument. It is a way of saying that dead prophets outrank living ones and that modern revelation can be accepted only if Bible texts prove it to be true. This perspective short-circuits the conversion process and effectually denies the reality of the First Vision. It turns a deaf ear to every revelation we have received since the spring of 1820.

We know by experience that it is easier to convert people to the Book of Mormon than it is to convince them that we are interpreting the Bible correctly. We also know that conversion will unlock for them the true spirit and power of the Bible. Our efforts to convert people by using Bible texts may have no other effect than sustaining the notion that the Bible, rather than the voice of God in our dispensation, is the source of salvation. If that is the case, there would have been no need for a restoration of the gospel. All of the prophetic messengers who came with keys, powers, and authorities would have come in vain.

The Book of Mormon testifies that many of the plain and precious parts of the Bible were taken from it before it went forth to the nations of the earth (see 1 Nephi 13:23-29). We can hardly be true to the book if we argue that all its doctrines can be found in the Bible. Such arguments remind me of the occasion when a very enterprising student came into my office carrying a manuscript of impressive proportions. He placed it on my desk and said he was anxious to take it to a publisher but wanted me to review it for him first. He explained that it was a defense of Mormonism in which he had proved all our doctrines by the Bible. I asked him to close the door and in hushed tones said, "We have to get rid of this as quickly as we can!" There was obvious alarm in his voice when he asked what I meant. I said, "Look, if you have proven all of our doctrines by the Bible, then there is no need for Joseph Smith and the revelations of the Restoration." I added, with some emphasis, "This thing could destroy everything we stand for!" He grabbed his manuscript and made a quick exit.

Do Mormons Worship Joseph Smith?

Our commission is to bear witness of the restored gospel in all the world. Any time the adversary can get us to substitute something else for that message, the victory is his. It is not our purpose to convert people to programs, to activities, or to a Latter-day Saint culture. Nor can we modify the message the Lord gave us in an attempt to be more acceptable. To make such things the focus of our efforts is to lose sight of our destiny and purpose and will eventually cause us to lose our own way. To properly present our message requires that we testify that Joseph Smith is the great prophet of the Restoration. There is power in such a testimony, and every effort is made by the adversary to keep us from bearing it. Perhaps his most effective ploy is the notion that we should not testify about Joseph Smith for fear that people will think we worship him instead of Christ. The idea is to emphasize our faith in Christ while avoiding reference to Joseph Smith.

We hope that such an approach will place us in a position to say to those of other Christian faiths, "We share your love and reverence for Christ." But if we succeed in convincing our friends of other faiths that we share their reverence for and testimony of Christ, we have left them no reason to join with us. Such a ploy is self-defeating. And perhaps the greater danger is that we may convince ourselves, or even our children, that we do have the same faith. We then become embarrassed by the idea that there is one true church and adopt a Protestant idea that there is no greater difference between our faith and those of the world than there is between Methodists and Presbyterians.

The desire for acceptance can make setting aside both the essence of our faith and our religious heritage a relatively simple thing. The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints has now reinterpreted the First Vision in such a manner that they are comfortable with the following language, which is taken from the dedication service of their new temple in Independence, Missouri:

Let us rejoice

. . . for the courage of St. Ignatius, who was slain

praising Christ's love.

. . . for the martyrdom of Blandina, slave woman, during

the cruel reign of Marcus Aurelius.

. . . for the Monastic tradition, which helped to keep

Christianity alive, and to preserve the scriptural

witness to God's unfailing love.

. . . for the impact of these, and others, on our faith:

Calvin, Luther, the Wesleys, Simon Bolivar,

Dorothea Dix, Joseph and Emma Hale Smith, the

Grimke sisters, Susan B. Anthony, Margaret

Fuller, Sigmund Freud, Marie Curie, Mahatma

Gandhi, and Toyohiko Kagawa. [^1]

The prayer is an olive branch extended to those of historical Christianity with whom the RLDS seek fellowship. Such is their prerogative, and we wish them well in doing so. But we as Latter-day Saints cannot assume such a stance. As long as the First Vision stands as the foundation of our faith, we stand alone. We can neither seek nor accept any other companionship or alliance.

Let me illustrate in principle what is involved. Recently my wife and I were invited to speak to a group of seminary students on the subject of preparing for missions. Before we spoke, two of their number, a young woman and a young man, were asked to bear a brief testimony, apparently without warning. Obviously, the hope in calling on them was to simulate the opportunity they would have as missionaries and to invite the Spirit into our meeting. Neither student handled the situation very appropriately, and the hoped-for end was not accomplished. Because of that, as I began my talk, I suggested to the students that if they were called on, as two of their peers had just been, they could assure themselves and those present of a positive spiritual experience by testifying that Joseph Smith is a prophet. I assured them that if they would do that, the Spirit would quicken their minds and let them know what they should say. After the meeting, one of the teachers asked if he could speak with me privately for a moment. He asked delicately, "Would it not have been more appropriate to tell the students that when called on unexpectedly to speak, they should testify of Christ and then extend the promise of the sustaining support of the Spirit?" He seemed stunned when I answered, "No."

I went on to tell him that the fact that Christ is the foundation of our faith is beyond question, nor can the importance of his role as our Savior or Redeemer be overstated. Every principle of the gospel stems from his atoning sacrifice. We are saved through his grace, and without his saving labors in our behalf there would be no salvation. Such principles cannot be compromised. Why then testify that Joseph Smith is his prophet? Because it is in the Book of Mormon that we find our knowledge and understanding of both the Fall and the Atonement (see 2 Nephi 2; 9); and because it was from the Prophet Joseph Smith that we learned that all principles of the gospel are simply an appendage to the Atonement. [^2] We exist as a church because there was a Joseph Smith. It is because there is a Book of Mormon, it is because John the Baptist came to the Prophet and gave him keys and authority, and because Peter, James, and John did likewise. Our testimony of Christ grows out of these truths; it cannot stand independent of them. We cannot bring people to Christ without bringing them to these principles. We testify of Joseph Smith because he is God's choice to be the revelator of Christ for this dispensation. We testify of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon because it is the pure source, given by God to our dispensation, to learn of his Son. We testify of the appearance of those who held authority anciently to Joseph Smith, because that evidences that God has given us the same knowledge and authority had by the ancients. If we are going to ignore those principles in the testimony we bear, then it is a reasonable assumption that the Spirit will ignore us when we attempt to bear that testimony. "You shall declare the things which have been revealed to my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun.," is the Lord's direction to us (D&C 31:4). The eyes of that young seminary teacher lighted up, and he enthusiastically started telling me how his missionary experiences sustained the principle.

Other missionaries have had similar experiences. Brigham Young used the following story to teach this principle: "One of our Elders with whom I was acquainted, after he was baptised, got cornered up, and was obliged to preach a sermon. He never had been able to say that he knew Joseph was a Prophet; but he was there in the meeting: the house was crowded with the congregation; the windows and doors full of people, and all around on the green waiting to hear a 'Mormon' preacher. There were none there but this one man, and he was called upon to preach. He thought he would pray and dismiss the meeting. He never had known that Joseph Smith was a Prophet: that was the lion that lay in his path; and he could not get by him, nor round about him, nor dig under him, nor leap over him; and the lion he must meet: he must say Joseph, for better or worse. As soon as he got 'Joseph' out, 'is a Prophet' was the next; and from that, his tongue was loosened, and he continued talking until near sundown. The Lord pours out his Spirit upon a man when he testifies that which the Lord gives him to testify of. From that day to this, he has never been at a loss to know that Joseph was a Prophet." [^3]

Similarly, Matthew Cowley shared this experience: "I will never forget the prayers of my father the day that I left. I have never heard a more beautiful blessing in all my life. Then his last words to me at the railroad station, 'My boy, you will go out on that mission; you will study; you will try to prepare your sermons; and sometimes when you are called upon, you will think you are wonderfully prepared, but when you stand up, your mind will go completely blank.' I have had that experience more than once.

"I said, 'What do you do when your mind goes blank?'

"He said, 'You stand up there and with all the fervor of your soul, you bear witness that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the living God, and thoughts will flood into your mind and words to your mouth, to round out those thoughts in a facility of expression that will carry conviction to the heart of everyone who listens.' And so my mind, being mostly blank during my five years in the mission field, gave me the opportunity to bear testimony to the greatest event in the history of the world since the crucifixion of the Master. Try it sometime, fellows and girls. If you don't have anything else to say, testify that Joseph Smith was the prophet of God, and the whole history of the Church will flood into your mind." [^4]

Being True to the Testimony of the Restoration

At issue here is the courage and conviction to bear witness to the principles that set us apart from the world and require us to stand on our own ground. Parley P. Pratt records an event in the early history of the Church that aptly illustrates the matter. "While visiting with brother Joseph in Philadelphia, a very large church was opened for him to preach in, and about three thousand people assembled to hear him. Brother Rigdon spoke first, and dwelt on the Gospel, illustrating his doctrine by the Bible. When he was through, brother Joseph arose like a lion about to roar; and being full of the Holy Ghost, spoke in great power, bearing testimony of the visions he had seen, the ministering of angels which he had enjoyed; and how he had found the plates of the Book of Mormon, and translated them by the gift and power of God. He commenced by saying: 'If nobody else had the courage to testify of so glorious a message from Heaven, and of the finding of so glorious a record, he felt to do it in justice to the people, and leave the event with God.'

"The entire congregation were astounded; electrified, as it were, and overwhelmed with the sense of the truth and power by which he spoke, and the wonders which he related. A lasting impression was made; many souls were gathered into the fold. And I bear witness, that he, by his faithful and powerful testimony, cleared his garments of their blood. Multitudes were baptized in Philadelphia and in the regions around; while, at the same time, branches were springing up in Pennsylvania, in Jersey and in various directions." [^5]

There is some irony associated with this story. Elder Pratt was the missionary who taught John Taylor. Then came the dark days of the Kirtland apostasy. Of that time Elder B. H. Roberts wrote: "There was a bitter spirit of apostasy rife in Kirtland. A number in the quorum of the Twelve were disaffected toward the Prophet, and the Church seemed on the point of disintegration. Among others, Parley P. Pratt was floundering in the darkness, and coming to Elder Taylor told him of some things wherein he considered the Prophet Joseph in error. To his remarks Elder Taylor replied: 'I am surprised to hear you speak so, Brother Parley. Before you left Canada you bore a strong testimony to Joseph Smith being a Prophet of God, and to the truth of the work he has inaugurated; and you said you knew these things by revelation, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. You gave to me a strict charge to the effect that though you or an angel from heaven was to declare anything else I was not to believe it. Now Brother Parley, it is not man that I am following, but the Lord. The principles you taught me led me to Him, and I now have the same testimony that you then rejoiced in. If the work was true six months ago, it is true today; if Joseph was then a prophet, he is now a prophet.'" [^6] Because of that testimony, Elder Pratt went to the Prophet "in tears, and, with a broken heart and contrite spirit" to confess and make things right. [^7]

One classic illustration of being true to our testimony that Joseph Smith is a prophet centers on a story that President David O. McKay was fond of telling about a missionary experience of his father, who served in his native Scotland. He was president of the Glasgow District when he received a strong witness of the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. President McKay said:

"I know that the Lord communicates with his servants. I have not doubted this as a fact since I was a boy and heard the testimony of my father regarding the revelation that came to him of the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph. I feel impressed to relate that circumstance and add his testimony to the one that I am now giving. He accepted a call to a mission in 1881. When he began preaching in his native land, and bore testimony of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, he noticed that the people turned away from him. They were bitter in their hearts against anything Mormon, and the name of Joseph Smith seemed to arouse antagonism in their hearts. One day he concluded that the best way to reach these people would be to preach just the simple principles, the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, the first principles of the gospel, and not bear testimony of the restoration. In a month or so he became oppressed with a gloomy, downcast feeling and he could not enter into the spirit of his work. He did not really know what was the matter; but his mind became obstructed; his spirit became depressed; he was oppressed and hampered; and that feeling of depression continued until it weighed him down with such heaviness that he went to the Lord and said: 'Unless I can get this feeling removed, I shall have to go home. I can't continue my work thus hampered.'

"The discouragement continued for some time after that, when, one morning, before daylight, following a sleepless night, he decided to retire to a cave, near the ocean, where he knew he would be shut off from the world entirely, and there pour out his soul to God and ask why he was oppressed with this feeling, what he had done, and what he could do to throw it off and continue his work. He started out in the dark towards the cave. He became so eager to get to it that he started to run. As he was leaving the town, he was hailed by an officer who wanted to know what was the matter. He gave some noncommittal but satisfying reply and was permitted to go on. Something just seemed to drive him; he had to get relief. He entered the cave or sheltered opening, and said: 'Oh, Father, what can I do to have this feeling removed? I must have it lifted or I cannot continue in this work'; and he heard a voice, as distinct as the tone I am now uttering, say: 'Testify that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God.' Remembering then, what he tacitly had decided six weeks or more before, and becoming overwhelmed with the thought, the whole thing came to him in a realization that he was there for a special mission, and he had not given that special mission the attention which it deserved. Then he cried in his heart, 'Lord, it is enough,' and went out from the cave." [^8]

Brigham Young illustrated the power associated with the testimony that Joseph Smith is a prophet when he said: "There is not a man or woman that loves the truth, who has heard the report of the Book of Mormon, but the Spirit of the Almighty has testified to him or her of its truth; neither has any man heard the name of Joseph Smith, but the Spirit has whispered to him—'He is a true Prophet.'" [^9]

The Importance of the First Vision

Speaking at Carthage Jail, where Joseph and Hyrum Smith were martyred, President Howard W. Hunter said on the one hundred fiftieth anniversary of that event, "Joseph Smith's greatness consists in one thing—the truthfulness of his declaration that he saw the Father and the Son and that he responded to the reality of that divine revelation." [^10] The First Vision, explained Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "was the most important event that had taken place in all world history from the day of Christ's ministry to the glorious hour when it occurred." [^11] This vision stands as a refutation of the fundamental doctrines of a corrupt Christianity. It destroys the very premises upon which all the creeds of Christendom rest.

Whereas traditional Christianity declares that the heavens are sealed and revelation has ceased, the First Vision shatters that seal and reopens the channel of divine communication between God and men.

Whereas traditional Christianity declares God to be invisible, and therefore unseen throughout the immenseness of eternity, the First Vision evidences that he does in reality manifest himself.

Whereas traditional Christianity declares the Father and Son to be without body, parts, and passions, the theophany witnessed by Joseph Smith introduces both the Father and the Son as corporeal beings, each separate from the other.

Whereas traditional Christianity views the fatherhood of God and the sonship of Christ as purely figurative, in the First Vision Joseph Smith actually heard the voice of God testifying that Jesus the Christ was his Son.

As to the churches of the world, Joseph Smith was instructed that he was to join none of them. He, like the church he would yet organize, was to stand independent of the authority and knowledge of the world. The process of salvation must dissociate itself from error and falsehood. The priesthood and all ordinances and doctrines of salvation must stand unsoiled and independent of the sophistry of men; nothing must be added to or taken from them.

In recounting the events that led him to what we have come to know as the Sacred Grove, the Prophet Joseph Smith tells how he was impressed by the injunction of James for all who sought wisdom to ask of God. His description of that experience is a perfect illustration of how the Spirit of revelation speaks through holy writ. "Never," he said, "did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know" (Joseph Smith-History 1:12). What has been described here is the Spirit of revelation directing Joseph Smith to inquire of the Lord; that is, a revelation directing him to receive a revelation. The experience could leave us wondering how often revelations have gone unclaimed because of our failure to heed the prompting to ask.

Continuing his description of the events leading to the first vision, Joseph Smith then made what may well be the most important observation ever made relative to the manner in which we teach others the gospel. He said: "For the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible" (Joseph Smith-History 1:12). Had Joseph Smith sought answers in the Bible, instead of on his knees in a quiet grove, we would still be waiting for the restoration of the gospel promised in the Bible. Similarly, in missionary work, as long as we attempt to show people the path of salvation as stemming from the Bible, we become nothing more than another of the squabbling sects of Christendom. Our responsibility is to teach investigators to pray and to show them how answers come. The well-trained missionary will answer investigators' questions by finding the simplest and most direct route to the Sacred Grove. It is not common ground we seek in giving answers, but holy ground. Those who have a Bible need now to become as those of whom we read in the Bible; that is, they need living prophets and the faith to call down the revelations of heaven upon their own heads.

The gospel cannot be properly taught amid the spirit of contention. That is one of the primary reasons we have been given the Book of Mormon. Nephi explained that by placing the Bible and the Book of Mormon together we would be able to confound false doctrines, lay down contentions, and establish peace (2 Nephi 3:12). The Book of Mormon, and in a more general sense the entire message of the Restoration, constitutes that book of peace. Our response to good people who seek to convert us to their interpretation of the Bible is respectful. We simply say that we could agree with them, except for one thing; and that one thing is that God has spoken in our day and has given us a more perfect and complete answer. We make no claim to seeing the Bible more clearly than they do, save only by the light of modern revelation. We would never seek to have anyone surrender their love for the Bible; we seek only to add to it.

At issue here is the principle of revelation. Virtually all anti-Mormon criticism reduces itself to the critic's refusal to concede the reality of revelation. Such criticism attacks the First Vision, the Book of Mormon, the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, and the authority of a restored priesthood. Each of those components is rooted in modern revelation. To allow revelation in any form is to allow the possibility that Joseph Smith was, in fact, a prophet and that Mormonism is true. That would never do. To oppose our message demands opposition to our claim that God continues to speak. The process of conversion requires obtaining a conviction of the truthfulness of the restored gospel by personal experience with the principle of revelation. Everyone is required to do what Joseph Smith did, and that is to receive the personal revelation that the wisdom that brings salvation comes only by the Spirit of revelation, and then each must find his own equivalent of the Sacred Grove and obtain his own answer. Having then obtained an answer they, like Joseph Smith, have acquired a faith and knowledge that stands independent of the wisdom of men. Thus it is that each member of the Church has his own gospel dispensation, in the sense that his knowledge and testimony allow him to stand independent of the wisdom of the world. In that sense, every soul must obtain the knowledge of salvation for himself. It cannot be had only from books or schools, colleges or universities, nor is it simply a matter of having been born in the right neighborhood or a favored nation. All must obtain, and all must do so on the same conditions.

Our Debt to Others

The declaration that we stand independent of the doctrines and philosophies of the world is not intended to suggest that we have not been immeasurably blessed by countless souls not of our faith. The freedom of worship that allows the seed of faith to grow has been purchased with the sacrifice and courage of many noble and good people. Sacred ground has been watered with their blood, and they hold a lasting place of honor in our hearts. Nor do we take lightly the countless others whose lives have blessed ours with their sweat and tears, their inspiration and talent, their ingenuity and genius. We make no claim to a monopoly on goodness, virtue, or even truth. Our sole claim is to those singular truths upon which salvation rests and to the authority to perform those ordinances essential to salvation. As to the countless other things of lasting worth in this world, Joseph Smith teaches us, "If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things" (Article of Faith 13). The earth has never known a people more devoted to missionary work than the Latter-day Saints, nor do our labors stop there, for we also seek to bless all who once lived on this earth with the fulness of gospel blessings, through our labors in their behalf in our temples. In our missionary labors we have never asked anyone to surrender any true practice, belief, or wholesome association to join with us. We say to these converts, Hold to those truths with all the tenacity of your soul, and we will add to them.

"Thy Name Shall Be Had for Good and Evil"

Three years after the First Vision Moroni first appeared to Joseph Smith to begin preparing him to bring forth the Book of Mormon. Moroni began Joseph's instruction with a unique and remarkable prophecy. He told the now seventeen-year-old boy that his name "should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people" (Joseph Smith-History 1:33). Of all the prophecies associated with the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation, that is the most remarkable. No other prophecy can match it in depth or breadth. In 1823, Joseph Smith was an unknown, uneducated farm boy living in wilderness conditions. What of the seventeen-year-old boys living today? What are the odds that we could pick one of their number, particularly one whose circumstances were as unpromising as those of Joseph Smith, who would yet be known among all the peoples of the earth? There are few young men in earth's history of whom that could be said.

A more bold and far-reaching prophecy could not have been made, and we make no pretense that it has yet been fulfilled. Yet the work moves forward, and no faithful Latter-day Saint has any difficulty seeing that future day when missionaries will labor among all the peoples of the earth. Our concern here, however, is not in the remarkable nature of the prophecy but in the reason for it. Why is it necessary for Joseph Smith's name to be known among all people? Joseph Smith is the great revelator of Christ for our dispensation. The Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants all declare that there is but one name under heaven whereby men can be saved and that is the name of the Lord Jesus Christ (see Acts 4:12; Mosiah 3:17; D&C 18:23). Joseph Smith is the greatest teacher of Christ the world has ever known. He has restored more scriptural testimony from the ancient disciples of Christ than any man who ever lived; he received and recorded more revelations relative to Christ and his plan for the salvation of his children than any other man who ever lived; and he revealed more of the mysteries of heaven in his discourses than any man of whom the world has record. He was God's covenant spokesman. Every man on the face of the earth today who has the authority to speak or act in the name of God traces that authority to Joseph Smith.

We cannot take the message of salvation to the ends of the earth independent of our witness of Joseph Smith as the great prophet of the Restoration. We can no more declare the message of the restored gospel without mention of Joseph Smith than we can tell the story of Sinai without reference to Moses. We cannot seek to hide the name of Joseph Smith in efforts to share the gospel, for in so doing we will find an immediate absence of the Spirit. For thousands of years the religious world has spoken reverently of the law of Moses, without anyone supposing that those who exercised faith therein worshiped Moses instead of the God of heaven. Why then the inordinate concern on the part of some to dissociate the name of Joseph Smith from the message of the Restoration lest we be accused of worshiping him?

Of course, there are those who will misunderstand and pervert and distort our message. That too was part of the promise given by Moroni. He said that the name of Joseph Smith was to be had for "good and evil" among those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. We know that no truth of salvation will ever go unopposed. All heaven-sent truths are to be attested to by both the sweet and peaceful whisperings of the Spirit and the loud, rancorous, and ugly hollering of the legions of the adversary. No truth that has the power to bless lives will be left undisturbed by the prince of darkness. For us to hide that truth ourselves simply saves him the trouble.

A telestial world is often a very uninhabitable place for celestial principles. Yet the greater the opposition, the greater the strength of those who withstand it. It was Moroni's role to prepare the youthful Joseph Smith for such opposition. Moroni explained to Joseph that the work to which he had been called would "cause the righteous to rejoice and wicked to rage; with the one;" he said, "it shall be had in honour, and with the other in reproach; yet, with these it shall be a terror, because of the great and marvelous work which shall follow the coming forth of this fulness of the gospel." [^12]

Moroni gave Joseph Smith a sign by which he might know that the things he was being told were true. The sign had particular reference to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and to its testimony of Christ going to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. "This is the sign," he said. "When these things begin to be known, that is, when it is known that the Lord has shown you these things, the workers of iniquity will seek your overthrow. They will circulate falsehoods to destroy your reputation; and also will seek to take your life; but remember this, if you are faithful, and shall hereafter continue to keep the commandments of the Lord, you shall be preserved to bring these things forth; for in due time he will give you a commandment to come and take them. When they are interpreted, the Lord will give the holy priesthood to some, and they shall begin to proclaim this gospel and baptize by water, and after that, they shall have power to give the Holy Ghost by the laying on of their hands. Then will persecution rage more and more; for the iniquities of men shall be revealed, and those who are not built upon the Rock will seek to overthrow the church; but it will increase the more opposed." [^13]

Joseph Smith soon learned that Moroni had not overstated either the persuasive power of the message that had been given to him or the opposition that it would engender. In a revelation to Joseph Smith in the darkest point of his life, while he was incarcerated in a dungeon that was a part of the Liberty Jail, the Lord told him: "The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; while the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand" (D&C 122:1-2).

If we are to stand where Joseph stood, that is, if we are to hold to the same principles and declare the same doctrines, then we too must be known for both good and evil among those with whom we labor. Our efforts will be held in honor by some and in derision by others, yet we must stand firm. Surely this has been the lot of virtually every missionary who has ever served. When Moroni linked Joseph Smith with his destiny, he linked all who would be faithful to that same testimony to that same destiny.

The Keystone of Our Religion

We find the following entry in the History of the Church for Sunday, November 28, 1841. "I spent the day in council," said Joseph Smith, "with the Twelve Apostles at the house of President Young, conversing with them upon a variety of subjects." Only one, however, merited mention in his journal. "I told the brethren," he said, "that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." [^14]

The Book of Mormon is the keystone in the arch of the restored gospel. A keystone rests at the crown of an arch and locks all the other stones in place. As long as the keystone stands, the arch stands. Should the keystone fall, the arch would also fall. So it is with the Book of Mormon. Resting at the crown of the Restoration, it locks all other doctrines in place. If it stands, the Church stands; if it falls, the Church falls. For instance, the Book of Mormon is the perfect evidence that Joseph Smith is a prophet, that Jesus is the Christ and the Son of God, that resurrection—the inseparable union of body and spirit—is a reality, that God remembers the covenants he made with the fathers, and that Israel will be gathered again to the covenants of salvation and then restored to the glory of David's day. The book is itself a miracle and thus establishes the truth that the God of Israel is a God of miracles.

It was in translating this record that Joseph Smith laid the foundation of his own understanding of the gospel's saving principles. As it was with Joseph Smith, so it is to be with each of us. Almost a year before the Church was organized, the Lord instructed Oliver Cowdery, who had been the Prophet's scribe in translating the book, to trust in its doctrines as he sought instruction from the Lord. "Behold," the Lord said, "I have manifested unto you, by my Spirit in many instances, that the things which you have written are true; wherefore you know that they are true. And if you know that they are true, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that you rely upon the things which are written; for in them are all things written concerning the foundation of my church, my gospel, and my rock. Wherefore, if you shall build up my church, upon the foundation of my gospel and my rock, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you" (D&C 18:2-5).

Only after the Book of Mormon and its doctrines had come forth could the Church be organized. The organization was not to call forth those doctrines; rather, the doctrines were to call forth the organization. Thus in teaching our nonmember friends we do not seek to have them obtain a testimony of the organization of the Church but rather a testimony of the doctrines taught in the Book of Mormon. It is through the Book of Mormon, for instance, that we want them to learn of the necessity of baptism. Thus we have been instructed to flood the earth with copies of the Book of Mormon rather than with copies of a chart that details the organization of the Church. For this reason the many scriptural texts describing the events of the last days center on the gathering of Israel rather than on the organization of the Church. Similarly it was necessary for the priesthood to be restored before the Church could be organized. The organization must always be subordinate to the doctrines and the authority that created it. It is here that we must stand, for the idea that the Bible is a sufficient source upon which to base the organization of the Church denies the need for continuous revelation, the need for the restoration of the priesthood, and the need for living oracles. It is to deny that power by which Israel is to be gathered and the host of testimonies from prophets of ages past of a restoration of all things. It is to deny the need for this, the greatest of all gospel dispensations, the one in which all the keys, powers, majesties, glory, and strength of past dispensations are to be gathered to prepare the way for the coming of the Lord.

Where We Stand

As Latter-day Saints we must know clearly where we stand. If our message is simply a reworking of key Bible texts for which we have gained some insights that others overlooked, then why not abandon the offensive notion that there was a universal apostasy, or that there is but one true church, and get on with the matter of mending fences with historical Christianity? If, on the other hand, we are serious in testifying that there was indeed an apostasy, that it was universal, that it included the loss of the priesthood and the saving truths of salvation and the knowledge of the very nature of God himself, then we must be prepared to stand alone. We are not attempting to rebuild out of the theological rubble of the past. We have no borrowed doctrines. We have no priesthood, no keys, no power, no authority that we have received from the world. Such being the case, we have no right to proclaim our message to the nations of the earth by seeking common ground. We must stand independent. Indeed, it is not common ground that we seek. We seek sacred ground, and upon that ground we must stand.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Dedication of the Temple," Independence, Missouri, 17 Apr. 1994. Copy of the program in possession of the author.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), p. 121.
[^3] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 6:280.
[^4] Matthew Cowley, Matthew Cowley Speaks (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971), pp. 297-98.
[^5] Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), pp. 260-61.
[^6] B. H. Roberts, Life of John Taylor (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965), pp. 39-40.
[^7] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 144.
[^8] David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from the Writings of President David O. McKay, comp. Clare Middlemiss (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1955), pp. 22-24.
[^9] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 1:93.
[^10] Howard W. Hunter, "Come to the God of All Truth," Ensign, Sept. 1994, p. 72.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 285.
[^12] Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 2 (October 1835): 199.
[^13] Messenger and Advocate 2 (October 1835): 199.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2d ed. rev., ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 4:461.
