START UPON A MISSION, PENNILESS—AID FROM THE CAPTAIN AND PASSENGERS ON THE STEAMBOAT—ARRIVE AT NEW ORLEANS—FAIL IN TRYING TO FIND FREE PASSAGE TO ENGLAND—DISCOURAGEMENT—PRAYER—REBUKE AND ANSWER—APPLY FOR PASSAGE ON THE "BERLIN"—KIND RECEPTION FROM CAPTAIN BAKER—BARGAIN FOR PASSAGE—ONE HALF TO BE PAID IN DISCUSSING RELIGION WITH AN EPISCOPALIAN MINISTER.

In the year 1846, at a council of the Twelve Apostles held in the temple at Nauvoo, I was appointed to go on a mission to England.

After seeing my wife and our one child provided for, as to travel and board in the great exodus then being inaugurated for the unknown somewhere for the Saints to seek, I left Nauvoo, poor and penniless, for St. Louis, Missouri.

After procuring some pecuniary help, I took passage for New Orleans on board the steamer Brunswick, Captain Moore commanding.

From some of the passengers I received substantial evidences of answer to prayer for means to prosecute my journey. In my labors in preaching the word I was wonderfully blessed, the captain kindly remitting one-half of the cabin passage money.

Arriving at New Orleans a stranger, and knowing no Saints if there were any in that city, I secured lodgings and board at $1.00 per day. It now became a new and peculiar duty and strain on my faith and pocket to seek a passage in some sailing vessel, bound for Liverpool.

I had some $45.00 in my pocket, the gifts of dear friends in St. Louis, on board the steamer Brunswick, and from one person particularly in answer to a masonic shake of the hand, unintentionally given.

I endeavored to find passage on the no purse or scrip principle, and was in every instance unsuccessful. I attributed these repulses to meanness or the non-appreciation of the character of a missionary, such as I proclaimed myself, and to the national character of the captains of the several vessels to whom I applied, for, being English myself, to this class I had purposely made my applications.

Meeting with several rebuffs, I was fast drifting on the road to discouragement.

On the Thursday succeeding my arrival I stood on the levee, and in fervent prayer I asked God to open the way for me to fill this mission—to soften the heart of the next captain I applied to, so that he might take me to Liverpool, free. I requested this as an evidence to me of God's favor; and if refused, I would take it as an evidence that I should return, overtake the Saints going west, and, with my family, find a new home.

While thus meditating and praying, it seemed as if some one came up to me and asked me how much money I had.

I instinctively replied, "About $40.00."

Then came the query: What did I want with that but to pay my way? Why ask for a Divine interposition on the heart or purse of any one while I had money in my pocket?

I felt the rebuke, yet I thought of my shabby clothes, my going home to see a proud-feeling mother, my desire by my personal appearance to cast no discredit on the cause I had espoused. These and many similar reflections passed hurriedly through my mind.

My invisible monitor did not leave me, but, waking me from the reverie, he again plied me with similar interrogations and rebukes, and told me to apply to the ship then in direct sight.

I looked up and saw the words: "For Liverpool."

I walked down to the pile of cotton from which the mate and some stevedores were loading the good ship Berlin.

I asked the mate what was the chance to obtain passage on board his ship for Liverpool.

In the most cherry voice he replied: "First rate! But here comes Captain Baker; talk with him."

I approached him. He offered his hand. I told him my business, my wishes and aims. He invited me on board, and, it being noon, to dinner.

After dinner he remarked: "Now to business! You say you are a 'Mormon' missionary. You wish to go to England! And how do you wish to go?"

I replied that I had but little money, and would be obliged to content myself with a steerage passage.

To this he strenuously objected, remarking that I knew not the life of a steerage passenger.

He asked me how much money I had, remarking that his cabin fare was $80.00.

I put my hand in my pocket and drew out my entire stock of cash, $40.00. "There captain," I remarked, "is all I have, which is just half the price of a cabin passage."

He remarked, "I will take this in part payment!"

"But," I asked, "how shall I, how can I pay you the difference?"

He replied, "I have heard much of the preachers of the 'Mormon' faith being experts in the scriptures. We shall take on board on Sunday evening an Episcopalian minister, and when we get out to sea and all things in trim, I shall expect you and the minister to give me and my wife some Bible contests."

"Now," said I to the captain, "having given you all my money, how can I pay my board bill till you sail?"

"Why," he replied, "how can you board but board the ship Berlin! Here," (calling to one of the men) "go with this boy and help him with any luggage he may have, and put it in the cabin."

Soon I was duly installed. You may readily imagine my feelings of gratitude to God and the monitor on the levee.

In due time we sailed, after receiving the reverend gent, who was a tall, portly person, wearing the garb and look of his church.
