Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan ( 1651)

Chapter IX

Of the Several Subject of Knowledge

THERE are of are of knowledge two kinds, whereof one is knowledge of fact; the other, knowledge of the consequence of one affirmation to another. The former is nothing else but sense and memory, and is absolute knowledge; as when we see a fact doing, or remember it done; and this is the knowledge required in a witness. The latter is called science, and is conditional; as when we know that: if the figure shown be a circle, then any straight line through the center shall divide it into two equal parts. And this is the knowledge required in a philosopher; that is to say, of him that pretends to reasoning.

The register of knowledge of fact is called history, whereof there be two sorts: one called natural history; which is the history of such facts, or effects of Nature, as have no dependence on man's will; such as are the histories of metals, plants, animals, regions, and the like. The other is civil history, which is the history of the voluntary actions of men in Commonwealths.

The registers of science are such books as contain the demonstrations of consequences of one affirmation to another; and are commonly called books of philosophy; whereof the sorts are many, according to the diversity of the matter; and may be divided in such manner as I have divided them in the following table.

I. SCIENCE, that is, knowledge of consequences; which is called also PHILOSOPHY

A. Consequences from accidents of bodies natural; which is called NATURAL PHILOSOPHY

a. Consequences from quantity, and motion indeterminate; which, being the principles or first foundation of philosophy, is called philosophia prima

PHILOSOPHIA PRIMA

b. Consequences from motion, and quantity determined

1) Consequences from quantity, and motion determined

a) By figure, By number

1] Mathematics,

GEOMETRY

ARITHMETIC

2) Consequences from motion, and quantity of bodies in special

a) Consequences from motion, and quantity of the great parts of the world, as the earth and stars,

1] Cosmography

ASTRONOMY

GEOGRAPHY

b) Consequences from motion of special kinds, and figures of body,

1] Mechanics, doctrine of weight

Science of ENGINEERS

ARCHITECTURE

NAVIGATION

a. Consequences from qualities of bodies transient, such as sometimes appear, sometimes vanish

METEOROLOGY

b. Consequences from qualities of bodies permanent

1) Consequences from qualities of stars

a) Consequences from the light of the stars. Out of this, and the motion of the sun, is made the science of

SCIOGRAPHY

b) Consequences from the influence of the stars,

ASTROLOGY

2) Consequences of qualities from liquid bodies that fill the space between the stars; such as are the air, or substance etherial

3) Consequences from qualities of bodies terrestrial

a) Consequences from parts of the earth that are without sense,

1] Consequences from qualities of minerals, as stones, metals, etc.

2] Consequences from the qualities of vegetables

b) Consequences from qualities of animals

1] Consequences from qualities of animals in general

a] Consequences from vision,

OPTICS

b] Consequences from sounds,

MUSIC

c] Consequences from the rest of the senses

2] Consequences from qualities of men in special

a] Consequences from passions of men,

ETHICS

b] Consequences from speech,

i) In magnifying, vilifying, etc.

POETRY

ii) In persuading,

RHETORIC

iii) In reasoning,

LOGIC

iv) In contracting,

The Science of JUST and UNJUST

B. Consequences from accidents of politic bodies; which is called POLITICS, AND CIVIL PHILOSOPHY
