S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

1756-1800

Dr. Joseph Young, grandfather of Brigham Young, was a veteran of the French and Indian Wars of the early colonial period. England and France were fighting on many fronts, but this war was of peculiar significance for its issue was whether the New World of North America would be controlled by the French or by the British. The final battle on the Plains of Abraham, near Quebec, in which Wolfe, while victor, lost his life, settled that issue for all time. Britain won and France withdrew.

Dr. Young being a surgeon had, as his main occupation, the amputation of arms and legs damaged in the fighting in the campaign to control the Canadian gateway near Lake George and Lake Champlain. He varied this work with the extraction of arrows from various parts of the soldiers' anatomy and probing for bullets fired at close range from the matchlock muskets of the French. These lead balls were more than one half an inch in diameter and made a hole large enough to make probing for a bullet a major operation. It seems impossible for men to have survived such a shock as these wounds must have inflicted, yet many of them lived. In those days it was a question of which was worse, the wound or the treatment, but men were tough fibered, and immune to many of the infecting bacteria of the day. Oftentimes the poultices and the ointment applied to these wounds were as effective as those treatments in use today.

After the war Dr. Young settled in the farming community of Hopkinton, Massachusetts. This town, a little east and south of Worcester, was new, with a good deal of new land, and a new opportunity, and here the doctor combined his practice of medicine with farming.

One fine day he received a call to come to the house of John Hayden, far gone with cancer. Dr. Young had a reputation in the neighborhood for successful treatment of cancer, but this particular case had resisted his best efforts. Nursing Mr. Hayden was his widowed daughter Betsy Hayden Tread-way. She was fair and comely, so the visits had not only the effect of giving comfort to Mr. Hayden but also of giving interest in things other than medical treatment to Dr. Young. He fell in love with her, and in due course of time they were married. In the course of the next nine years six children were born to the couple. Suzannah December 21, 1759 William February 28, 1761 John March 7, 1763 Joseph J. March 26, 1765 Anna July 30, 1766 Ichabod July 24, 1768

In 1769 Dr. Joseph Young died. Many years later, Brigham Young stated that he was killed by the falling of a fence rail, but Phinehas, Brigham's brother, reported that the death was due to being struck by a falling tree. Both could have been right. It could be that a tree felled for the purpose of making fence rails could have been called a fence rail. It would have been an odd accident, indeed, for a fence rail, once split and placed in a fence, to have fallen in such a manner as to fatally injure a man. Fences in that day were usually called "worm" fences, because of the irregular way they "wormed" their way over the landscape. Even the top rail was not in a position to do more than injure an arm or a leg. A falling tree seems more reasonable as a cause of death.

After the death of her husband, Elizabeth Hayden Young was hard put to earn a living, and during the next four years lost her possessions. She was forced to send her children out to work. John and Joseph (John was six years of age at the death of his father) were "bound out" to a man by the name of Jones who had both white and black servants. The ten-year-old John and the eight-year-old Joseph were worked along with the servants. The story comes down that they were cruelly treated, but this would not have been unusual for that day. There is no doubt that work was a daylight-until-dark proposition with scant variety in the food, and meager pay. There is an apocryphal story that the boys stood this for five years and then ran away and joined the continental army. The story then states that both were captured by the British. John escaped from his captors, but Joseph, so the story goes, fell in love with the British and refused to leave them. John never saw his brother again. Based on the American Historical Review, John in applying for a pension did not make any statement to verify this story. The actual date of his enlistment, according to his own statement, was June of 1780. He joined the 4th Massachusetts Brigade of Musketry, rendezvoused in July at Springfield, and was marched from there to Westpoint via Litchfield and Fishkill. From there he marched to Orangetown, New Jersey, at the time Major Andre was hanged as a spy, and from there he marched to Liberty Pole, then to Tantoway, where he stayed in camp until he was marched back to West Point for winter quarters. After serving six months he was discharged. This service was in the regular continental line army under command of General George Washington.

About August 10, 1781, he again enlisted in the Massachusetts Militia for three months. He again marched with the regiment to Westpoint and from there to Peekskill. Here he was assigned to an unattached party for "reconnoitering the line." He took yellow fever and lay in the hospital at Peekskill until able to go to the camp. This enlistment was for three months, when he was again discharged. He spent the winter at Hopkinton, presumably working for Mr. Jones, but when spring came he enlisted for a third time in March of 1782. This enlistment was for six weeks to go to Rhode Island to repair Fort Butte. From this enlistment he was discharged in due course. Thus he served three separate enlistments between the ages of 17 and 19. He was not engaged in any battles, although that is a matter of pure circumstance. Apparently his indenture master, John Jones, had some claim on his services, for Jones took his discharge papers and turned them in on the payment of his own taxes. From this it would appear that his master, Jones, collected on them, perhaps his pay.

From this it is apparent that John was never captured by the British, although his brother may have been. He fought in no battles, but he did acquire a cannon ball, said to have been fired in the Battle of Saratoga. From the fact that he possessed the cannon ball has come the legend that he fought at Saratoga. [^1]

During this period, the doctrines of the revolutionists would have become a part of his being. He subscribed to the right of a man to own land, to vote, to be free to express himself; he learned, too, that free men could band together, the very bond making them well nigh invincible in a righteous cause. He read the tracts of the firebrands of the revolution, or, more likely, heard them read at the informal gatherings at the village store. Sam Adams must have stirred him. The gossip over the doings of the Continental Congress would not only have come to him, but the indecisiveness of the Congress would have had effect on his comfort and safety as a soldier. Along with others he would have suffered because of the vacillation of this body of legislators. The ideals of Washington, the wisdom of Franklin, and later the Jeffersonian love for the common man were the meat on which he grew, as these thinkers and actors on the stage said their lines and vanished into the wings.

Yet the hard work of earning a livelihood was the chain which bound him to the earth-the good fresh-scented land. As a bound apprentice, John learned the care of the farm, and he farmed for his "vittles" and keep. He believed the folklore that was a part of the farming knowledge of the day. One planted potatoes in the dark of the moon just as one planted corn in its light, and one put his brand on a horse in the dark of the moon, or the brand would grow. What was good for potatoes was good for colts, apparently. Anyone in his right mind wore a bag of asafoetida suspended from a thong around his neck to ward off disease, but, mostly, its odor warded everyone off within smelling distance. One paid attention to the nostrums and cure-alls which, from time immemorial, had been the topic of fireplace conversation.

John Young served out his indenture or apprenticeship until he was released from it at the age of 21. This would be the spring of 1784. Meanwhile he could not have failed to notice Abigail Howe, Nabby to her friends, who was said to be the prettiest of the five Howe sisters. She had a "doll-like face, blue eyes, and yellow hair." She was of a lovable, gentle disposition, and had a pleasing personality. She was very popular with her associates; and she was pious. These characteristics were considered assets in that day, as they are today. John obeyed all of the social requirements of his time in his courtship, and succeeded in convincing Abigail that he was the right man for her. They were married October 31, 1785, at Hopkinton, Middlesex County, Massachusetts.

Hopkinton offered sufficient work for John Young to earn enough to keep his little family fed and clothed for a time. The war for independence was barely over and there was gossip aplenty about the state of the colonies. Would the colonies band together or would each go its. separate and ineffectual way alone? Hopkinton was close enough to Boston to be abreast of the times. John Adams was New England's most eloquent and solid citizen, so that his views probably found lodgment in the mind of John Young. But there wasn't much time for John to think of politics, even had he been of a mind to do it, for following on the heels of his marriage he soon was looking into the new-born face of Nancy. The date was August 6, 1786. Barely fifteen months later, November 8, 1787, Fanny was added to the household.

By this time the colonies had agreed to band together, and the Constitution had been signed by the delegates in Philadelphia, but it was the next year before Massachusetts ratified the Constitution, followed by several other states including New York. What this far-reaching event had to do with the move John made to Durham, New York, is not known, but he was there clearing land and farming in 1789. Over the dim roads of the period he had worked his way to Albany and thence to Durham with his wife and two children. The fact that they went there at all would have been unknown, except for the entry in the family Bible to the effect that Rhoda, named after Abigail's sister, was born in Durham, New York, September 10, 1789. They didn't stay there very long, for 1790 found them back in Hopkinton, where they lived for the next ten years. At regular intervals, five more children were added to the flock. The firstborn son, John Jr., arrived May 27, 1791; Nabby, April 23, 1793; Suzannah, June 17, 1795; Joseph, April 7, 1797; Phinehas Howe, February 16, 1799. John Young's axe and hoe had to be kept moving to feed those eight hungry mouths.

Why John Young left Hopkinton at this point has never been explained. It is quite likely that he was caught up in the fever of the times to move west in order to better his condition. Massachusetts land was none too fertile, and with the conditions of that day even good land tended to play out. There was a good deal of talk about the opportunities over in New York. Here also there were tracts of land reserved for homesteads of Revolutionary soldiers. Phelps and Gorham had purchased an immense tract of land from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and had begun to advertise its advantages, but John didn't go there directly. Instead, he went to Whitingham, Vermont, moving in the winter of 1800-1801.

One wonders in this day of cozy, rapid transit why he chose winter to travel to Vermont, but one has but to know the condition of the roads of that day to discover the reason.

In spring, summer, and fall the tracks which passed for roads were impassable much of the time, and difficult all of the time. After storms all traffic was stopped until the roads dried enough to be firm. Wagons, heavily laden, cut into the soft soil of the countryside until the roads became a succession of deep chucks, first on one side, then on the other. Wet spots would let the wheels down until the wagon bed rested on the mud. In this situation all one could do was to unload, and then pry the empty wagon out of the mire. On particularly

Abigail (Nabby) Howe Young. A drawing made from an early pencil sketch by Nadine Bushman barton, 1964.

long stretches of wet land the travelers would build corduroy roads. These consisted of logs six to eight inches in diameter, laid at right angles across stringers which had been laid parallel to the track. This type of road was very uncomfortable to travel, being a series of short bumps as the wheels crossed each log. At times an ox or horse got a hoof between two logs laid a little too loose which caused a delay while the logs were lifted and the hoof pulled out. Successive users kept these in what repair was needed to make the passage sure. In summer during dry spells, roads were equally deep in dust, draft animals stirring up great clouds as they moved slowly along. Both of these disadvantages of warm weather travel were non-existent in winter. There was no dust; there was no mud; mosquitoes were non-existent. The frozen earth, covered with snow, gave little resistance to a bobsled, and no discomfort of bog hole or corduroy. Loads which were immovable by summer, or which could be pulled only with great difficulty with long delays for mire, broken reaches, axles, and wheels, or exhausted animals, slid over the snow with consummate ease. This may be the reason why John decided to move his family in January.

---
Notas:
[^1] The above facts are taken from records printed in M. Hamlin Cannon, "A Pension Office note on Brigham Young's father," American Historical Review (Oct. 1944, pp. 82-90).
