S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

January-September 1801

The move of the Young family to Whitingham was fraught with dangers and difficulties. It would have been arduous in the summer; it was arduous, difficult, and dangerous in January. Winter grips the Massachusetts back country with bands of ice during much of the winter. It can raise a howling blizzard with subzero temperature which will leave a foot of heavy snow. Then the temperature can, within hours, rise to above freezing. Rain will begin to fall and, turning to ice as it strikes, will sheath the landscape, trees, houses, animals, and men in a thick coat of glittering ice. It is beautiful and terrible at once. Then, as if that isn't bad enough, the temperature will again rise and more rain will melt the ice and snow into sloppy slush. Not satisfied it yet again freezes, making any natural food completely inaccessible to the desperately hungry, surviving animals. Men caught out in one of these storms are hard put to it to survive.

On the other hand some winters will be barren of snow and storms. Wagons can move easily across the country, to some advantage, for the frozen ground easily supports them. Even then, clouds constantly threaten so that a man must be prepared for the worst even if he does not experience it.

There is always the problem of wagon versus bob-sled. If a man takes his family via bob-sled, they are immobile come spring. If he depends on wagons he faces the problem of exhausted animals pulling the equipment through the heavy snow. If he tries a road well beaten down by bob-sleds, the wagon wheels track in the loose unpacked snow on both sides, for the wheels are wider apart than the bob runners.

Another problem: Must the family camp out en route, or will there be sufficient funds to stay at inns?

The Young family was not given to making explanations. They were terse of speech, awkward with the written word; no one in the family was a diarist. So one is reduced to conjecture in explaining why or how. One fact is known. John Young, with eight children, the eldest girl fourteen, the eldest boy nine and one half, with a total of five girls and three boys, moved his family more than one hundred miles from Hopkinton to Whitingham, Vermont. It was four miles over the Massachusetts/Vermont line midway between the east and west branches of the North River, a fork of the Deer field River. We wonder why he chose Whitingham. It was only one of many such places. It must have been that there, for some reason, he could obtain work or land. It would be interesting to know which route he took. In his going he was most likely to travel north to Framingham, where he could strike the Worcester Pike. Leaving Worcester he could angle off to Paxton, Barre, Dana, North Salem. He could then cross the Connecticut River, his greatest natural obstacle, near either Deerfield or Greenfield, if there was a ferry at these places. His last towns would be Shelburne and Colraine. A map of 1815 shows a dim trace road passing through these towns from Worcester. No mention has been made of the dozen or two creeks and brooks he would have to ford, nor the primitive road he faced once he left Worcester.

Did they all ride in the wagon box, bedded down in the straw, and covered with quilts, as we do today on a bob-sled party? Or was he so poor that he could afford only one wagon, forcing all but the small children to walk? The best team would average only three miles per hour for eight or nine hours. Fifteen miles per day with a load is the best they could do. Where did they get the hay for the stock? Did they use oxen or horses? They must have been at least ten days on the road, assuming there were no delaying storms.

What was at the end of the road? Was there a cabin ready, with firewood stacked, waiting to receive them? Did the settlers already on the ground expect them? Did they find shelter with some hospitable family, in a ten by sixteen foot cabin, everyone moving over to make room? Did they have farming tools, plows, harrows, hoes, and seed to plant in addition to furniture? Did they have furniture?

The veil of inarticulate time is drawn. However, this move to Whitingham, Vermont, indicates something of their character. John and Abigail Howe Young were determined people, not easily discouraged or scared; otherwise they would never have moved at all; or, moving, would not have chosen winter.

The early spring of 1801 was probably used to build the small cabin which they were to occupy. Cutting the logs for this small home was probably the first act in clearing land. By May, John would need to have enough land clear to plant his meager variety of vegetables, of which corn was the chief crop.

His son, Brigham said, many years later, that "he moved from Hopkinton to Whitingham, Windham County, Vermont, where he remained for three years opening new farms." "Opening new farms" could mean that he spent his time clearing, fencing, building for others; hiring out. We are sure that he worked.

The frontier economy was one of bare subsistence. Labor was limited to the business of farming and creating farms. Greater variety than that required manufacture of some sort, or transport. It would be nice, Abigail must have thought, to have clothes such as were worn in Boston. But well she knew that what they had was limited to what they could produce themselves. Coon-skin caps were popular, not because they wouldn't have liked the hats of the city, but because they could kill a coon and tan the fur. Cloth they made from flax (linen) or from wool, or at times they traded their produce for small amounts of material, "enough to make a suit" - "sufficient for a dress." Boots and shoes? They went barefoot except in most inclement weather. When foot covering was needed, moccasins made from skins were far more prevalent than boots or shoes. Within ten years times changed. But this was 1801.

The family, along with other settlers, were too isolated to be very much concerned with historical events taking place-for example, with the fact that Napoleon had taken over France and had conquered most of Europe. They voted, no doubt, in the election of 1801, when Thomas Jefferson was elected President. John Young as a revolutionary soldier had heard of Jefferson, but once the latter had been elected, he meant nothing to John Young at Whitingham. The economy of the country, the law of supply and demand-these factors affected him, but except as they applied to the things a dozen eggs, twenty pounds of maple sugar, or a block of potash would buy, he knew nothing about it.

Whatever the economic factors which influenced the cash economy, every family could be independent of fluctuation of profit and loss by the simple expedient of the ownership of a cow. One of the first purchases of John Young was this necessity. Caleb Murdock had a cow, a good cow. John bought the cow from Murdock. She was one of those rare critters which proved to be a good milker. During the summer when clover was blooming she produced "a bushel of milk," as John was wont to say. This meant not only milk, but butter, cheese, and cottage cheese. To the infant Brigham it meant life-for he was weaned soon after his birth because of the illness of Nabbie. She was ill for some time, so that the two older girls did much of the housework. Fanny could pacify Brigham when none of the others could, so she soon became his nurse and protector. Fanny also had the care of the cow. Like some cows, this one would give up her milk to one person only-Fanny. Fanny often carried Brigham in her arms out to milk, performing the operation with one hand while Brigham was cuddled with the other arm.

Yet their lives had compensations. Simple pleasures are often happiest ones. Even the most inarticulate cannot fail to be impressed by the beginning of spring in the Vermont forests. The hills glow with pastel colors faintly echoing the brilliance of the color of the previous fall. There are delicate lavenders, faint pinks, suggestions of red. Then as though a great hand were combing out the color, a flood of yellow-green takes command, quickly followed by the greens, shading from yellow to the deep blue greens of conifers. By June the first all of this miracle is accomplished.

The brilliance of fall by comparison leaves one breathless, whether he is surveying a distant hill which stretches upward like a great persian carpet, or lost among the trees, the air vibrating with yellow, orange, red, and all shades in between. John Young must have stood in his doorway in early October, looked over the hills and declared to Abigail, "It's mighty pretty, Nabbie." And Abigail, rocking her four-month-old son to sleep, would have a great artistic satisfaction in being in such a land, hard though it was. "Yes, John," she would respond, "it's right pretty."

But the baby, Brigham, born June 1, would sleep on, feeling safe in the security of his mother's arms, and from her heart and her soul gradually absorbing what she was and what he was to be.
