S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

1801-June 1815

How is determination built into a character? or quick clear action? or clarity of terse expression? or great physical strength? or endurance? or steadiness of purpose? or reliability? or great religious faith and fervor? or gentleness with children? or understanding of animals? Quality is the basic material from which the facets of nobility emerge. All men can rise higher than they begin if they make the effort, but the qualities of greatness beyond the average man must be in the man to begin with. Then the proper environment and experience may become the shaping tools which in the end permit a man thus endowed to reach the heights. No man may look upon a new-born child and predict his future unless endowed with the gift of prophetic insight. Looking back after the life is finished, one may point out some of the shaping and polishing factors. Thus we have done with Washington and Lincoln. Thus we may do with Brigham Young.

If as a baby one grows into the knowledge of speech, learning the familiar words of the King James Bible as the vocabulary; if the attitude of speech in the family is respectful; if acknowledgment of the goodness of God is a daily expression; if the protection of the Almighty is sought in times of fear and danger, sickness and crisis-if this is the prevailing attitude in the home, the child then develops and grows in this attitude. Brigham Young's description of this factor of his development is short and to the point:

"My parents were devoted to the Methodist religion and their precepts of morality were sustained by their good example....I was taught by my parents to live a strictly moral life."

Phinehas, an older brother, said, "We moved to Whitingham, Windham County, Vermont, where we lived three years, and during this time I recollect being taught to pray and obey my father and mother."

These short references to early youth open a window through which one looks into a home of strict puritan influence. There was affection, but it was controlled. There was quick obedience, rigidly enforced. Abigail, a woman of quiet culture, tempered the vigor of John's applications of discipline. There was a deep abiding faith, controlled by religious form. This however had been modified from the early puritan Congregationalism to the more liberal Methodism. John Young early joined the reformed Methodist Church. So did Abigail.

The only readily available textbook was the Bible. It is liely that it took Brigham a long time to learn to read it, writing being likewise difficult. One learns to recognize the printed forms of words long before he learns to construct words in these forms. Brigham never did become facile at writing. His spelling was phonetic on words with which he was not familiar. He was self taught. What little schooling he gained in his youth could not have made much contribution to his education.

This was the common experience on the frontier. There wasn't time for education. The work of carving out a living required every working hour of every living soul. Some, saying in one spot and keeping their efforts centered, having first chosen a farm in the path of economic progress, became prosperous enough to afford schools for the children. Had this been the case with John Young the development of Brigham might have been different. John, however, seems to have been restless. This restlessness was not inborn but rather a thirst to improve his condition. He was not of a nature to fight it out on one line" summer after summer, especially if there was a better chance elsewhere. Even had he been so constituted the economic conditions of the back country during the years 1800-1815 did not improve fast enough to save a farm if the mortgage holders pressed for payment. The big boom in New York began with the cash wages of the Erie Canal construction, and until its completion there was demand for food and labor. Many a successful farm in New York state could count the beginning of its prosperity by that operation. The number of dispossessed farmers who prior to that period were forced by the times to give up and move farther west, will never be counted. John Young was caught up in the whirlwind of that movement. Reading of him, one suspects that much of the time he was in the vortex of the storm. Yet he did not quail. He did not give up. He did not flee. He moved with the storm-and his sons learned to move with him.

All of his boys learned the pattern. Each developed resourcefulness. Each became an axeman par excellence. Each graduated from the school of land clearing for small farmers. Each put religion foremost in his life. And each developed loyalty one for the other, so that if one found good fortune he notified the others so they could enlarge on it.

The economy of that situation called for family loyalty. Yet not all families achieved it. Many a boy ran away. The fact that John could command the loyal support of his boys when he needed it, even after they married, bespeaks the fact that home life was good, that is, good for their day. They knew no other condition with which to compare theirs but, even so, intolerable conditions need no comparison. The victims of such conditions rise up in rebellion of their own choice.

John Young stayed in Whitingham town for three years. Then, in 1804, he started west.

Two girls had married, Nancy to Daniel Kent, and Fanny to Robert Cart. Nancy was eighteen years of age, Fanny sixteen. This left Rhoda, fifteen, to be the mainstay of the younger children. John, Jr., was now thirteen. Five other children were in the caravan, Brigham the youngest, being three. How did they travel? We have no record. They used wagons, of course, but whether or not oxen or horses were the motive power is not known. They crossed the Hudson at Troy, most likely, then wound their way over the primitive trace road that led to Cooperstown and Sherburne. This later became the Cherry Valley route. They stopped at Sherburne for nine years. The greatest increase in wealth was the addition of Louisa, born soon after their arrival there, and Lorenzo Dow, born three years later in 1807. The first death occurred here when Nabby died, aged fourteen.

It is quite possible that after nine years of back-breaking toil they had eonugh assets to trade for land farther west. The War of 1812 was on, but apparently it did not affect them, buried as they were in the deep forest. Whether or not their assets were adequate, they pulled up stakes and moved to Cayuga County in 1813. Brigham, now twelve, had learned some of the frontier lessons. His text was the forest, and he learned to read rapidly its lessons. His teachers were his older brothers. His keenness of observation was sharpened on the hone of experience. He was now large enough to work in earnest. The use of the ax, its sharpening, its balancing, its effectiveness in action, became second nature. He learned the ways of wild animals. The old muzzle-loading musket of his father's revolutionary war experience became familiar, from its spark-producing frizzen to the long ramrod reposing under the barrel. The family settled in the town of Aurilius, in the general neighborhood of Auburn. Rhoda, mainstay of her mother, was married to John P. Greene in 1813 in Cayuga County, and John Jr. married Theodosia Kimball in the same year. Then a year later Susannah was married to James Little. This left five children at home, Joseph, Phinehas Howe, Brigham, Lorenzo Dow, and Louisa. The work of clearing and building went on apace. Then tragedy struck again. Worn out from giving birth to eleven children, rearing them, burying Nabby, her namesake, with the additional hardship of doing it all while making four major moves under primitive pioneer conditions, Abigail Howe Young, affectionately called "Nabby" by her loved ones, died June 11, 1815. She was forty-nine years of age.

She had suffered for many years from tuberculosis. Lorenzo's memory of his mother is of this illness. He remembered her as a "praying, fervent" woman. "She frequently called me to her bedside and counseled me to be a good man, that the Lord might bless my life. On one occasion she told me that if I would not neglect to pray to my Heavenly Father He would send a guardian angel to protect me in the dangers to which I might be exposed." Lorenzo was greatly impressed by his mother. She must have made a greater impression on Brigham who was fourteen when she died.

One wonders how tuberculosis, a highly infectious disease, could fail to conquer the children, but with the exception of little Nabby, they seem to have been immune during their growing years.

During the last months and weeks of Nabby's life, Fanny came home. She left Robert Carr because of his unfaithfulness to her, and returned to her father's house. It was a good thing she did, for she was able to give a guiding hand and a firm purpose to the younger children. She was especially helpful to Nabby in her last illness. She gave security to Lorenzo Dow during the weeks and days of Nabby's slow dying, and kept him occupied so that he was not conscious of the last struggles of his mother.

It should be remembered that death was a terrifying event in that day. There were no tranquilizing drugs. There were but few sedatives known to medicine and these were not obtainable in the back country. If a person died from a painful disease he suffered the full measure of pain right up to the last breath. Tuberculosis is a painful disease, and the slow disintegration of tissue suffered by its victims, plus the pain it causes, is distressing in the extreme to the onlookers as well as to the sufferer. But while Fanny managed to keep Lorenzo Dow's attention, the remaining children were given the experience of a loved one dying a slow painful death. It had a lasting effect upon them.

By now Brigham was old enough (14 years) to have a full realization of his mother's suffering. While it is not recorded it is quite likely that he took his turn at her bedside, making it as easy for her as he could when the wracking cough shook her emaciated frame, and wiping her lips free of the bloody sputum when she became too weak to do it herself. Compassion is a quality best come by when caring for a loved one with a serious illness. Brigham had full opportunity to learn it at this early age. He never forgot the lesson, it growing ever larger in his heart as he matured.
