S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

June 1815-1816

The movements of John Young are obscured after the death of Abigail, because of lack of record. Years later, some of the children told of events in their lives and named the approximate dates and places in which the events took place, but these details are conflicting. Certain it is that two events could not have happened to the same people on the same day at widely distant places.

It is certain, however, that John moved his family to Tyrone. John P. Greene had already located there with Rhoda, so it was natural that John should go there to be near them. Fanny handled the children and kept the household together. She was twenty seven. Brigham was past fourteen and growing fast. He had a natural aptitude for tools which rapidly developed into skill by the nature of the society in which the family lived.

The only account which mentions just where they settled states that they located a farm six miles from Greene's farm, which in its turn was twelve miles from Painted Post. This town was an old trading post and fort in the earlier times and was well known on the frontier.

It is not known why John and his boys were clearing land during the winter, living in a small cabin, without the two daughters. There is no way of knowing where Fanny and Louisa were. They could have been with Rhoda, or they could have been with Susannah at Aurilius. This latter is not likely. Wherever the girls were, John and the boys were clearing land at Tyrone.

All winter they labored with a stern, exacting father who expected a man's work from each boy. There were no comforts; just work-then more work. One catches a glimpse of the family rising in the early morning, blowing up the coals into a fire, hugging the fireplace as John prepared the simple meal. He would swing the kettle on the crane, warn Lorenzo to keep the fire going, then with Joseph, Phinehas and Brigham sally into the chilly dawn, where frost bit poorly shod feet and made hands ache with the cold. Later, Lorenzo would wander out to their place of work rather than be left alone where he would help as much as he could.

First winter on the new farm

Toward spring John made some troughs and prepared to make sugar. This was the only cash crop he could produce. The bottom had dropped out of the potash market since the war had cut off the Canadian outlet, so no one leached potash any more. The flour in the barrel got low. Joseph and Phinehas left the farm in search of work which they could exchange for food. The sap began to run as spring brought the requisite warm days and cold nights, and soon John had all he could do keeping the fire under the sugar kettle and the syrup stirring. He made about sixty pounds of maple sugar. And the flour was gone from the barrel.

One morning John packed the sugar, all but a few pounds, into a pack for his back. He instructed Brigham and Lorenzo to go out and clear land each day. He hoped to be back the secured evening, he said, with flour in exchange for his sugar. Painted Post was eighteen miles away, eighteen miles of heavy melting snow by day and freezing temperatures by night. Then he walked away into the forest and out of sight, carrying sixty pounds of sugar.

The boys ate a breakfast of sugar. Then they went out and worked at clearing land all day. There was no lunch. As they tramped home toward nightfall the singing of a bird attracted them. There, a few yards away, was a robin, a harbinger of the coming spring, perched on a swaying sumac twig. Brigham told Lorenzo to stand still and watch the bird while he ran to the cabin for the musket, the old muzzle-loader his father had carried during the revolutionary war. Returning with the heavy flintlock he primed the piece and adjusted the flint. Then aiming as best he could he fired. The bird fell fluttering to the ground. He skinned and cleaned it and at the cabin put the carcass in the pot to boil. While Lorenzo held a pan, he upended the flour barrel and by beating on the upturned bottom managed to collect about two spoons of flour, which went into the stew. That robin stew with some maple sugar was supper, breakfast, and lunch for the two hungry boys. It was all they had to sustain the heavy toil of the second day until, as darkness descended, the "hullo" of their returning father echoed through the trees. He brought a pack of meal and once more they had bread.

As summer came and seed was planted amid the stumps left in the cleared land, John came home one day with a bride. She was Mrs. Hannah Brown, widow of a neighboring farmer. She was the mother of several children, but the account does not say whether or not the children came too as a part of the marriage contract. It is assumed that they did, or if not that John went to live on her farm. Six years later, in 1823, a son, Edward, was born of this union. Meanwhile, Lorenzo went to live with Susannah at Aurilius. Brigham must have gone too, and for the next eleven years his growth and development centered in that neighborhood. His first experience as a mechanic was at Auburn in which he worked on a building at the site of the state prison. Before construction could start, the land had to be cleared. The clearing of this swampy and soft land was a difficult operation. Some of the trees were from five to seven feet through, and removing them taught Brigham many lessons in the use of the lever as well as in that of the saw and the ax.

One is curious to know whether Brigham was apprenticed out, or whether his father allowed him to make his own way. It was common to apprentice boys to the learning of a trade, and this was about the only way that beginners could break in. It is quite likely that Brigham served an apprenticeship until he was twenty-one.

Brigham never made any reference to having lived with his father after John's second marriage. Whether he found the changed condition unacceptable or whether he did not live there because he was now old enough to leave home and be apprenticed to a man who could teach him the arts of carpentry, painting and glazing, is not known. In his diary he stated that his half-brother, Edward, was born on July 30, 1823, six years after his father's second marriage, at Wayne, Steuben County. Wayne is the town bordering Tyrone. This must have been the location of the Brown farm. Whether she went home from Tyrone, to give birth, or whether John had moved over to Wayne to live on her farm, we can only surmise.
