S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

1816-1824

What could Brigham Young count as his assets as he began his life in Aurilius and Auburn. He possessed no tangible thing that could be sold for gold. Yet through the years he had received the best possible education for a sixteen-year-old boy in his environment. He was self reliant, he could work with the best of them. His well-knit frame was a mass of tough, hard muscle; he was used to lifting heavy loads; he understood the principle of bar and lever; he was an expert with the ax and adze; he could fell a tree so as to have it lie exactly in the position he wanted; he knew which trees make the best firewood, and which are to be avoided because of the sparks they explode. He knew how to split wood, taking advantage of the grain; he knew how to plant and harvest; he had learned a good deal about animals, both tame and wild; he could handle horses and oxen; one controlled them with the voice, he had learned. He had also noticed that, when angry, he could not get the best out of an ox. The calm, certain voice, determined and sure of what was wanted, was the best way.

He knew the lore of the woods. He could cross a section of heavily forested country and not get lost. He had an instinctive feel for direction which had been sharpened by the years of growing up in the back country. He knew when berries are ripe and where to find them; he knew which are edible plants, and he knew the medicinal properties of others.

Brigham had a healthy respect for the large wild animals which he and others of his kind drove farther back into the woods by the clearing operations. He was full of the folklore of the period, but he had scepticism for much of it. And while he had been taught honesty of purpose, truth of speech, and respect for religion, he did not feel drawn to espouse any one faith. Even though his father and mother had accepted Methodism, and his brothers John and Joseph were developing in it as preachers, he held aloof for a considerable time.

It must have been deeply satisfying to him to be on his own, to test his young strength against the world. And the "world" was north. The Erie Canal was a-building and the Aurilius country was beginning to boom. Men were needed on the canal. They might need boys too. But Brigham did not consider himself a boy; in his own eyes he was a man, and so he looked confidently forward to Auburn, Aurilius, and Port Byron.

Susannah lived in Aurilius with her husband, James Little. It is surprising to note how this family seems bound to one another. John moves to Sherburne, Rhoda and John Greene being already there. Then in Cayuga County, at Aurilius, both the Greenes and Littles have preceded him. John Greene and Rhoda are in Tyrone when John takes out land there. So it is, and so it will be till the end of their lives; all at the right place at the right time to give support and aid. One reads of the adventures of one of the family, only to learn that others are not far away. The in-law sons worked into a pattern of loyalty not often seen in a family so large. One traces out what one member might have been doing by learning where the others were and what engaged their attention.

Auburn in 1817 was beginning to thrive, as was Port Byron on the Erie Canal. Auburn was on a river which gave some prospect of mills and commerce.

After his work on the prison site at Auburn, the mist of uncertainty once more enveloped the exact sequence of Brigham's life. When the history again emerges, he is a carpenter, painter, and glazier. These are trades which call for several years of apprenticeship. It is not clear who taught him or how he advanced, but there is in existence an account from the memory of William Hayden who mentions three instances which to his mind showed Brigham to be a leader.

By the time Hayden knew him, Brigham was living Port Byron. He had learned the painter's trade, and spent considerable time in painting wood buckets for a furniture manufacturer there. He found the hardest work in paint mixing was to reduce the pigment powder for mixing with the oil and lead. So he invented a water-powered pigment crusher in which the cannon ball, brought home from revolution by his father, was used as the pestle to an iron mortar. It was an ingenious device and it saved Brigham great deal of work as well as speeding up his accomplishments. No drawing of it survives, but it could have looked like drawing here depicted.

He saved the mill in which he was employed from one day when a bolt of lightning struck the chimney, continuing through that channel and scattering the stove pipe all directions. The sparks from the fire in the stove fell into the shavings lying about, and in a moment the whole place might have been ablaze. Brigham grabbed a pail of water in a trice and called for a bucket brigade. His quick action doused the worst of the flames, and his crisp commands galvanized the crew of workers into action. Soon the fire was out and order restored.

Diagram of Brigham Young's paint crusher

On another occasion the mother of a lost child appealed to the men for help. The men went searching about. Brigham, almost by instinct, seemed to know the danger point and went immediately to the flume carrying water to the water wheel which provided power to turn the lathes of the factory. Sure enough, he found the body of the baby at the bottom of the flume. He applied mouth to mouth respiration but the frantic mother snatched the baby from him and ran toward her home, despite all entreaty to allow him to continue resuscitation. The baby died. Brigham felt that had the mother allowed him to continue he might well have saved its life.

Other less exciting events during this period included Brigham's membership in the Port Byron debating and oratorical society. Here he took full advantage of the opportunity to learn the art of speaking and of the mental development of debating. It was a time when the ability to express oneself and to win in competition with an opponent in debate was the chief mental occupation of a community.

Here it was that he fell in love with Miss Miriam Works, daughter of Asa and Abigail Works. The old family record states that Jerusha was her mother's name, but later research by descendants proved it to be Abigail. Asa Works was of the Works family which had lived in Hopkinton, Massachusetts, where Asa was born.

One can imagine the scene in which Brigham asked for the hand of Miriam. Asa would listen to Brigham as he told Asa how he expected to support his daughter. He had a trade, in fact three trades. He was industrious; he had no bad habits -he did not drink liquor, for example. He was sure he could make an acceptable son-in-law. Asa Works in his turn would see before him a young man of strong muscular frame, with a square jaw and a slightly protruding underlip. Steady blue eyes would gaze unwaveringly at him. The head would be crowned with blond wavy hair. In terse sentences Brigham would state his case.

Asa would know, too, that this was the son of JohnYoung and Nabby Howe of Hopkinton-people of his breed, old neighbors, good people, good stock. Folks set a greaat store in stock in family connections. Brigham was accepted.

And Miriam, comely and desirable, her even features more beautiful because she was in love, married him on October 8, 1824. The autumn woods were aflame with color as Brigham escorted her to the little frame house he had rented as their first home in Port Byron.

He was twenty-three years of age in the full strength young manhood; she eighteen, in the bloom of budding womanhood. Both were children of the month of June-birth date being June 1, 1801, hers June 6, 1806.

On September 26, 1825, Miriam presented Brigham with a baby girl. The couple named her Elizabeth.

Map illustrating how several towns were carved out of the original town tract of Aurilius, New York

Confusion could be caused by the interchange of names of towns in which Brigham appeared. Aurilius was the name of the original town in 1790. By 1805 several towns had been organized from the original tract of Aurilius. These were Aurilius, Fleming, Sennett, Throop, Mentz, Brutus, Montezuma, and the City of Auburn. The whole area was loosely referred to as Aurilius when the Youngs went there. Brigham could say that he lived in Aurilius although he might have lived near Auburn as did the Little family, or at Port Byron as he did when married. Port Byron was one of the more important stations on the Erie Canal, and was therefore full of opportunity for "carpenters, joiners, painters, and glaziers."
