S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

1822-1829

When Heber C. Kimball purchased his brother Charles' pottery business in Mendon in 1822 he had hopes of settling there and gathering about him the means for comfortable living. By 1827 he had achieved a portion of that goal. He had a comfortable house and barn, and outbuildings; planted fruit trees on his homestead of five and one half acres; he worked at the potter's trade, with side lines of cutting cordwood and clearing land for others. At the age of twenty-eight he had found Vilate Murray in the neighboring town of Victor and had persuaded her to join his life's fortunes. Alert to the times and watchful of opportunity had he desired he could have added to his activities the art of blacksmithing for he had learned it from his father as a boy. He had knon the pinch of hard times and of homelessness. Now he was a religious, respected potter in the community of farmers the "Town" of Mendon. Accepting no religious faith, believed in the Bible and leaned to baptism by immersion the means to salvation. He was not to be stampeded emotionalism.

Into a house a hundred steps down the road from the Kimballs moved John P. and Rhoda Young Greene. They were not long in finding a congenial relationship with Kimballs, the two families soon becoming friends. John Greene was by now a shoemaker, having learned this trade after he impaired his health in his arduous land-clearing operations. He was a preacher too, and held to the Bible as the source of his doctrine. In 1827 Fanny Young Cart was living with the Kimballs, and Heber had met and liked John who with his wife and infant had moved there, as well as Phinehas, John Jr., Lorenzo, and Joseph. Joseph had preaching circuit for the Reformed Methodists as had John P. Greene, and the others preached as time and circumstances allowed. They could not accept the orthodox creeds of day, but selected only those doctrines and principles which were clearly given in the Bible.

The talk which goes on between serious and sober men and women concerning eternal things must have been carried on often between these families, for in 1827 religion was the main topic for most people. Heber leaned a little toward the Baptist faith for that group practiced immersion. There was comment many times on the lack of the spiritual gifts so vividly described in the New Testament. Why, they questioned among themselves, did not the gift of healing and of tongues exist today? What had happened to the practice of the laying on of hands for the purpose of giving authority to perform religious acts? Why were not apostles and prophets in the modern churches?

On the night of September 22, 1827, after Heber had retired to sleep, he was awakened by a pounding on his door and the vigorous voice of John P. Greene urging him and Vilate to come out and see the 'scenery" of the heavens. Hurriedly dressing and awakening Fanny, Heber and Vilate ran outside. There awaiting them was John Greene, Rhoda, and Father John Young. The six stood in mute amazement at the panorama exhibited to them in the heavens. Describing it later, Heber said:

"... it was so clear that you could see to pick up a pin, we looked to the eastern horizon and beheld a white smoke arise towards the heavens, and as it ascended it formed itself into a belt, and made a noise like the rushing of a mighty wind, and continued southwest, forming a regular bow dipping in the western horizon. After the bow had formed it began to widen out and grow clear and transparent of a blueish cast, it grew wide enough to contain twelve men abreast.

"In this bow an army moved, commencing from the east and marching to the west. They moved in platoons, and walked so close, the rear ranks trod in the steps of their file leaders, until the whole bow was literally crowded with soldiers. We could see distinctly the muskets, bayonets, and knapsacks of the men, who wore caps and feathers like those used by the American soldiers in the last war with Britain; also their officers with their swords and equipage, and heard the clashing and jingling of their instruments of war and could discover the form and features of the men. The most profound order existed throughout the entire army, when the foremost man stepped, every man stepped at the same time: I could hear the step. When the front rank reached the Western horizon a battle ensued, as we could distinctly hear the report of the arms and the rush.

"..... This scenery we gazed upon for hours, until it began to disappear.

"..... My wife, Vilate, being frightened at what she saw said, 'Father Young, what does all this mean?' He replied in a lively, pleased manner, 'why, it's one of the signs of the coming of the Son of Man.'"

There are those who now would scoff and say, "Just the Aurora" - But these people were used to the aurora, those great pulsating curtains of green and blue and lavender This was like nothing they had seen before, and to them it indeed was an augury. All the signs were that these were the last days. This great "scenery" served to confirm the idea

Brigham Young had a decision to make! Should he stay in Port Byron where he was well known, or should he move to Mendon? Mendon was a town in Monroe County, where its north boundary ran parallel the Erie Canal, four miles farther north, away. Its south line was near the Ontario and Genesee turnpike connecting the eastern country with Buffalo on Lake Erie. This was one of the first roads constructed by the Phelps-Gorham and Morris-Livingston interests when they opened the country for land sale in the beginning years of the century. This road had been the artery for what prosperity the country had sustained, for over it the great wagons drawn by multi-teams of oxen or mules, had hauled the farm produce across the state, returning with goods for the settlers During the War of 1812-15 this road had transported soldier and supplies to Lake Erie for the western battles. Those living along it had made a good living supplying the needs of these defenders of the nation's borders. After the war there had been reaction, and many were left bankrupt.

Mendon was just one of a dozen towns so situated. It was a farming community, though it had some small commerce.

But for Brigham the greatest pull must have been the family. The members of the Young family had stayed close to one another all through the drudgery years of their western migration, and they were now nearly all in Mendon. The father John was there, as was Rhoda and John P. Greene; Phinehas and his family were in nearby Victor; and Fanny Young Carr was living with Heber C. Kimball. Joseph was living with his father, being yet unmarried. John Junior was at Hector not far away but came visiting frequently. Lorenzo Dow was there too, much of the time. Due to these circumstances Brigham decided to move. One can imagine a man of his orderly mind making the decision carefully. It is likely that he first went to Mendon and surveyed the situation. There would have to be enough of building activity going on for him to keep busy at his trade. One can readily see how he could make this trip. Mendon was forty miles, as the crow flies, from Port Byron. The Erie Canal passed within four or five miles of Mendon. Passenger barges were common. Three days at the most of comfortable sitting on a barge was better than fighting the wilderness or struggling with the chucky turnpike. Brigham never hesitated to discard an outmoded method of travel for a better one. He must have ridden over on the barge, and then, later, transported his family there by the same means. Brigham Young moved to Mendon with Miriam Works Young and his daughter Elizabeth, then age four, in 1829.

It wasn't long before Brigham and Heber were close friends. Each found in the other the emotional satisfaction of true friendship. One never wearies of being with a friend. A mark of true friendship is that nothing much need be said in a friend's company. Close friends have understanding without words. And so these men, one terse and forceful of speech, the other more poetical and expressive, found common ground on which to cement a friendship. Heber respected the craftsmanship of Brigham's carpentry; Brigham admired Heber's skill at the potter's wheel. Both were skilled woods-men; both were independent in thinking and not the type to be stampeded by emotion.

Little has been written about their daily association, but whatever it was it served to cement them in closer companionship. Each recognized something of fundamental integrity in the other and each responded to that quality with affection and respect.

MENDON

What is there to remember about Mendon?

There are a dozen Likely Towns whose names Are lost-

Buried In oblivion.

But Mendon lives Because Brigham Young Lived there And Heber Kimball- And their Families. A stop on the journey A way place.
