S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Phinehas Howe Young rode through the woods one spring day in 1830 with joy in his heart. The first faint green of growing things was beginning to show against the browns and greys of retreating winter. He had been preaching the evening before at Lima, a distance through the woods of seven or eight miles to the south. The folks had received him well so there was reason to feel glad; God had been good to him, he felt. It was nearly noon when he stopped at the Tomlinson farm to obtain dinner. This was common practice for preachers, and for others. If there was a farm handy, come noon, one was welcome to sit up and eat, even though he might be a stranger to the farmers. Phinehas was no stranger to these folks. They had seen his comings and goings and had accepted his idea of religion; he knew he would be welcome.

He began exchanging with the family the small gossip that holds communities together with its fine web of rumor, truth, and wit, when there was an interruption. A young man, dressed in the rough homespun clothes of the frontier, came into the room and singled out Phinehas. He had an open, frank face, and his speech was slow and studied; apparently it was not easy for him to express himself fluently. He held

a book in his hand, which he offered to Phinehas.

"There's a book, sir, I wish you to read."

Phinehas hesitated: "Pray, sir, what book have you?"

"The Book of Mormon, or, as it is called by some, the Golden Bible."

"Ah, so then it purports to be a revelation?"

"Yes, a revelation from God."

The young man showed Phinehas the last two pages of the book.

"Here is the testimony of the witnesses to the truth of the Book."

Phinehas read the testimony of three witnesses, which said they had seen the plates from which the book had been translated, that an angel had shown these plates to them and that a voice had declared it to be true. Then he read the testimony of eight others which stated that they had been shown the plates by the "said Smith" and that they had "hefted" them; further, that the plates and the engravings on them appeared to be of "curious workmanship."

The young man continued: "If you will read this book with a prayerful heart and ask God to give you a witness, you will know the truth of the work."

His earnest demeanor and forthright manner impressed Phinehas who told the young man he would certainly read it. Phinehas asked him his name.

"My name is Samuel H. Smith."

"Then you are one of the witnesses."

"Yes, I know the book is a revelation from God, translated by the power of the Holy Ghost, and that my brother, Joseph Smith, Jr., is a Prophet, Seer, and Revelator."

To Phinehas this was strange language. But he bought the copy and promised to read the book. The conversation shifted to other matters, and soon after dinner they parted, each to go his separate way. The more Phinehas considered, the more he felt that Samuel H. Smith was deceived, that the book was written to deceive people; therefore as minister of a flock he had a duty to expose the deception to the people and save them from its errors. On his arrival home in Victor, six miles from Mendon, that afternoon he said to Clarissa, his wife: "I have got a week's work laid out, and hope that nothing will occur to prevent my accomplishing the task."

"Have you anything new to attend to?" she asked.

"I have got a book here called the Book of Mormon, and it is said to be a revelation, and I wish to read it and make myself acquainted with its errors, so I can expose them to the world.

He read the book during the week, then read it again the following week. To his surprise he could not find the anticipated errors, but felt, rather, a conviction that what he had been reading was true. The next Sabbath he was asked by the congregation to give his views on the book. He defended it for ten minutes, when suddenly the Spirit of God came on him with such force that in a marvelous manner he spoke at great length on the importance of it, quoting copiously from the Bible to support his position. He closed by telling the people that he believed the book.

Phinehas had inspired the curiosity of many friends and neighbors, but his father got the first chance to read the book. John read it and declared to Phinehas that it "was the greatest work, and the clearest from error of any he had ever seen, the Bible not excepted." Fanny read it next, and declared it a revelation. During the summer the book was passed around among the entire family; all read it; all believed its truth. Heber C. Kimball had it in his turn. He could not doubt it. And so all the summer long, the book was a silent influence portending they knew not what, but that the seal on the heavens was broken they had no doubt.

While the Book of Mormon was being passed around in Mendon in the immediate circle of the Youngs and the Kimballs, Joseph Young had been taking care of his Reformed Methodist circuit in Canada. His work had been largely in and around Kingston at the outlet of Lake Ontario. He came home in August and asked Phinehas to go with him to Kingston to help out with his work there. They started out August 20 to traverse the two hundred miles of rough roads and trails which led there, in due time coming to Lyons, a village en route. Here they put up at the house of an old friend, Solomon Chamberlain. No sooner had they arrived than Solomon began to preach to them, stating that a church had been organized, ten or more had been baptized, that they must believe the Book of Mormon or be lost. Phinehas, realizing that Joseph had little idea of what Solomon was talking about, tried to slow him down but he would not be slowed. Here for the first time Phinehas and Joseph heard of the necessity for another church, of the importance of baptism by proper authority, of the power of the Holy Priesthood and the necessity of its restoration in order that the power of the Gospel might be made manifest. Phinehas pumped and probed and soon became convinced that the old man was right.

Phinehas stated, years later, that this talk with Chamberlain "spoiled" his preaching, for from then on he could put no heart in it. He soon left Joseph and returned via steamer packet to Oswego in time to attend a conference of the Reformed Methodist Church at Manlius Square, among which were many old friends. Here he again met Solomon Chamberlain, who said he had come to offer them the Book of Mormon, saying that if they rejected it they would all go to destruction. Phinehas saw the first negative reaction to the new message when the conference rejected both Chamberlain and the Book by voice vote. But Phinehas stood up and bore his testimony of the truth of what they had heard. Jonh P. Greene was there and accompanied him home.

There was plenty of time at home to talk over and digest the events and feelings which they had experienced. Brigham had not traveled far that season, and there was good reason for him to stay close to his home. Miriam, far from well with a deep-seated, nagging cough, had on June 1st presented him with another daughter. They named her Vilate, honoring Vilate Kimball who was such a close friend and helper as to deserve special consideration. Brigham was busy taking care of his family.

Phinehas talked things over with Brigham: the conversation with Solomon Chamberlain, the Chamberlain declaration at the convention, the burden of Chamberlain's message about a new church, and authority, and priesthood. The Book of Mormon came in for discussion, too, especially the written testimonies on its last pages which were backed further by the deep sincerity of the witness of Samuel H. Smith. What did Brigham think of it? Brigham gave Phinehas his measured opinion, arrived at after consideration. He was "convinced there was something to the new doctrine."

Brigham's friends, Heber C. Kimball and Vilate, meanwhile joined the Baptist flock. "Although they believed in principles I did not," he explained, "I placed myself under their watch-care to be a guard upon me, and to keep me from running into evils." The Kimballs attended one meeting of their new association, partaking of the communion for the first, and last, time.

One listens to a Declaration of Principle, of Faith, of Assurance, of Testimony. How does one Know that this Testimony is the One from God, Prophecied, Waited for? What about other Men who have Persuaded, preached, Testified? Only by the Holy Ghost- Then one knows And knowing, Acts.
