S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

1831 -March 1832

Into Victor, home town of Vilate Murray Kimball, in the summer of 1831, there walked five young men. They said they were from Columbia, Bradford County, Pennsylvania and had the message of the restored gospel to offer. They said they represented the Church of Jesus Christ and introduced themselves as Eleazer Miller, Elial Strong, Alpheus Gifford, Enos Curtis, and Daniel Bowen. They were given hospitality by Phinehas H. Young, and immediately held a series of meetings. The Youngs and Kimballs with other friends went over to Victor to hear them. What was partially known to Phinehas through his visit with Solomon Chamberlain the previous year was now given to all of them with added emphasis.

What the missionaries said was stirring and convincing. They talked of a "holy angel who had been commissioned from the heavens, who had committed the Everlasting Gospel and restored the Holy Priesthood unto Joseph Smith as at the beginning." They declared the nature of Joseph Smith's calling as a Prophet, "that all men were now called on to repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, and receive the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost; they said that these things should follow those that believe, viz: they should cast out devils in the name of Jesus; they should speak with new tongues. . ." The reason they gave for the necessity of this restoration was that the people had "transgressed the law, changed the ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant."

Brigham and Heber sat through the series of meetings deeply stirred in their feelings. To their complete satisfaction these young men answered most of the questions which rose silently within their souls, without ever the questions being given voice. Their faith was increased when they heard the missionaries speak by the gift of tongues as the ancient saints had done, and then give the interpretation with the dignity of their calling. This was no idle babble. It was the pure gift as promised by the scriptures.

At the end Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were constrained to bear witness that the visitors spoke the truth. Heber said that when they did this "the power of God rested upon us."

There were other events which caused their bosoms to burn and their wonder to increase. One day John Young, Joseph, Brigham, and Heber C. Kimball went to the woods to get wood for Phinehas. While they were gathering the wood they pondered the events of the past weeks and talked over what they had been told by the five missionaries concerning the new doctrine of the Saints gathering to Zion. As they talked the "glory of the Lord" shone upon them, and they saw the gathering of the Saints to Zion, and the glory that would rest upon them, and many more things connected with that great event, such as the sufferings and persecutions which would come upon the people of God, as well as calamities and judgments which would come upon the world. The glory of this vision caused "such great joy to spring up in our bosoms, that we were hardly able to contain ourselves; and we did shout aloud, Hosannah to God, and the Lamb."

They now were ready for more investigation. They wanted to be sure that what they felt to be true was true. So it was proposed that a trip be made to the Columbia Branch of the new church in Bradford County, Pennsylvania. Just who made the proposal is not clear. Most likely it was a suggestion growing out of a discussion of the possibility. Heber C. Kimball had a good team and sleigh, so it was agreed that Brigham and Phinehas Young and their wives, and Heber C. Kimball would make the long journey. Vilate would stay home with the children. That it was hazardous in winter there was no doubt, and that such hazards were their normal course there was no doubt either. They fully realized the risks they were taking. By the time they were

able to leave home another year had begun; it was January 1832.

During the journey they were several times discouraged because of the numerous natural difficulties of storm, icy streams to ford, and deep snow which hampered them. One hundred and twenty-five miles of breaking trail, with long distances between settlements, is no task for weaklings. Brigham said they persisted "because our faith was to learn more." They stayed with the members at Columbia for six days and heard more preaching, explanations, and, to their satisfaction, the gift of tongues and its interpretation exercised. They had the week of their return journey in which to consider and weigh, ponder and discuss what they had experienced. There was no doubt in their minds now that there had been, indeed, a restoration of the Gospel and that they must have a part in it.

Sleigh of the type used by Brigham Young in the winter of 1831 to go to Kingston to tell Joseph about the new faith.

Brigham did not tarry long in Mendon. After a few days' rest, with a horse and sleigh he started for Kingston, Canada, to carry the glad tidings to Joseph Young. With him as far as Sackett's Harbor rode John P. Greene, still handling his circuit as a Reformed Methodist minister. Brigham says nothing about the difficulties he encountered, or how he fared, but he found Joseph working with his congregations in and near "Loboro" (Loughborough) and convinced him of the truth of what he had learned. Joseph returning with him, they arrived home in March.
