S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April 1832

As soon as Joseph and Brigham arrived home from Canada, Phinehas, John Senior, and Joseph journeyed to the Columbia Branch in Pennsylvania. There John, Phinehas, and Joseph were fully convinced, all lingering doubts were dissipated, and on April 5, 1832, Phinehas was baptized by Ezra Landen, and John by Daniel Bowen. The next day Joseph entered the water and was baptized by Daniel Bowen.

Later, in Mendon, on a snowy blustery day, April 14, Eleazer Miller baptized Brigham Young after a two-mile walk in the storm to a small creek. Before Brigham's clothes were dry Elder Miller conferred the Holy Ghost upon him and ordained him an elder. Speaking of this occasion, Brigham said later: "According to the words of the Savior, I felt a humble, child-like spirit, witnessing to me that my sins were forgiven."

On the next day Alpheus Gifford walked into the pottery shop of Heber C. Kimball. He engaged Heber in conversation about the Gospel work, when Heber suddenly said, "Brother Alpheus, I am ready to go forward and be baptized." Jumping up, he pulled off his apron, washed his hands, and with his sleeves still rolled up to his shoulders, walked with Alpheus a mile to a small stream where he received baptism. Heber knelt as the Holy Ghost was conferred upon him. Alpheus wanted to ordain him an elder, but Heber, feeling unworthy of the honor, asked him to forbear. A few days later, however, he was ordained.

Within two weeks Vilate Kimball was baptized by Joseph Young, and in another week Miriam Works Young was baptized. During that summer, John Young, his sons and Heber C. Kimball preached with new assurance, sure now that they had authority to act in the name of the Lord. Others became convinced. Joseph baptized his brother John, Susannah and her husband were baptized at the same time; Fanny had accepted baptism at the hands of Alpheus Gifford. Nancy Waited for a year, then she entered the water also. A branch of the Church was organized, with the following member:

John Young and Hannah B. Young Brigham Young and Miriam Works Young Phinehas H. Young and Clarissa Young Joseph Young Lorenzo D. Young and Persis Young John P. Greene and Rhoda Young Greene and children Joel Sanford and Louisa Young Sanford Fanny Young Carr (widow) Isaac Flummerfelt and wife and children Ira Bond and Charlotte Heber C. Kimball and Vilate Murray Kimball Rufus Parks John Morton and Betsy Nathan Tomlinson (in whose house Phinehas had met Samuel H. Smith) Israel Barlow and mother, brother, and sisters.

Thus the entire Young family with its in-laws cast its lot with the new faith. Truly they must have been united. Though hard their youthful lot and strict the father's discipline, the brothers, sisters and father had been knit together in bonds few families of that day experienced.

Shortly after the baptism of the family, Fanny Young Carr married Roswell Murray, brother of Vilate Murray Kimball. This union served further to cement the ties of affection which bound the two families together. It is not difficult to imagine how this marriage came about. Fanny lived with the Kimballs. Roswell Murray was Vilate's brother and as his home was only six miles away the two could not help meeting each other.

Then as though it were a benediction on their efforts of the spring and summer, one morning Brigham called in on the Kimballs as they were kneeling in family prayer. Alpheus Gifford began to speak in tongues. In a few moments the Spirit came upon Brigham and he too spoke in tongues. The occurrence awed the participants. Brigham said that their thoughts turned with joy to the day of Pentecost, when the apostles were clothed with cloven tongues of fire and each listener heard the word preached in his own tongue.
