S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Summer 1832

One first learning about the new Church soon discovered that his membership was not expected to be passive. The five men who came to Victor and Mendon and preached in 1831 were not professional preachers, nor were they of the circuitriding group. They were volunteers, each one going out as he was called for varying lengths of time. The new members also learned that there was no collection taken at services. One could not support himself by Sunday preaching. Each had "freely received" and each was expected to give freely; it was a volunteer service, an unpaid ministry. The local branches were operated by local men, chosen for the position by those holding authority and sustained by the vote of the local members. This was certainly different from anything the newly-ordained priesthood bearers had experienced. As they traveled they were invited by the people to accept hospitality. Bodily needs were thus cared for for the moment, but once they came home there was the family to consider. The Young brothers, except Brigham, went abroad preaching, anxious to spread the word of the new order of the restoration. What preaching Brigham did was in and around Mendon.

There was good reason for him to stay near home. Miriam was ill; in fact had been ailing for some time. The hacking, persistent cough, the bloody spittle, the night sweats, presaged no good. But she kept up as long as she could, finally taking to her bed as a last resort. The Kimballs insisted that she be nursed at their house, so she was moved over there. Until her baptism Miriam had wondered what was in store for her, but now she had no doubt. At least she knew that the glorious promises which were so abundant in scripture, and so long delayed that some had said they were mere legend, were about to be fulfilled. With that fulfillment would come her secure place forever with the Lord Jesus Christ in His kingdom. There were many details not yet filled in, but the Spirit of the Holy Ghost whispered peace to her soul.

Brigham did what he could to allay her pain and waited on her. Vilate Kimball carried the lion's share of the nursing, while others of the family nearby were helpful. But in spite of all of their ministrations, Miriam gradually became weaker. She was conscious to the last, declaring her joy in the new faith, clapping her hands to emphasize her happiness in her new knowledge. She asked Vilate and Heber to do likewise. This enthusiasm, thus expressed, was satisfying to Brigham, who mentioned it with some pride in later years. She died on September 8, 1832, leaving two little girls, Elizabeth, now seven, and Vilate, two. Brigham found solace in his new-found faith, and felt that all was well with Miriam.

Heber and Vilate Kimball opened their hearts and home and invited Brigham and the girls to live with them. Vilate would take care of the little girls, she said, for they would need a mother. There being no better solution to his problem, Brigham broke up housekeeping and moved over to the Kimballs place. It was the best arrangement possible. Vilate Kimball was one of those who could take a motherless child and make it feel wanted. She was already close to the children, the younger of the two being her namesake, so there would be no friction in the home. Brigham was closer to Heber than to his natural brothers; they shared and could discuss the new experiences in the Kingdom of God, so recently opened to them, and newly marvelous in each detail of discovery. When one has the gift of the Holy Ghost, it truly is a light to open the way. One sees clearly, without realizing that until this light came things were not clear. Brigham and his friends had the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Through its impressions scripture became understandable as they pondered, and the patterns of the Gospel as it unfolded were to them natural and logical. These new reflections eased Brigham's heart in his loneliness after Miriam's death.

There was a new factor which was the subject of long discussion, but while Miriam had been so ill that summer Brigham felt that he must devote himself to her. He knew about consumption, as it was called. He had seen many die of it, and he had recognized that Miriam had reached the fatal stage. Now he was free to do what he knew he must do. He must meet and know Joseph Smith. One of the most important teachings which had first attracted him was that the heavens were once more open, that there was a prophet in the land, and that that prophet was truly commissioned by the Lord Jesus Christ to speak for Him, just as prophets were in ancient times. Those who had seen the Prophet had described him and had told of their feelings on meeting him. Certainly he had exercised a powerful and lasting influence on everyone who had shaken his hand. There had come a quiet, powerful assurance that Joseph Smith was indeed the Prophet of God, His true spokesman.

Brigham had joined the Church, read the Book of Mormon, heard tongues spoken and interpreted, and had had the same gift fall upon himself. These were the marks of the truth. But further, he had spent the year previous to all of this measuring, balancing, applying the plumb to the doctrine. He and his brothers, and Heber, knew the Bible and believed it. All they had heard from visiting missionaries of the Church they had measured against the Bible. They had discussed and evaluated. They had weighed and hefted and gauged. The more they had discussed, the more sure they became that the new doctrine was right. Now it was time, they felt, to take this final step, not only to meet the Prophet, but to discover from him what the Lord had in store for them.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was living at Kirtland, to which he had moved at the Lord's command to escape persecution in the Fayette area. Brigham decided to go to Kirtland to meet the prophet, as did Joseph Young and Heber C. Kimball. Once again they agreed to go in the Kimball wagon, driving the Kimball team. They started out a few days after Miriam's funeral to travel the intervening distance of 325 miles. The weather was delightful most of the time, as September is a time of "settled" weather in New York State. Why did not others of the family go? Phinehas, Lorenzo, and John were starting on their way to Zion in Missouri and were now at Olean Point at the head of the Allegheny River. John P. Greene was in Kirtland with Rhoda, to which place he had moved his family during the summer.

It is interesting to observe that Lorenzo and Phinehas Young, with their father and their brother John, felt that they should proceed to Zion in Jackson County, Missouri. Zion had been located, the Prophet had dedicated a site for the temple, and members were "gathering" there. But to get to that place, more than a thousand miles away, was one problem; to do it without financial reserves was another. They took their household goods-what little they had-to Olean Point in New York, at the head of navigation on the upper Allegheny River. There they spent some time building two flat boats. They then "worked" these boats as far as Pittsburg before winter set in, spending the winter in Pittsburg under considerable hardship, working at what jobs they could find and preaching their new-found faith. In 1833 they started down the Ohio from Pittsburg, going as far as Columbia where they learned of the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County. From Columbia they made their way to Kirtland, joining in the activities of the temple building effort there. The account of their adventures is not a proper part of this biography, but those adventures were exciting and dangerous and will bear a brief mention.

The wagon trip to Kirtland must have been a time of happy fulfillment for Brigham, Joseph and Heber. As they passed along their route they met friends, occasionally met relatives, and found some Church branches already established. At these branches meetings were held, each providing occasion for visiting and for hearing of events and happenings in the new Church. There was a deal of gossip about the Church and its leaders, and since no one was loath to talk, they heard good and bad reports. At night they stopped if possible at a branch where there would be preaching and testimony bearing.

As all journeys must reach a destination, even slow ones by horse and wagon, the three travelers finally reached Kirtland. The town was bustling with activity which centered in the new temple building crowning the hill. By this time autumn was on the land, the hills and valleys out doing themselves in a blaze of color. The wagon had one more creek to cross, with a long slow ascent to the top of the hill by the temple site. One can imagine the feelings of the three men. At the moment unconscious of the beauty of the landscape, yet subtly influenced by its peace, they slowly drove the team down the steep road and across the bridge over the winding brook. The team took up the slack on the tugs and they began the ascent. Would Joseph Smith welcome them? Would he accept them? They began inquiry at the first house. "Do you know John P. Greene?" "Yes." "Can you direct us to his house?" "Yes, he lives in the third house on the right, after you pass the road leading to the left." And they pulled into the yard of John and Rhoda, who themselves had barely become established in Kirtland. John and Rhoda were glad to see them and made them welcome. They asked John where they might find the Prophet. He agreed to guide them. They refreshed themselves somewhat washing the dust of the road from their faces, after which Rhoda gave them some lunch. Then they went to find Joseph Smith, whom they had traveled 325 miles to see. At his house they were told that he was back in the trees cutting wood. Directed by the sounds of chopping they walked into the woods.

Under a clear fall sky, with the late afternoon sunlight streaming through the yellow and gold of maple and the deep reds of oak and sumac and lighting the scene with the brilliance and sparkle of these reflected glories, they came upon a clearing. They paused to watch, for a moment, the man they had come to see. What they saw was a man six feet tall of powerful build. The mighty muscles swung the axe with graceful rhythm as the chips flew, the fair hair, almost golden, reflecting the autumn color about him. He was dressed in simple clothing-a shirt and trousers of poor material, on his feet a pair of rough boots. But the grace with which he swung the ax bespoke long hours of acquaintance with this common tool of the frontier. He had a prominent nose, sensitive lips, and a cheerful countenance. His eyes were blue, and as he heard their noise of approach these were the most noticeable part of him as he stopped and sized his visitors up. His brothers, who were helping him, stepped forward. John P. Greene introduced to the Prophet his brothers-in-law and Heber C. Kimball. Indeed Joseph was glad to meet them, and in turn presented his brothers to them. From Brother Greene he had heard of them, of their conversion, and of their devotion to their new faith. He offered his hand to Brigham. Their hands met, fingers rasped and held firm. For a moment they looked at each other, blue eyes to blue eyes, each unwavering. Blond hair matched blond hair. Joseph, noting Brigham's stalwart frame, shorter than his by three inches, must have liked what he saw. And Brigham, the Spirit bearing testimony to his soul of this man's calling, knew that he was in the presence of the Prophet of God. Brigham would give his allegiance-with no reservation, no holding back-throughout his life; and he would give it fully, gladly. As with Brigham, so with his companions; Heber received the same testimony, and so did Joseph. They were satisfied; the long, slow journey had been worth the effort.

After some further conversation reflective of their delight at this auspicious occasion the group moved to the house. There was much to talk about, many questions to ask, explanation of the work in Mendon to be made, with the hope that their inexperience in the new faith had not led them into any serious errors.

That evening the men gathered in the Smith parlor, others joining them for informal talk and testimony bearing. The Spirit of the Holy Ghost was present, and here was confirmed for Brigham what he had known from his experience thus far: that the Spirit whispers peace; that when it comes it fills one with joy and contentment and the knowledge that with quiet dignity truth is being spoken when the Lord's servants testify. Never is the Spirit the cause of uncontrolled shouting, shaking, quivering, rolling, or uncircumspect conduct. Men are the dignified sons of God and act with restraint and dignity. This was what Brigham expected, and this was his experience in the new faith.

The Prophet guided the discussion, instilling confidence in testimony and correcting statements if they were not in harmony with true teaching. Then in the midst of this time of spiritual feasting and communion, the Spirit prompted Brigham to speak in tongues. He spoke in harmony with the Spirit as words came to him. Then John P. Greene received the same gift and spoke in tongues also. Joseph Smith listened to these manifestations. Others present asked him what it meant, whether it was of God. He assured them that it was of God, given through the Holy Ghost, and furthermore that it was the pure Adamic language which had been given. This caused all to marvel. Then the Spirit was given to Joseph Smith and he in turn spoke in tongues, this being the first time he had received this gift. Truly it was a Pentecostal day for all of them, and at its happy ending the three visitors wended their way to John P. Greene's home, not to sleep but to talk far into the night, before the warming fire, of the wondrous events and of their joy. Finally they made their beds on the floor and slept.

The two Young brothers and Heber spent six happy days and nights in this way. There was much for them to learn. They learned of the founding of the Church; of the difficulties of translating and publishing the Book of Mormon; of the persecution the Prophet suffered in his youth. They met the Prophet's father, Joseph Smith, Senior, and Hyrum, his beloved brother. They greeted others who, like themselves, had come to meet the Prophet. They contemplated the foundation trenches and basement of the temple, which had barely begun to take shape. Even in this Brigham marveled. There were temples anciently; certainly the restored Church needed a temple where the Lord could come and rest Himself "if," as Brigham thought, "He was a mind to." In his mind the greatest truth of all was that Jesus the Lord had revealed Himself to His prophet as He said He always would! He had promised to come. He had kept that promise. Brigham knew quite well that the risen Lord did not need in any sense to rest, but it pleased him to remember that the Son of Man had said that he had no place to lay his head, and that, in their weak mortality, the Saints would make it unnecessary for him ever to say it again.

As all journeys come to an end, regretfully Brigham and his fellow travelers had to leave the spiritual feast of the previous six days. It was getting on toward cold weather and home was a long way away. So early one morning after the visit to Kirtland they greased the axles of the wagon, hitched up the team and turned their faces toward the east with its intervening 325 miles of chucks and bumps, and of streams to be forded. On the way they would not visit much with folks, but as they jogged through the countryside, between discussions of what they had heard during their memorable visit, they would note that the signs portended a long, hard winter. They would instinctively notice too, and wonder why it was, that the deep red leaves still clung to the oaks, while all the rest of the trees were bare. But above and beyond all these temporal observations there was the spiritual feeling that now at long last, they had come home. They had found the truth.
