S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

October-November 1832

There was plenty to talk about on the way home from Kirtland. First, there were the long discussions about the new place of Joseph Smith in their lives. They had become acquainted with the ancient prophets by reading their written prophecies. Isaiah was a series of glorious words, but no one tried to imagine him in day-to-day living. One thrilled to the cadences of "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counseller, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." But such words did not portray the Prophet Isaiah. In Kirtland, however, for the first time, they had seen a mortal man acting as the mouthpiece of the Lord. Could this man be a prophet? The Spirit, whispering to their souls, confirmed that he was. His speech was not like the ancients, but its poetical music rang through their souls.

There can be no doubt that they read the handwritten copy of the great vision of the "glories," the grand sweep of the vision of the future of the human race which accorded with Paul's statement, "There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory." Quite possibly they had laboriously copied it and other revelations of the will of the Lord to them. How closely these gems of truth illuminated scriptures from the Bible, enlarging, expanding, but always harmonizing with the central theme! As Heber once said, "Truth is what we wanted, and truth we would have," they had found truth. They had read the great testimony: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record...."

In addition they could ponder the law of the Church, a most complete statement of how one should conduct oneself. It enlarged on the Ten Commandments and gave a list of evils to avoid. This would be most satisfying to these men of Puritan ancestry. Virtue must be practiced and iniquity not tolerated, yet the repentant one could find proper place.

But all of this talk and reflection could bring but one result. There was whetted to keen edge the feeling that they must warn their neighbors that here at long last were the last days; that the Gospel was once again on the earth.

Joseph Young had little congregations in and around Kingston, Canada, whom he had converted to the Reformed Methodist faith. Now, even as he had learned of it, they must hear of the Restoration. While traveling, Brigham and Joseph agreed to go to Canada together. Furthermore they would go as soon as they got home. How? The only way they could -on foot. Joseph was a bachelor and had no home ties. Vilate Kimball was taking care of Brigham's children so he could be free also. Heber would stay and take care of the home front.

Early in December, 1832, they started out, facing the two-hundred-mile tramp with vigor and fortitude. The weather was bad. Brigham said that most of the time they walked in snow and mud a foot deep. Allowing for some exaggeration, even eight inches of snow on top of unfrozen mud would make for bad walking. Moving as steadily as they could they must have traversed the two hundred miles in from ten to fourteen days. Some days they might walk thirty miles; others they would do well to go fifteen. Passing through Sacketts Harbor, they were faced with the problem of crossing the St. Lawrence River. This was frozen over, so they started out from Gravelly Point for the last six miles of crossing on the ice. The ice had not yet thickened enough to be safe and it bent under their weight. They separated some little distance to better distribute their weight, but the ice bent until water was "half shoe" deep around their feet. However, they finally

made it to shore and to Kingston. Brigham's only comment was to the effect that the water came up a "half shoe" depth. Thus he shrugged off the very real risk of drowning.

Once on land, they spent time in Kingston preaching and bearing witness, then moved on to West "Loboro" where, during January, about forty-five were baptized. Several branches were organized in the neighboring communities through their efforts. In February as spring began to creep north, before the ice softened, they recrossed the river and tramped back to Mendon, arriving in early March. About this homecoming Brigham was terse as usual: "I tarried in Mendon making my home at Brother Kimball's and preaching in the neighboring country." He didn't stay long, however.

The first of April saw him on his way to Canada again. Walking was easier now. The snow was gone, and the trees were beginning to make their spring color change from burnt umber to mauve, yellow, and new green. Brigham began to preach at Lyons where he and Joseph Young had been the previous spring. The visit was fruitful, for he baptized thirteen, organized a branch and ordained Jonathon Hampden a priest. Jonathon became his travelling companion. Some time was spent preaching in and around Kingston.

Crossing back to the United States he came to Theresa, Indian River Falls. He said it was near Ogdensburg, but it really was nearer Lake Ontario, and not more than twenty-five miles from Sacketts Harbor. There he found David W. Patten preaching to his own relatives. Brigham had become acquainted with David W. Patten at the time of his visit to Kirtland. His laconic statement is eloquent with brevity: "I tarried four or five days, preached five discourses, and baptized seven persons, among whom were Brother Patten's mother, brothers and sisters, and Warren Parrish and wife." According to David Patten's later report these baptisms took place on May 20, 1833.

Brigham then made his way to Ogdensburg, took steamer to Kingston, and revisited and encouraged the branches at Ernesttown and West "Loboro." At Ernesttown he stayed with James Lake until July 1. He accompanied Elder Lake and his family, with David and Abraham Wood, to Kirtland, where he once more enjoyed the company of the Prophet. Having helped the Lake family get settled, with Father Bosley of Avon he returned to Mendon. That is all he says about it. One conjecture is that the trip to Kirtland must have been made by boat. It was five hundred miles overland, while it was a simple matter to board the lake steamer at Kingston. The Welland Canal around Niagara Falls was operating for boats of shallow draft. By now Buffalo was also a main port. As an alternative, the group could have gone overland directly south to the Erie Canal, and there taken the mule barge. In any event Brigham was back in Mendon in time to start with Heber C. Kimball on their move to Kirtland. The Prophet had counselled them to make this move, and the two men determined to accept the counsel.

Heber sold out under considerable persecution and annoying legal heckling, and Brigham also sold his home. They shipped their belongings via the Erie Canal to Fairport, near Kirtland. Then one day in September, 1833, Heber lifted Vilate into the wagon, and William Henry and Helen Mar followed her. Brigham handed up his children, Elizabeth and Vilate, and climbed in, Heber clucked the horses into action, and they were on their way. They left behind a Mendon of sorrowful memories-for Brigham's Miriam was buried there, while Heber's two children, Judith and Roswell Heber, the eldest and youngest, had also died there. They left behind also a joy, for in Mendon the brethren from Bradford County had found them and baptized them. Here they had first preached and borne their witness of the truth which they had so anxiously sought and "were determined to have." The rest of the Young family had already gone; Brigham was the last of the family to leave.

Beginning in September of 1832, Brigham had travelled to Kirtland with Joseph and Heber by wagon, six hundred miles. He and Joseph had tramped in the winter a total of more than five hundred miles. Then he had covered the same ground in the spring and summer, adding a trip to Kirtland and return, making a total distance of approximately a thousand miles that time. Finally he had moved with Heber to Kirtland, another 325 miles, making a total of 2400 miles in one year. He had organized several branches, had baptized upwards of a hundred people, and had become experienced in bearing testimony and explaining the Restoration.

What the future held he did not try to foresee. As of the moment he was happy to have "the privilege of listening to the teachings of the Prophet," enjoying the society of the Saints, and "working hard at my former trade."

KIRTLAND

Do visions, or Revelations, or Temples make a land or a City Holy?

Does the Lord God Choose the place? Or is it men and Times?

Kirtland sits Bare upon her hills, Her skeleton licked Clean, A hollow shell of what Once was.
