S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

September 1833-Spring 1834

The first problem on arrival at Kirtland was to find a house. This was not easy. Kirtland was a farming community, and what land was available nearby had long since been possessed by the first settlers. Many of these had joined the Church, but still the rights of property, and the ingrained urge to make as much profit as possible, was the basis of buying and selling land. In addition, land value was inflated by the needs of the ever-increasing number of the newly arrived members, each requiring shelter, most of whom were of limited means. Heber C. Kimball finally managed to rent a small house into which he squeezed the two families.

The first thing which gave Brigham pause was the large number of men preparing to leave for the winter to work in Cleveland and other centers near and far. He and Heber had come to Kirtland on the advice of the Prophet. Therefore they were needed here. Here it was he was to begin his contribution to the building of the Kingdom of God. He could not understand why the brethren had not enough faith to stay and build the Kingdom. When they asked his opinion he forthrightly and with vigor said that he had gathered to Kirtland because he was so directed by the Prophet of God, and therefore he was "not going to Painesville, Cleveland, or anywhere else to build up the gentiles," but was going to "stay here and seek the things that pertained to the Kingdom of God by listening to the teachings of His servants."

Further, he declared, he would work for his brethren and trust in God and them that he would be paid.

Apparently this faith was justified, for he labored for Brother Cahoon and finished his house, and "although he did not know when he could pay me when I commenced, before I finished he had paid me in full." He worked for Father John Smith and others, who paid him, and this sustained himself in Kirtland. When the brethren who had gone out to work for the gentiles returned, he said, "I had means" -though he characteristically added, "though some of them were scant."

Evenings and weekends he attended meetings, and preached. It was not hard to visit with the Prophet. The Prophet had freely received, and freely he gave. Those in his presence constantly asked questions on procedure, organization, priesthood. Testimony was often borne. Meetings were held to seek the Spirit, and those present diligently sought its gifts. Men often spoke by the spirit of prophecy. Tongues were loosed and scriptures quoted which until then had never been seen with such light. Often the gift of tongues was granted, together with the interpretation of the strange words, for "tongues" without interpretation was useless. Instances were told and verified of healings from desperate illnesses. Many present had experienced healing as well as witnessed it.

Let it be known that these were not meetings where people shouted or screamed or rolled, or shook, or acted except with strict decorum. Men were constantly being rebuked for undignified conduct, and the continuance of it, after warning, often meant the loss of Church membership. The whispering of the Spirit was one of sweet peace, enlarging the soul and bringing satisfaction. The Saints never tired of the meetings, held them often, and were strengthened. Thus Brigham spent the winter evenings and weekends listening to the Prophet, attending meetings, and preaching to possible converts in the country round about. He grew in faith and knowledge.

Heber needed a house so Brigham built one for him. In April it was ready, and Heber moved. He said it was small, but it was the best he could afford, for he had given much of the money gleaned from the sale of his property to the Prophet for the printing plant, the store house, and the new temple. But he must have felt that this was small exchange indeed for the wealth of the knowledge of eternal principles. The truth was to him without price. To that Brigham could add his Amen and Amen.

Brigham Young's vigorous, terse speech and firm demeanor did not go unnoticed. His initial declaration that here he was called and here he would stay, was pleasing to the Prophet, who had plenty of people of the opposite disposition around him. But others noticed too. Among those who sat and listened quietly to his sermons was a young woman, from Rhode Island, they said. She had an appropriate name, Mary Ann Angell. She had had plenty of time to decide what she wanted. Early of serious mind and a keen student of the Bible, she had passed her youth working in the local Baptist Church. Then, one day in 1830, Thomas B. Marsh came into Providence teaching the Restoration and testifying of the Book of Mormon. Her interest was casual, but she listened and from Elder Marsh obtained a copy of the Book. Before she read it she had a strong feeling come over her that its contents were true. She testified later that the witness of the Spirit was so strong that she never afterwards doubted.

During this time her parents were visiting friends near Hector, New York. This was the general area of her birth, for she was born at Seneca, Ontario County, a scant dozen miles south of Palmyra. She wrote her parents asking them to investigate the new faith, but not feeling satisfied with their short account, journeyed alone in the spring of 1832 to Ontario County to learn more. She had long ago made up her mind that when she married it would be to a man of strong Christian virtue and character, and as a result she was still single at twenty-nine years of age.

If she really wanted to learn she could not have gone to a place where the doctrine was being discussed with greater earnestness. Phinehas and Lorenzo Dow Young were in the neighborhood, as was Joseph Young, all newly joined and enthusiastic. She heard them all and asked many questions. No less doughty a champion of the faith was John P. Greene, who finally baptized her. Her parents joined also, but were not quite ready to go to Kirtland. Mary Ann was impatient, however, and went on ahead. To sustain herself she most likely took work "helping" in the homes of more affluent members.

As she sat quietly in the audiences listening to Brigham Young preach, Mary Ann was stirred by his straightforward discourse. He heard her bear testimony. The Spirit whispered. With the sureness of the compass needle pointing toward the pole star, he was drawn irresistibly toward her. When he learned that she was especially kind and motherly to the children where she lived, he was pleased. And she knew, with that inexplicable instinct that all women seem to have, that this, at last, was the man for her.

Brigham was not one to be obtuse in his desire. Once his mind was made up, he came to the point. He had two children, daughters nine and four years of age. The younger was not strong and would need special attention. Would she accept him on that basis? She would, and she did.

So, on the 18th of February, 1834, Brigham Young, born June 1, 1801, age thirty-two, married Mary Ann Angell, born June 8, 1803, age thirty. He was two years and seven days older than she. Nothing is known as to who was the officiating elder, but there is a tradition in the family that Sidney Rigdon officiated.

Brigham does not say how or where he started housekeeping. But from his comment quoted earlier, made when the brethren returned from working for the "gentiles' -that even though he had stayed and worked for his brethren, he "had means, though some of them were scant"-one can well imagine the basis of his start. It would mean that there were times when they were scraping the bottom of the flour barrel. But it would also mean that he was beholden to no man, that he earned what he had, that he helped his brother in need of his services, without pressing for payment, and that he kept out of debt. Both he and Mary Ann believed with good reason that this marriage had the inspiration of heaven in it.

Marriage certificate of Brigham Young and Mary Ann Angell.

This man was strong in determination and character; this woman was equally strong; both were determined to seek the Kingdom. Given such conditions from the start, the union could not fail to be permanent.
