S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

February-May 1834

Brigham now had a good deal to occupy his mind. He and Mary Ann "took the children and began housekeeping...." It is no easy thing to lift two little girls from the sheltering arms of one who has known them nearly all of their lives, and has loved them, and place them under the care of another. The change was made easier because Mary Ann was of much the same disposition as Vilate Kimball. She was a natural mother long before she was one in fact. So she mothered the two girls, soon won their confidence, and brought serenity to their lives.

The record does not say how he arranged it, but Brigham got into his own house. Whether he rented one, as had Heber until his own was erected, or whether he built a small house, is not known. He said, "she took charge of my children and kept my house ...." (That was important to him. He was ever grateful to Heber and Vilate for their hospitality and love during his period of sorrow and crisis, but he knew he must set up his own establishment. He must take care of his own, as must others, and in this he had the full and understanding cooperation of the Kimballs.)

"..... and labored faithfully for the interest of my family and the kingdom." Brigham had a great deal to learn. By October 1833, when the Church had been organized three years, much had happened. Many revealed truths had been received by the leaders, and passed by word of mouth and hand-written letters to the members. Some of these letters had been read by Brigham, but many had not. These truths covered a wide range of subjects on doctrine, explanations of history, prognostications of future glory, and many new, restored choice bits of eternal value. Brigham learned of the attempt to print them in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, and of the subsequent smashing of the press, pieing of the type, by mobs, and the rescue of but a few copies of the unfinished "Book of Commandments." At this time some of the survivors of the mobbings reached Kirtland, bringing with them a full account of their experiences. Brigham learned in tight-lipped stern silence of the terrible, evil, things done by the lawless mobs which raged through Jackson County. They had tarred and leathered the Bishop, Edward Partridge. They had destroyed homes and barns, had shot or run off stock, and had forced the people to cross the Missouri in the cold of winter for safety. His sense of justice was outraged. Could this be the freedom for which his father had fought in the Revolution?

Brigham's great trial was the bitter strife and persecution against Joseph Smith already under way in Kirtland. It was difficult for him to understand how any man who had received the testimony, the witness of the truth of the mission of Joseph Smith, could turn bitter. He soon learned that men who wanted to use the new Church for their own gain, or who exploited the people, taking advantage of the need of newcomers, to sell them land at inflated prices, turned bitter if their plans were frustrated. The Prophet was vigorous in rebuking such men. They, in turn, declared him to be a fallen prophet and in their anger turned the full force of devilish hate against him. There were plots to kill him, both by members and nonmembers. Nor was this hatred confined to the ignorant or emotional. The educated men of the surrounding territory plotted. No less than the most prominent men of the area met at the home of Mr. Garfield, father of the future President of the United States, and there worked at plans to drive the Prophet from the country with a coat of tar and feathers. That this and other plots did not succeed was due to the vigilance and effort of loyal men among whom Brigham and Heber were numbered. Men soon discovered where Brigham stood. With few words, but forcefully, he rebuked them, told them the Prophet was their only hope of authority in the last days, and warned them that they would go to hell if they did not repent. The result was that though he was not called to the conspiratorial meetings, he was alert enough to circumvent them as much as possible. However, the ferment was working. Who would stand, and who would fall? This was a time of testing.

If his greatest trial was the disloyalty of hypocritical, evil-disposed men, Brigham's greatest joy was to be with Joseph Smith. Joseph's inspired knowledge seemed endless. The eternities had been opened to his vision. He seemed to be familiar with the efforts to establish the Kingdom of God in all ages. He spoke of Adam and Seth, of Enoch and Noah, with easy familiarity. He could explain how the Gospel had been in force since the beginning and that it did not begin with John the Baptist. He learned that the ancient prophets had been well informed on the principles of the Gospel. They knew of the mission of the Messiah and of the ordinances of salvation. Brigham learned that baptism for the remission of sins was given to Adam, that the death and resurrection of the Redeemer, the keystone of all the plan of salvation, had been seen in vision, declared and foretold from the beginning. This unity of doctrine, consistent through all ages with that revealed through Joseph Smith, thrilled him.

Joseph could and did tell Brigham more detail of the future of men after death than had been written in the great vision of the glories. Then too, to the joy of his well-ordered mind, there was explained the principles of personal conduct and relationships to others, so that no one need be in doubt on how to be just and kind to his fellows.

There can be no doubt of Brigham's position on one principle having to do with the revelation called the Word of Wisdom. Objection had been raised to a man's officiating at the sacrament table when he was violating the principles of the Word as given in the revelation. (This is the revelation now contained in D&C 89 of the Doctrine and Covenants and has to do with hot drinks, alcohol, and tobacco, among other things.) The newly formed High Council debated the matter, and after considerable discussion ruled that no man was worthy to hold office in the Church if he was not keeping this commandment. Brigham most likely was present, for spectators were allowed, but if he was not present, he heard about the decision. He determined to regulate his conformity with this and all other truth.

He received deep and lasting impressions on the dignity of men who were called to high position, for at a meeting on February 12 the Prophet explained what was expected to be the order of a Council which should consider matters for judgment.

These were serious matters. There was no place for frivolity when men met under the order of Council to govern and to judge. The Prophet expounded the idea, "... no man is capable of judging a matter, in council, unless his own heart is pure. We are frequently so filled with prejudice, or have a beam in our own eye that we are not capable of passing righteous decisions....In ancient days councils were conducted with such propriety that no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room, or get uneasy in the least, until the voice of the Lord by revelation, or the voice of the council by the spirit, was obtained which had not been observed in this Church to the present time.

"It was understood in ancient days that if one man could stay in council another could; and if the President could spend his time, the members could also; but in our councils, generally, one will be uneasy, another asleep, one praying, another not, one's mind on the business of the council, and another thinking of something else.

"Our acts are recorded, and at a future day they will be laid before us, and if we should fail to judge right and injure our fellow beings, they may there, perhaps, condemn us; there they are of great consequence, and to me the consequence appears to be of force, beyond anything which I am able to express. Ask yourselves, brethren, how much you have exercised yourselves in prayer since you heard of this council; and if you are now prepared to sit in council upon the soul of your brother."

Brigham appreciated the efforts of Joseph to improve the dignity of the men who were to administer justice and equity. He said "Amen" to all that the Prophet said, and incorporated into his life the Prophet's advice to the council.

The people in Kirtland were worried and puzzled. Why had the mobs sought to destroy Zion? Surely the Lord had said He would establish Zion. Bravely had the work started. The Prophet had journeyed out to Jackson County, Missouri, and while there had dedicated a temple site. The more faithful had gone there and purchased land, had built cabins, had taken the first steps for settlement. Then like a hurricane the tide of sentiment had turned. Old settlers, until now neutral or friendly, had become bitter enemies.

The country was the frontier. While a few were temperate, many more men were devils incarnate. These had not hesitated to incite, inflame, and wreak personal damage on the peace-inclined Saints. Finally after a series of body-wracking persecutions-in which rape, murder, and lesser acts of tarring and feathering, beatings, whippings, and wholesale burning of homes, became the method of operation-the Saints had been driven in self-preservation across the Missouri to Clay County. It made no difference to the mobbers that it was November and the weather was cold. With bitter indifference to the sufferings they inflicted they had forced out the Saints, making them homeless and penniless.

The first group of survivors had arrived in Kirtland with the dreadful, harrowing accounts of their experiences. Accustomed as the Saints were to persecution and violence from small groups, this was the first of an organized effort on a large scale involving the whole of a community and, in the end, the whole of a state. It was the first experience in the history of their brief effort where law was aborted in a County or a State, and the machinery of justice used to uphold mob violence.

It is difficult for a just man who works within the framework of law and order to restrain himself under such conditions. To turn to the patient, slow machinery of the law for redress of wrongs, which get worse even while redress is sought, requires a control of feeling and desire beyond the ability of most men. When the law itself turns traitor to justice, and there is no redress, desperation takes the place of wisdom. Even then there are profitable courses open if wisdom can prevail.

Joseph Smith met with the High Council in Kirtland on February 24, 1834. The subject uppermost in the minds of everyone present was how could they relieve and rescue the Saints from the mobbers in Zion. At the meeting attended by about forty others, the group listened attentively to Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight, newly arrived from Zion, pleading that the Saints there be succored.

All were quiet when the Prophet arose and stated that in response to a revelation, he intended to go to Zion to assist in redeeming it. He asked for council sanction. There was unanimous assent. He called for volunteers. Forty hands were raised. He then raised the question of the mode of travel. Should they go by water or by land? Land travel was voted. Who should command? A member nominated Joseph Smith, Jr. This proposition was carried unanimously.

The revelation to which the Prophet referred instructed him to do his best to recruit five hundred men. They were to be young and middle-aged. If, perchance because of poor response, he should have to accept less, he was not to start until he had a minimum of one hundred. Led by Joseph Smith and Parley P. Pratt, four pairs of elders were to seek volunteers to go to the redemption of Zion. Within two days Joseph and Parley were on their way east seeking volunteers and friends. For a month they labored diligently to obtain the required help. By that time there were 125 who had volunteered to go.

Meanwhile, at the conclusion of the council meeting Brigham walked home to Mary Ann to inform her of his decision to go. He had, with Heber C. Kimball, been among the first to volunteer. It had not been thought out. The need was there, the request was made; the Prophet had asked. Brigham believed in the mission of the Prophet. With no second thought he had raised his hand. No quibbling, no grumbling; he was ready.

But now there must be some second thoughts. He had means, though "scant." He could leave Mary Ann with her garden plot, some chickens, two or three pigs, a cow. There was no money. How long he would be away he had no idea. He was at the call of the Prophet. Did she think she could manage it? Mary Ann was equal to the emergency. She could and she would. It would not be easy. She sensed the dawning of a new life within her, and that would complicate things somewhat, but she would get by. He was not to worry or fret; if there was emergency they had friends, and in a final extremity she could appeal to the Bishop's storehouse. She could get by if Vilate Kimball could, or if the wives of the other volunteers could; he could count on her. Looking into her eyes, searching her heart and feelings, Brigham was buoyed up. She would manage.

There were two months and a week to get things in order and to prepare to leave. Brigham and Mary Ann spent long evenings preparing against contingencies. What if he should not return before the new baby arrived? This was discussed and probable solutions arranged. To whom could she turn in case of sickness, or accident or death? The biggest problem was food. They would have to use the garden during the summer. Most likely there would be enough corn to supply meal, and to exchange for wheat in case there was not enough wheat when harvest came. There would be problems and crises. No one has yet written the day-by-day account of a woman trying to hold her home together, with no income, and nowhere to get needed things except what she could raise or improvise. Men were brave, but they were mobile. Women were more than brave-they were heroic.

Brigham gathered what he could for the expedition. First on the list was means of protection. The Camp would need arms. Brigham left with a good gun, a bayonet, a dirk, and powder and shot for protection. He took an ax, a saw, a chisel, a spade, a hoe, and other garden tools. There would be supplies of clothing, bedding, and food to take to the impoverished saints. Teams were needed, and wagons. Heber C. Kimball offered his team and wagon; others did likewise. It soon became evident that the wagons would be barely sufficient to carry the supplies. This meant that the men would have to walk. Though Brigham could not supply a wagon, he had skills in lieu thereof. He made knives for the brethren to carry. And he stepped up the effort to persuade others to go.

Joseph Young had been out preaching and did not therefore attend the discussion meetings. On his return Brigham approached him and asked him to join the expedition. Joseph hesitated. On the previous February 18th, he had married Jane Adeline Bicknell, and most likely his new responsibility weighed upon him. Perhaps he did not realize the importance of this long journey. It could end in bloodshed, he might have thought. A few days after they discussed it, Brigham and Joseph were walking together when they met Joseph Smith. The Prophet said, "Brother Joseph, I want you to go with us up to Missouri." Brigham explained, "My brother is doubtful as to his duty to go," to which the Prophet replied, "Brother Brigham and Brother Joseph, if you will go with me in the camp to Missouri, and keep my counsel, I promise you in the name of the Almighty that I will lead you there and back again and not a hair of your heads shall be harmed." Joseph Young promptly offered his hand to bind the covenant. Brigham was glad to receive the promise, and sealed it also with a warm handclasp.

That evening when Brigham told Mary Ann of the conversation, and expressed his pleasure that Joseph was going, the most satisfying part of the conversation to her was the pledge of the Prophet. She was relieved, for she knew her Brigham would do exactly what the Prophet counseled. Feeling that Joseph Smith was inspired, she was at ease. She was sure the journey would end well.

Another emergency arose. Solomon Angell and Lorenzo Booth had both expressed a desire to go on the expedition, but when the time of final decision came they had not found a place to leave their families. They did not feel they should leave unless their families had a roof over their heads. Brigham again consulted Mary Ann. Yes, she guessed she could manage. So the families of these two brethren were invited to live with Mary Ann and the girls. It was no doubt a tight squeeze, but, if Brigham could sacrifice, Mary Ann could sacrifice too.

May 5th arrived and the brethren said goodbye, journeying to New Portage fifty miles away. Brigham and Joseph Young on arrival went to the home of Israel Barlow, where they spent the night. The next morning they reported to the Camp. Israel Barlow was with them. He had agreed to join the Camp, making all his preparations overnight. It has never been reported what Brigham said to persuade him.

All told, about a hundred men came from Kirtland, while thirty-five more joined from other branches of the Church. There were few male members left in Kirtland. Sidney Rigdon and Oliver Cowdery were left in charge; there were a few working on the temple; and then there were those too aged to travel.

Brigham was keenly interested in seeing Joseph Smith bring order out of the heterogeneous group. The Prophet seemed quite sure of what he wanted. He divided the whole band into companies of twelve, then instructed each company to elect its own captain and to assign each man his post of duty. There were to be two cooks, two firemen, two tent men, two water men, one runner, two wagoneers and horsemen, and one commissary man. Each man was instructed to turn all of his money into the common treasury, to be shared by all alike. Discipline was set. Most important, each night before retiring to rest, at the sound of the trumpet, all bowed before the Lord in the several tents, offering thanks and asking for protection. This was repeated at 4 a.m., each man on his knees, imploring safe travel for the day. With these and other instructions for safety, discipline and order, the march began.

During the election of captains, Brigham was elected captain of his group, and Heber C. Kimball of his. This was the first time either of them had been asked to preside over groups as large as this. Already, men were turning to them for leadership. This was not an appointment made by the Prophet but in each case was an election by twelve men who apparently recognized leadership when they saw it.
