S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

May, June 1834

The men of Zion's Camp were used to travel and were not awed by the distance they now contemplated traveling, even though it was approximately a thousand miles. Many of the leaders had walked as far as this in the course of a year's effort in spreading the word, though not with quite the concentration of effort squeezed into so short a time. The constant grind of walking steadily from daylight until dark, day after day, is quite different from walking fifteen or twenty miles, then tarrying for a day or two days, often stopping en route to visit people. A man hardens up to physical effort; however, his chief difficulty in such an endeavor is his feet. Under good conditions, with proper care, one can walk every day for long distances; but, given a series of hot days, an insufficient supply of socks, heavy hot boots, with no unguents or dressings for sore spots, feet can become fiery, fevered sources of pain. In this respect all of the men suffered to some extent. The worst cases were given some relief by being allowed to drive the teams or ride by the side of the driver for a time. Heber C. Kimball, who had a team, said that he walked most of the way to give those with sore feet a chance for relief; and the Prophet Joseph Smith, who seldom mentioned or complained of physical handicaps, stated that often the men's stockings were filled with blood on the removal of their boots. It does not require a very great imagination to feel with them the morning chore of donning a pair of boots stiff with blood and sweat. Forcing one's tender, blistered feet into such encompassing pain-makers would take more courage than most of us possess.

For shelter there were tents. These were pitched each night inside a rough oval made by the encircling wagons. Feed for the horses was no problem at all as there was plenty of unclaimed land on which lush grass flourished. The men had little bedding, and needed none. If the heat of the day was torture for their feet, the warmth of the nights made sleep pleasant without cover.

Nothing was ever said in any diary about pests en route. Mosquitoes must have made them miserable at night, especially when they traveled through or camped near swampy land or sluggish streams. Then, as now, the woods were alive with red bugs-"chiggers," as some know them-those semi-invisible ticks which raise itchy welts on anyone walking through grass or woods. For those not particularly bothered by mosquitoes there was a succession of gnats, fleas, and horse and deer flies, to bedevil them either by day or by night. Each pest had its season, but the mosquitoes persisted for the longest period.

Keeping clean was a major problem. Heber C. Kimball told of his effort at washing clothes. He crowded his wash into a large kettle and proceeded to boil the clothing, hoping thus to loosen the dirt. Then he rubbed and scrubbed until he had worn most of the skin off his hands. This had no effect on the dirt; it would not come out. When he was telling of this experience a short time later to some members along the way, the women present laughed and told him that when he boiled the clothes he "set" the dirt, and then it would never come out-a fact which any woman knew. Why didn't Heber know it? Because washing was done by the women, and since, in the division of labor in that day, the men were engaged in the heavier toil on the farms, they normally did not know the detail of the washing process. Heber learned when the necessity was upon him by the trial and error (mostly error) method. If Heber had such an experience, no doubt the others did too, including Brigham. Heber wrote about it; Brigham did not.

The evening campsites were chosen more for protection than for convenience. If the men could avoid it they never camped in a wood, but always in the open, preferably on an eminence. Often this made the carrying of wood and water a major chore. Many grumbled and complained, but the leaders felt that they couldn't take the chance of being surprised by their enemies. They had no illusions concerning the friendliness of any community en route. While they passed through or near some settlements which exhibited a friendly spirit, by and large there was more suspicion and distrust exhibited, and very often there was hostility.

The Camp had men out ahead to purchase supplies and to survey the best route for travel. These men, not known to the people, found no trouble in hearing the casual talk about the movements of the Camp and the rumors concerning its purpose. Most of the gossip repeated wild rumors of the violent purpose of the Camp, rumors which were entirely untrue. But this talk served to build up resistance and hate in the countryside. Almost as soon as Zion's Camp left Kirtland, word got to the mobs of men in Jackson County, Misouri, that the Camp was coming to assist the Saints in reestablishing themselves on their dispossessed lands. To the mobbers there was only one answer. They would destroy anyone who tried to assist the Saints.

By the time the Camp reached Illinois there were spies from Missouri following them almost constantly. Since the one man most hated by these mobbers was Joseph Smith, they would have liked nothing better than to kill him en route. But the group circumvented them by never revealing his identity. He walked along and did camp chores with the rest of them, pulling the ropes with the others when wagons needed extra "horsepower" to get up hills or through mud. The Camp was well organized so that the captains of twelve were more in evidence than the Commander-in-Chief, and everyone contrived to keep feeling it that way, certain that they would be misunderstood at best, and set upon at worst, they kept their own council and allowed people to think what they would,

Three experiences have been told concerning questioners' attempts to gain information. The first and most prevalent was the effort to get George A. Smith to talk, he being a youth of

seventeen years. The conversation would go about as follows:

"My boy, where are you from?" "From the East." "Where are you going?" "To the West." "What for?" "To see where we can get land cheapest and best." "Who leads the Camp?" "Sometimes one, sometimes another." "What name?"

"Captain Wallace, Major Bruce, Orson Hyde, James Allred."

This pattern of response was followed by most of those questioned.

One of their first experiences with spies had the same result. The spies would ask where they were from and where they were going. The reply was as usual, "Some are from the state of Maine." Another would say, "I'm from New York State," another, "Me?" I'm from Massachusetts." One stock reply was, "We are from the East and when we have done eating dinner we shall be going to the West again." They then asked Frederick G. Williams who was the camp leader. He replied, "We have no one in particular." They asked if there was not a general in command, and the reply was, "No one in particular." "But isn't there one whom you call your captain, one superior to the rest?" And the leader parried the question with, "Sometimes one, sometimes another takes charge of the company, so as not to throw the burden upon anyone in particular."

Sunday, June 1, Brigham's 33rd birthday, the Camp was halted near Jacksonville, Illinois, and all-day preaching services were announced. Many townspeople came to hear. The Prophet Joseph assigned the brethren special topics. Joseph Young spoke on the principles of free salvation; Brigham Young on baptism being essential to salvation; Orson Hyde quoted scripture to prove that baptism is for remission of sins; Lyman Johnson spoke on the necessity of upright conduct and keeping holy the Sabbath Day; Orson Pratt followed, speaking on the restoration of all things. The audience drew its own conclusions: Joseph Young must be a Methodist; Brigham surely was a close communion Baptist; Orson Hyde must be a Campbellite or a Reformed Baptist; Lyman Johnson clearly was a Presbyterian; and Orson Pratt was a Restorationer.

The townsmen wanted to know if all the members of the Camp belonged to one denomination. And the truth of the answer that, "We were some of us Baptists, some Methodist, some Presbyterians, some Campbellites, and some Restorationers," was lost on them.

As the Camp pressed on the Missourians became more convinced that the purpose of the expedition was war-like. This was natural enough, for that seemed to be the only language the mob understood. By violence-heartless and cruel violence-they had defied law to impose their will on the Saints. They could expect nothing else but swift retribution from this organized armed camp so quickly drawing near. Some of the men in the Camp thought likewise. They were going to avenge the evil done their fellow members and, come what may, reestablish them. Certainly it is true that they were called to assist in the redemption of Zion, although the arms they were taking could be used either for defense or offense. But this idea of vengeance was apparently not a part of the Prophet's plan. It is not clear that he knew exactly what was going to take place, or how the fulfillment of the command from the Lord to redeem Zion would be acccomplished. It is most likely that he walked by faith, receiving as needed the inspiration and revelation to guide him. The Camp had not been long on its way before he began to guide the Camp members in their attitudes as well as in their duties. First he set an example by enduring hardships without grumbling. He shared everyone's lack as well as the occasional plenty. He walked and worked as did they all. He was quick to take advantage of happenings along the way to drive home lessons of good conduct and responsible behavior. He was quick to rebuke and when repentance was evident, quick to forgive. Brigham was in harmony with his methods. This was his idea of Christian fair play.

Early in the march they encountered bad roads, so bad indeed that ropes had to be fastened to the axles and manpower added to the teams to get them out of the sloughs and mudholes. In one such situation Parley P. Pratt's team broke its harness, so quite cheerfully the men dragged the wagon three miles. This was noted and commended.

Soon after this Brigham's commissary men went out after bread but, failing to find any, returned empty handed. This lack of wheat bread angered Sylvester Smith, whose expressed dissatisfaction was both long and loud. This was the beginning of a series of rebellions and carping criticisms. The Prophet rebuked him and illustrated to the Camp that this spirit was one which would bring failure on the Camp if it continued. This statement was prophetic, as will be seen.

After a week of travel, one night the Prophet discovered Moses Martin sound asleep at his post on guard duty. Gently he removed Martin's sword and left him sleeping. The next day a court-martial was held. Martin pleaded his own case, stating that he had been extremely fatigued. The judgment was to forgive him provided he would never again go to sleep while on watch. Joseph then used the occasion to instruct the Camp on the lessons to be learned from the experience.

Nor did the rigors of the march lessen Joseph's gift. On May 16 while passing through some thick woods he told the brethren with him that he felt much depressed and lonely, and that there had been a great deal of bloodshed in that place at some time. He said that when a man of God is in a place where many have been killed, he "will feel lonesome and unpleasant and his spirits will sink." They traveled about two hundred yards more when they passed out of the woods, coming to a large farm. Near the road they passed a large mound about sixty feet high. It proved to be an ancient burial mound.

Soon after this, at dinner-time, some of the brethren expressed their fear of drinking milk, which was easily obtainable. They expressed the same fears about butter. There was a great deal of the "milk sick" in the neighborhood. The Prophet told them to use all they could get of milk and butter, that it would not harm them; and he promised that if they obeyed his counsel not one would get sick from its use. They used dairy products freely from then on, and none were sick.

As they crossed from Ohio into Indiana, a quarrel arose between Sylvester Smith and several brethren. A rebellious spirit persisted after the Prophet rebuked them, so he warned them that they would meet with "difficulty and hindrances before they leave this place, exhorting them to humble themselves before the Lord, and become united that they might not be scourged." On their arising Sunday morning every home in the camp was found so badly foundered that they could hardly be led to water. As soon as the Prophet learned of the misfortune he informed them that all those "who would humble themselves would know that the hand of the Lord was in this misfortune, that their horses should be restored to health immediately and by twelve o'clock the same day the homes were as nimble as ever with the exception of Sylvester Smith's one of which soon afterward died." By this lesson the men learned that when a prophet rebuked them, they had better give heed. This simple session became a guidepost to Brigham. He had never questioned the prophet, and he determined that he never would.

During the passing through Illinois, while pitching camp they discovered three prairie rattlesnakes. The men were for killing the snakes, but the Prophet told them to "Let them alone-don't hurt them." Then came another lesson which had double significance. "How will the serpent ever lose his venom while the servants of God possess the same disposition and continue to make war on it? Men must become harmless before the brute creation, and when men lose their vicious dispositions and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together and the suckling child can play with the serpent in safety."

Then came the point of the lesson: "I exhorted the brethren not to kill a serpent, bird, or an animal of any kind during our journey unless it became necessary to preserve ourselves from hunger." The brethren carried the snakes on sticks across the creek, Decidedly, this was something new to them in the application of love and tolerance.

That the lesson was received and understood was illustrated the next day when Solomon Humphries, an aged brother, lay on the prairie to rest himself and fell asleep. He awoke to find a rattlesnake coiled dose to his head, between him and his hat. Some of the brethren gathered around him, saying, "It's a rattlesnake, let's kill it." But Humphries said, "No, I'll protect him; you shan't hurt him, for he and I had a good nap together."

Further lessons in conduct were learned when, during a sham battle for practice, Heber C. Kimball cut the palm of his hand quite badly when he grasped an opponent's sword. The Prophet called the Camp together and warned them to be careful never to injure each other, but to control their spirits, even in play.

On another occasion, with not enough sweet bread to serve all of the men at the mess, the cook served the Prophet sweet bread and the other men sour bread. The Prophet rebuked him and told him there must be no partiality, that all, including himself, must share and share alike.

Then there was the time when, digging in a burial mound and finding a skeleton, the arrow which must have killed him lying among the collapsed ribs, all wondered about who he was, and the circumstances of his death. A day or two later the Prophet, in response to the questions concerning the skeleton, "inquired of the Lord." It was revealed to him that the man's name was Zelph; that he was a "white Lamanite" and had fought under the great chief Onandagas during the last great wars of the Nephites. The arrow was indeed the cause of his death. No one doubted that this really was the man referred to.

Brigham was present during all of these experiences. He had early resolved never to miss an opportunity to be near the Prophet, to be there whenever he spoke. One does not picture him as neglecting his duty as captain of his twelve, but if there came a choice as to where in the march he would be, if possible it was always near the Prophet. He saw with his own eyes the events, and heard with his own ears the explanations, the prophecies, the warnings, of this modern prophet. So many things happened to show that the Lord was indeed revealing things to Joseph Smith that Brigham wanted to miss nothing. He took the hardship and the difficulties as normal; he solved the problems of his group and maintained loyalty to Joseph.

While there was monotony in walking there never was monotony in scenery, for the country was new. The prairies, that vast area of plain, with no trees or underbrush to break the expanse, were exciting to see. Imagine not having to grub out stumps or cut and burn trees, the land waiting for the plow! What greater heaven could a farmer want?

Brigham was observant; He learned how to travel with a large group. And he followed implicitly the examples of the Prophet Joseph Smith.
