S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

June, July 1834

In the new order established by Joseph Smith, Brigham learned that obedience to counsel was a prime requisite. When one became disobedient, order ceased, discipline whether or not self-imposed, was impossible to achieve, and the Spirit departed. The discipline must be voluntary. No physical punishment was possible in a group such as this. The obligation to go was self-imposed, and the obligation to obey the leader must similarly come from within. There are many sins, but high in the order of serious sin is disloyalty to and rebellion against the servant of the Lord. Apostasy soon develops from such rebellion!

Zion's Camp, which had increased with the addition of men along the route, was now more than 150 strong. They were about to cross the Mississippi into Missouri. Rumor, and solid information which couldn't be discounted as rumor, was that they would never reach Jackson County, that bands of mobbers would wipe them out as soon as they set foot across the Mississippi. The Camp was stopped for the noon rest. Joseph Smith called the men together and mounted a wagon wheel. He once more exhorted them to faithfulness and humility, and gave them advice on their conduct. Then he said he would deliver a prophecy. He said the Lord had revealed to him "that a scourge would come upon the Camp in consequence of the fractious and unruly spirit that appeared among them, and that they would die like sheep with the rot; still," he promised, "if they would repent and humble themselves before the Lord, the scourge, in great measure, might be turned away; but as the Lord lives the members of this Camp would suffer for giving way to their unruly temper." How much effect this warning prophecy had on the recalcitrant ones, the Prophet did not mention, but he did record the following incident At Atlas, Illinois, the commissary department had purchased twenty-five gallons of honey and a dozen Missouri cured hams, which when their wrappings were removed, proved to be a "little injured on the outside." They were one short of enough for each group to have a ham, so the Prophet's group went without. Supper for that group consisted of mush and honey, which was hardly satisfying. As they were finishing their meager fare, six of the hams were brought to the Prophet's tent door and thrown down in anger with the remark, "We don't eat stinking meat!" Joseph called Zebedee Coltrin to be quick and fry some of the ham, as "I hadn't had my hunger fully allayed for forty-eight hours." This Coltrin did, and Joseph's group feasted.

It may be fairly assumed from the report of this incident that a small portion of the camp was rebellious. It is difficult to define the qualities of character which cause some men to go forward uncomplaining while others in the same or less difficult circumstances make large crises out of small events. Certainly a self-centered selfishness is one of the causes. Today men in the armed services grouse and complain at nearly everything. But a national army has a discipline based on physical punishment. An officer is supreme in relation to an enlisted man, even to the point of being the arbiter of disputes and the enforcer of obedience. It was not so with Zion's Camp.

Zion's Camp was on its way to help restore the Saints, and all the while Joseph was slowly and surely changing the war-like feelings of the young men to those of humility and dependence on Israel's God. And he did this all by warning and persuasion. Joseph himself waited for the way to be pointed out. He waited on the Lord, as he had learned to do long before, knowing that sure guidance could come only on the basis of righteousness. No matter what faced them, whether battle or peace, if they faced it righteously with no malice, being entirely guided by the Spirit, they could not fail to achieve the purpose of the Lord, whose ways are altogether righteous.

Brigham, taking part in each day's events and crises, was never deceived by any of the recalcitrant. He handled his twelve men, staying close to Joseph. He listened, he learned; he was ready in spirit to be obedient to the decisions of the leader.

Events now began to speed up. The Camp took two days to cross the Mississippi River with the ferry equipment at the crossing. While each group was crossing, the remainder occupied their time by fishing, bathing, resting, and washing clothes. Finally all were over, but the crossing was marred by the disobedient. Several men found some eggs on a sand bar and decided that they were turtle eggs. The Prophet declared them to be snake eggs, and told the men that if they ate the eggs they would become sick. Still declaring the eggs to be turtle eggs, the men proceeded to eat them-and were sick all the next day.

As though to welcome them with a grand salutation as they entered the devil's territory, evil seemed to mount, for at the Missouri side of the crossing Sylvester Smith again flared out in open rebellion at the Prophet himself. This was the first real outbreak of importance. The others, minor in nature, had been turned off, laughed at, rebuked, or used as a means of teaching lessons. This time the Prophet lectured severely on the spirit that was exhibited by Sylvester Smith, and reminded the rebellious ones that they had better repent.

At Salt River, where there was a branch of the Church, the Camp was joined on June 8 by about fifty men under the leadership of Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight. These men had started their march at Pontiac, Michigan to meet the others at this spot. The newcomers were absorbed into the Camp on the same basis as the rest of the men. Lyman Wight became Camp General.

From this time on as the Camp moved closer to Clay County the tempo of negotiations was stepped up. The Saints who had been driven out were in constant touch with Governor Dunklin, asking for redress. He seemed willing to help, but whatever he tried to do was twisted from its purpose by the mob element in control.

The Camp crossed the Grand River and camped between the forks of the Fishing River for the night of June 18. The day had been one of constant delay. Small events such as a wagon breaking down, the wheels running off several others, a "give-out" horse needing rest-these things slowed their progress. The result was they did not reach Liberty as was their intent, but made camp between the two streams. Then, while about two hundred mobbers were converging upon them, a mighty storm arose the like of which had not before been seen. Hail as large as hens' eggs pelted the mobbers and their horses; driving rain soaked them; a high wind increased the chaos. The water in both forks of the Fishing River rose thirty feet within an hour, forming an effective wall which prohibited any assault on the Camp. Many of the Camp members took shelter in an old meeting house.

Little hail hit the Camp, but all around them the devastation was frightening to see: trees stripped of leaves and branches, corn fields laid low, and the mobbers left afoot when their horses broke loose and scattered before the storm, some running for miles. But more important, fear entered into the souls of these hardened murderers, and they fled back to Jackson County. Some repentant men from Ray County who had intended to assist the mobbers came trembling into the Camp. They said that they had full intention of wiping out the Camp but were now finally convinced that the Almighty was protecting its members.

The Prophet then made the first declaration of the intention of the Camp. First he related the sufferings the Jackson County Saints had endured at the hands of their enemies simply because of their religion. He pointed out that the Camp had come a thousand miles to assist these persecuted, starving people who were their brethren, to bring them clothing, bedding, etc., and to reinstate them on their own lands; that it was not the intention to molest or injure any people, but only to administer to the wants of their afflicted friends; and further, that the evil reports circulating concerning the Camp were false and were instigated by the enemies of the Saints to secure their destruction When the Prophet finished speaking, the listening delegation were so moved that they offered their hands and promised to do all in their power to help him. This promise they kept.

The Prophet's declaration of objectives was moving to Brigham Young. He listened and, with clear conscience, could say, "Amen" to all that was spoken. To him the trip was justified. His sense of right and fair play was vindicated in this effort. He further supported the Prophet by doing his part when the Lord, by revelation at the Fishing River camp, declared that the Camp had fulfilled its purpose, that those without responsibility at Kirtland could stay and help build Zion, that those with responsibility should return, and that the leaders should return and prepare to receive an endowment in the new Temple being built.

One statement in the revelation stood out in the mind of Brigham: "There has been a day of calling, but the time has come for a day of choosing, and let those be chosen that are worthy." He, no doubt, when the revelation was presented by the Prophet, prepared to obey.

The Camp moved on June 25 to a spot near Liberty at Rush Creek. There the Prophet dispersed the Camp and its members lived with Church members in the vicinity. He did this to allay fears of the population that the Camp had anything but a desire to establish peace. Letters were sent to Doniphan, Atcheson and Thornton, three of their defenders, stating the reasons for this dispersal and another letter was sent to the governor, offering to compose peacefully their differences with Jackson County people so that those who had been driven out might return in peace to their homes there.

Now the scourge, promised before the Mississippi crossing, struck the men of the Camp. In each small group, apparently one or more men was suddenly taken ill with the cholera. Whether or not this was the dread epidemic and nearly always fatal Asiatic cholera, or a less deadly American variant, is not known. It killed very quickly most of those who died with it, but there were some caught in its tightening coils who by physical struggle of an intense kind were able to relieve themselves of its terrible effects. Some effort was made to perform the ordinance of administration of the sick, and each one attempting it was stricken. Joseph Smith himself attempted to lay on hands and was immediately taken ill. In describing it he said that he "quickly learned by painful experience that when the great Jehovah decrees destruction upon any people and makes known his determination, man must not attempt to stay his hand. The moment I attempted to rebuke the disease I was attacked, and had I not desisted in my attempt to save the life of a brother I would have lost my own."

Others had a like experience, and the first one to try to administer died. Those not attacked spent all of their time nursing the sick and burying the dead. There was no time to make coffins. The weather was hot and quick burial was necessary. The dead were rolled up in their own blankets and interred. Every means known of combating the disease was tried. One method seemed to get some result. The afflicted person was dipped in cold water, or it was poured on him. Then whiskey was mixed with flour to the consistency of starch and administered by mouth.

Sixty-eight of the Camp suffered from the scourge, and fourteen died. Solemnly the Prophet entered the names of the dead: John S. Carter, Eber Wilcox, Seth Hichcock, Erastus Rudd, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, Alfred Fisk, Edward Ives, Noah Johnson, Jesse B. Lawson, Robert McCord, Elial Strong, Jesse J. Smith, Warren Ingalls, and Betsy Parrish. (Several women and children had accompanied the camp.) Then he listed the following as among the most active in caring for the sick and burying the dead: John D. Parker, John Tanner, Nathan Tanner, Joseph B. Noble, Luke S. Johnson, Eleazer Miller, Joseph Young, Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young.

On July 2, Joseph Smith made a visit to the group staying near Liberty, at Lyman Wight's place. The Prophet told the brethren there that "if they would humble themselves before the Lord and covenant to keep His commandments, and obey my counsel, the plague should be stayed from that hour, and that there should not be another case of the cholera among them." The brethren covenanted with uplifted hands. There was no more cholera. Brigham bore witness of that, in writing later.

One more official act was necessary. On July 3 the Prophet authorized Lyman Wight to "give discharge to every man of the camp who had proved himself faithful, certifying that fact and giving him leave to return home."

On July 4 Brigham and Joseph Young started to walk home. Several brethren were with them. Certainly, during the walk home there was plenty of opportunity to bring into proper focus all of the excitement of the adventure and the lessons learned from it. For one thing, it was apparent that Joseph Smith himself had no clear conception of the results of Zion's Camp when the march began. Rather, he was attuned and each day received revelation sufficient for their needs. One step at a time, one day at a time, by faith in the word of the Lord, and by obedience to each day's requirements-this would bring the promised result. It was so when Israel gathered manna in the wilderness; it was true on this expedition; its lesson must be learned well by any man who would serve the Lord as a leader of the people.

Were Brigham and his brother disappointed that the Saints were not placed back on their land? Apparently not. Was there not a revelation from God giving full account of the reason for the failure and indicating the postponement of the restoration of Zion until the chosen time of the Lord? They had done what was asked. They could and did turn their faces homeward with dear conscience, but with increased anxiety. If they had to walk, they'd walk, but not slowly. With all the speed they could muster and in haste, Brigham and his companions turned toward their responsibilities at home. Mary Ann and her support was uppermost in his heart. The two brothers covered the distance in about twenty-five days, averaging forty miles per day. It was about August 1, 1834, when Brigham, dusty and tired, turned down the lane to his house, where in a moment Mary Ann was in his arms, crying with relief that her long, lonely effort was ended.
