S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

August 1834

Brigham was glad to be home but he was not nearly so happy as Mary Ann was to have him there. First there was the matter of a bath, a hot bath. What luxury! Then clean clothes, properly washed, unstained by travel and by repeated clumsy efforts at washing while en route. Finally, to sit up to the table and eat well cooked food especially prepared for his homecoming, served by his elder daughter, now nine years old, with his little Vilate, age four, on his lap-this gave him the keenest satisfaction and happiness.

Mary Ann told him of the life in Kirtland while he was away. She had had trouble sometimes in getting food enough for the table, on many days being reduced to one item in the house. But somehow they had managed. Her greatest difficulty had been wood for the cooking fires. At first she had been able to chop wood, but as her expected child had developed, using an ax had become impossible. Hoeing the garden, however, had been good for her. The women of the two families with her had done a good deal to ease her burden. Phinehas and Lorenzo had been kind and had kept her supplied with wood. They had brought her vegetables as they could. The cow had been steady and productive, her milk having diminished but two quarts in the three months of Brigham's absence. Of course there were the times when the cow had eaten wild onions and other strong-tasting herbs, and had thus tainted the milk, with the result that the little girls could no force themselves to drink it.

Mary Ann had kept busy helping the temple workers. She had accepted one hundred pounds of raw wool which she had cleaned, carded and spun and was knitting into articles of clothing for the men working on the temple. This was a pleasure to her for it gave her company. She could join with Vilate Kimball and the other neighbors, and they could have a social visit while working at the wool. Elizabeth had been helpful with the spinning and was learning to knit very well.

Had she been lonely? Yes, and fearful too for her man's safety and well-being. But somehow in the still of the night as she lay awake feeling the stirring and kicking of the new life she sheltered, the air filled with the noises of trilling insects, and of whistling frogs accompanied by the bass notes of a bull frog, an assurance had come into her soul that things would be all right; that Brigham would return safe and well.

She and the children listened with avid interest to Brigham's brief, pungent, account of his journey. He related what he thought would be of interest to the little girls, and dwelt tenderly on the terrible four days when the cholera laid most of the men low. He was indignant, later, when the girls had gone to bed, as he described to Mary Ann the weaknesses of men and the rebellions of the Camp. But he was warm and glowing as he rehearsed the way the Prophet had handled the situations that arose. He had been present when the revelation was given releasing them from their labors and postponing the redemption of Zion. He dwelt on the times when Joseph had prophesied of events to come and had explained the fulfillment. He had returned home convinced that the Lord God guided Joseph Smith in almost every act of his labors. Truly it was a deeply satisfying thing to labor, at long last, for the true kingdom of God under the direction of a true prophet, a mighty man chosen of the Lord in the last days. Mary Ann whispered a happy Amen as her spirit echoed and responded to the testimony of his heart. But Brigham must have opened his soul to his wife and talked about the time of testing which was past and the time of choosing which the Prophet had declared was now upon them. Whatever the Prophet had meant by a time of choosing, Brigham wanted most to be worthy to be among those chosen. As they drifted off to sleep, Brigham's last thought to Mary Ann could well have been that Joseph the Prophet had promised that he and Joseph, his brother, would return safely and that not a hair of their heads would be harmed. He no doubt felt grateful that the Lord had kept the promise made by His mouthpiece.

For a day or so Brigham labored to put his house and garden in good order. Repairs where needed were completed, and the garden cleared of the weeds which Mary Ann had not been able to handle. It was a good garden and she had kept it well. Now it was responding with mature crops which would supply the table from now on until the time of frost. Brigham put the finishing touches on his root cellar, which, in September, barely a month away, would be needed for storage of squash, pumpkin, beans, corn, potatoes, parsnips, carrots, and apples. A good root cellar, well built, was and is one of the best ways ever devised for winter storage of Nature's bounty.

Brigham was not allowed a long respite from labor. Joseph the Prophet had returned at about the same time as he had, and had again taken over the direction of the Church and its physical work. The finishing of the printing plant and the schoolhouse was important, he said. Could Brigham do that work? Brigham could, and would, and did.

There was plenty to occupy the Prophet on his return to Kirtland. There was the Temple, on which little progress had been made with so many men gone; there were the usual behind-the-scenes apostates; and there was Sylvester Smith.

The easiest way to discredit a good man is to speak evil of him. A second way, almost as easy, is to twist the facts of a relationship with him. "Listen to what he did to me," is an age-old, devilish way of discrediting the best of men by impugning motives, by insinuating that the man had evil design, or that he was a traitor. Any of these will prejudice large sections of the population. One can expect it from enemies and can build up a wall of defenders, but when one of the defenders suddenly says, "I have been close, and I found out for myself that the accusations are true," then some of the defenders are influenced to turn also. Perhaps this is what the Lord Himself meant in part when he mentioned the wounds he had received in the house of His friends. We have our modern applications of this principle of evil. Certainly we have it on the national and local political level, and we have it in the Church. They had it in the Church at Kirtland. The Prophet was hard put to defend himself against those who twisted his motives and his acts and then persuaded others, not acquainted with the facts, to take the same view.

Sylvester Smith was the spearhead for a series of such accusations. He accused the Prophet Joseph of persecution and bullying, and of malfeasance in his office during the Zion's Camp march. He was a prominent, talented member and therefore when he protested people listened. There were those who kept still and did not say anything openly. "It hadn't struck me quite like that, but now you mention it, perhaps that's the way it was." So these stayed neutral on the surface.

The Prophet promptly called a conference of high priests and elders. He presented the matter and spoke for a long time in explanation of his acts. And who arose to his defence? The two men he was learning to trust implicitly, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. There were others too, but again when prominent, attention-attracting men accuse, others of equal prominence should rise to the defense. This happened. Sylvester Smith was discredited and instructed to apologize. This he did, first involuntarily, and finally of his own free will.

Thus was the Prophet vindicated. But was he? In the minds of many people the feeling still persisted that where there is smoke there must be fire and that Sylvester Smith had some justification. Sylvester Smith himself carried the injured air, as much as to say, "I did my best, but he was too strong for me."

How does a Prophet of God act in this kind of situation? Does he carry the hurt? Does he use his power to sever? Joseph Smith freely forgave Sylvester. He showed no tendency to harbor resentment and reinstated the man, treating him from then on as though nothing had happened. He, by this action alone, showed that upon proper repentance not only would he forgive but would forget the offending act. He demonstrated also the principle which he later put into words as the Lord inspired him to write:

"Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;" (D. & C. 121:43)

Now another question: How does a man of the caliber and the ability to observe and learn, and the determination to do right, react to a situation of this type? What contribution did this incident make to the character and the knowledge of Brigham Young? He could walk home after the conference and feel that justice had been done. The Prophet was vindicated; that would be satisfying to Brigham. It would be later, when he saw the Prophet treating his accuser as though nothing had happened, that the final and greatest lesson would be absorbed. Would Brigham think the Prophet gullible? No, he assessed the whole act correctly and took the lesson to his heart. He had, from the beginning of his association, felt that he could learn at the feet of the Prophet. There he proposed to be as much as possible. He was not let down in this incident. He learned and absorbed the great doctrine of forgiveness, without which repentance is vain.
