S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Fall and Winter 1834

Hardly had the Sylvester Smith trial finished when another sullen and angry member of Zion's Camp instituted a civil suit. Denis Lake entered a charge against the Prophet, claiming that he had been promised $30 per month; he alleged also that Joseph had promised him "a lot of land." Brigham was called up and questioned by the attorney for the prosecution.

"Did you go up to Missouri with the said camp?"

"I did!"

"What tools did you take with you?"

"A good gun, and bayonet, plenty of ammunition, a dirk, an ax, a saw, a chisel, spade, hoe, and other necessary tools."

"What did you mean to do with your gun and ammunition?"

"I meant to defend my property, myself, and my brethren from thieves and robbers."

"What do you understand a lot of land to mean?"

"In the burying ground it generally means six feet."

This was the end of the questions to the witness, although the defense attorney urged the prosecutor to continue.

Thirty witnesses were called for the purpose of impeaching the testimony of the Prophet, but the effort ended in signal failure and the Prophet won the case. Brigham in commenting said, "I mention such cases, in which I took a part, in my history realizing that there are but few of the vexatious proceedings of the world and the apostates against the prophet noticed in his history." Brigham must therefore have felt that the Prophet should have more defense than the Prophet himself felt he needed.

Brigham not only finished the printing office and the school room that fall but as winter came on he worked at the stone quarry where the Prophet had assumed the foremanship, and he spent any remaining time he had on the temple. He managed to keep busy.

Meanwhile, unmentioned by him in his published history, he being extremely reticent concerning his private family affairs, Mary Ann brought forth her first child, a son, on October 14, 1834. Brigham named him Joseph Angell. The name honored two men whom he loved, the Prophet, and his elder brother, Joseph.

The family of Brigham Young had to be sustained. Food and clothing were needed. There had been provision made for the families of those called to the ministry to have claim on the resources of the Church but these resources were flimsy, for the Church was young and those expected to consecrate their surplus to the Church often did not do so.

Brigham found time to earn some money by making articles of furniture at home, at night. He made good chairs, and his furniture held together. Income from this was sufficient with what had been raised in the garden to keep his family from going hungry, although this period was one of "scant" means. Then too, there were interruptions in this plan. Often in the evenings there were meetings for prayer, meetings for testimony, but most often meetings for instruction. The range of subjects was as wide as eternity, and most of the time the man who was conversant with eternity was the instructor. Brigham pursued the policy that he could not afford to miss the instruction that dealt with eternity and eternal truth. He could afford to be irregular with his meals-that was earthly. He had missed so many meals in his life that regularity of sufficient food would have been the abnormal thing. And in this he was like the rest of his brethren. Most of those who were busy working for the Kingdom did not have time to properly care for themselves. It was their wives who filled in the gap. With the strong able faith and tenacity of Mary Ann, Brigham's family was able to get along, though "scant" the resources. It was a good thing he had Mary Ann. She wanted him to learn everything he could, and she never protested his going, so if a meeting was held Brigham was usually there, gaining from each experience more of wisdom, more of doctrine, more of revelation as the Prophet received it (and, better still, explanation of its meaning), more of faith, more of determination, more of loyalty and love.

One of the most satisfying of his experiences was attendance at the School for Elders. This group met regularly to be instructed. "Lectures on Theology" (later known as the "Lectures on Faith") were delivered regularly under the direction of Joseph Smith. Questions were courted and answers provided; the order and discipline of the rising Church were discussed. And well it was, for this group would later scatter over the earth, preaching the true order of the Gospel. They must be united in doctrine and principle, but first they must know the principles.

Many revelations from the Lord had been received through the Prophet's lips. Those of a general nature and containing instruction were being made ready for printing, these numbering more than one hundred by December 1834. There was great variety in their subjects. They declared principles of eternal life; they guided the daily movements of certain brethren; they set standards of conduct; some described the government and order of the Church; others explained the management of help to the poor. A committee was, even now, preparing to publish them so that all might read and profit. Through all of the difficulty-the rebellion of some men, the hard work of others, the study of truth, and the weighing of the ideas which were advanced by others in the name of truth but which were based on error-through all this the sweet whispering of the Spirit kept Brigham on a true course.

As Brigham watched his leader work he saw, too, what prodigious labor can accomplish. Did the work flag at the quarry where they were hewing stone for temple walls? Joseph became foreman and gave it added impetus. Was instruction needed? He was there to give it. Was there a breach in a distant branch? Joseph went to its rescue. There can be no doubt that his own standard of conduct was imparted to Brigham. Stated in his own words, the Prophet wrote at this time, "I made it my rule: When the Lord commands, do it." Brigham made this his rule too. In his private life with Mary Ann this rule became the basis of the family's decisions.
