S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

February-April 1835 [^1]

Sunday morning dawned fair on February 8 in 1835. Brigham Young stirred himself, tentatively tested the air, and decided that it was cold but not colder than yesterday. Well, there was no use in making it harder by hesitancy, so up he got and went over to the fireplace. The welt-banked ashes, when stirred, yielded a glowing core of coals which were quickly blown into a flame. Two or three pieces of rolled birch bark were added to the fire and caught quickly, followed by some small kindling. Within five minutes the room was pleasantly aglow with the reflection of the leaping flames. Brigham reflected that there was nothing quite like well-dried birch to catch fire quickly and to warm a room. He then went into the small kitchen and lit a fire in the range. It was not a large stove, but it was easier to cook over than a fireplace, which required that one constantly stoop over it, and it warmed the room better. While the room was warming he dressed and then with pail in hand he went out to the small barn to milk the cow. So the morning started; so it started every day when he was home.

Meanwhile Mary Ann was busy with a good breakfast of fried corn meal mush, with cream and maple syrup, apple pie, and beam from the Saturday night bean pot. The family being of the New England tradition, beans and pie for Sunday breakfast were expected. Mary Ann then took care of little Joseph, who was nearly four months old, and at the same time directed the efforts of Elizabeth and Vilate in dressing, washing, combing hair, and generally getting ready for Church.

Since the completion of the new schoolhouse the Sunday services were held there. This Sunday there was special anticipation for the Prophet was at the meeting. At the end of the service the Prophet approached Brigham and asked if Brigham and Joseph would come to his house and sing for him. Brigham was delighted to accept the invitation. He spoke to his brother about it on the way home, and it was agreed.

It was a pleasant occasion. Joseph Smith was a man who enjoyed praising the Lord in song. Brigham and Joseph were possessed of excellent and pleasing voices, which blended together well in duet. The softening effects of the music filled the heart and brought deep satisfaction. After several songs the Prophet opened his heart in conversation. He told them of a vision in which he had seen the state of those who had died in the cholera epidemic during Zion's Camp. It might have been thought that those who had died had been under condemnation while those who recovered, or were not stricken, were favored. This was not so, for the Lord's judgments affect the just and the unjust alike. There may be offenses at which the innocent suffer with the guilty, but woe to them by whom the offense cometh.

"Brethren," the Prophet said, "I have seen the men who died of cholera in our camp. If I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I ask no more." At the recital of these events of recent and tender memory he wept, and for some time could not speak. When he recovered sufficiently, he addressed himself to Brigham.

"I wish you to notify all of the brethren living in the branches within a reasonable distance from this place to meet in a general conference on Saturday next. I shall then and there appoint twelve special witnesses to open the door of the Gospel to foreign nations, and you, Brother Brigham, will be one of them." He enlarged on the duties of this calling, and described to them in considerable detail the work of the twelve special witnesses.

Then he turned to Joseph Young and, addressing him, said, "Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you president of the Seventies." He did not enlarge on this, but the tone of his voice, which was as though the ordinations were already accomplished, caused the two brothers to marvel. The ancient Church had twelve witnesses to the ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ, but these two, accepting as they did, every doctrine revealed through the Prophet Joseph, had the commonly accepted idea that the apostleship was reserved for those men of ancient times, and that the office was a special thing not connected with a church organization. Yet the moment the Prophet explained it, all seemed natural and right.

The "Seventies" was more of a mystery to them. There had been, they knew, seventy elders in ancient Israel. The Lord Jesus Christ had ordained "other seventy" and sent them forth. But that was about all they or anyone else knew about it.

Brigham and Joseph talked but little to each other as they walked home together. Each was wrapped in his own awed thoughts concerning what Joseph Smith had said.

Brigham began at once to notify the branches of the confernce called for the following Saturday, February 14. By the time the candles were lit that evening the word had been circulated in Kirtland. During the next four days Brigham traveled and asked others to notify everyone within reach.

Kirtland was abuzz the following Sunday evening. The Church now had twelve apostles. And furthermore, they had been chosen from among the men who went to Missouri with Zion's Camp. It appeared, too, that it had never been the intention of the Lord God for the members of the Camp to shed blood for the redemption of Zion. Rather the Camp had been a test of the willingness of the men to sacrifice themselves and all they possessed for the Lord's work. The cryptic words of the revelation given in Missouri were now plain. It was now a time of choosing. Saturday had seen some of the choosing. There had been no hurry. The Prophet had never been more sure of himself than when he conducted the work. So said the sober minded who had seen and heard.

What did the Prophet do? He read the inspired words of the 15th Chapter of John. Then after an appropriate and effective invocation, the brethren who had gone to Zion's Camp were asked to sit together in a reserved section of the house. The Prophet said that the meeting had been called because God had commanded it; it had been made known to him by vision and by the Spirit. He likened the Zion's Camp march to the testing of Abraham. The Camp had been tested; now those to be ordained to the ministry were to be chosen from among the Zion's Camp men. Did they agree? If so would all of the Zion's Camp men stand? All stood. A vote of the congregation to sustain this proposition was called for and a unanimous raising of the right hands followed.

The Prophet then said he wanted an expression from the brethren: Would they be satisfied to have the Spirit of the Lord dictate in the choice of the elders who were to be apostles. They expressed themselves as anxious to have it so. Then they all joined in singing "Hark Listen to The Trumpeters," after which President Smith prayed and then adjourned the meeting for one hour.

At the reassembly the house was filled to overflowing. During the intervening hour of adjournment word had got around that this was no usual conference. Many who had not thought of attending had changed their minds when they heard what was proposed. Now the Prophet explained that in 1829 the Lord had revealed to him that the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon would choose the Twelve; therefore in accordance with that instruction the first business was for the three Witnesses to pray, each one, and then choose twelve men as apostles to go to every nation, kindred, tongue and people.

The Three Witnesses then united in prayer, after which the Presidency, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams laid their hands on the heads of the Witnesses and blessed them to perform this most important task of choosing the twelve men. The three Witnesses, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris then chose the names of twelve men:

The first three men were invited to the front. Lyman, Brigham, and Heber moved forward, and each was ordained and blessed by the three Witnesses, who took turns being mouth. Joseph Smith the Prophet then dismissed the meeting, which was to reconvene the next day.

At the Sunday meeting, time was taken in ordaining and blessing five more of the apostles. Then a week later three more were ordained and blessed. Finally on April 26, Orson Pratt arrived at a meeting held that day and received his ordination and blessing. This completed the work of choosing and ordaining the Twelve.

Now for these men, called to be apostles, ignorant of the authority or responsibility of that office, a series of meetings was held for the purpose of instructing them in their duties. They soon discovered that they had an overwhelming task. Oliver was instructed to give the apostles their charges. He began by reading to them the revelation which had authorized him and the other Witnesses to seek out the Twelve. The first requirement to look for had been that they "desire to take upon them my name with full purpose of heart." If this was established as the desire of those being considered, "they are called to go into all the world to preach my gospel unto every creature."

The dignified words continued:

"And now I speak unto you, the Twelve-Behold, my grace is sufficient for you; you must walk uprightly before me and sin not.

"And, behold, you are they who are ordained of me to ordain priests and teachers; to declare my gospel, according to the power of the Holy Ghost which is in you, and according to the callings and gifts of God unto men;

"And I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it.

"These words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore, you shall testify they are of me and not of man;

"For it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them;

"Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words.

* * * *

"And you shall fall down and worship the Father in my name.

"And you must preach unto the world, saying: You must repent and be baptized, in the name of Jesus Christ;

"For all men must repent and be baptized, and not only men, but women, and children who have arrived at the years of

accountability.

"And now, after that you have received this, you must keep my commandments in all things;

"And by your hands I will work a marvelous work among the children of men, unto the convincing of many of their sins, that they may come unto repentance, and that they may come unto the kingdom of my Father.

"Wherefore, the blessings which I give unto you are above all things.

"And after that you have received this, if you keep not my commandments you cannot be saved in the kingdom of my Father.

"Behold, I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, and your Redeemer, by the power of my Spirit have spoken it. Amen."

-Doctrine and Covenants 18:27, 28, 31-36, 40-47.

Brigham took this revelation as the voice of the Lord to him personally, even as the final paragraph said. He heard! He knew!

The instruction from Oliver Cowdery continued:

"If you come short of your duty, great will be your condemnation; for the greater the calling the greater the transgression... therefore I warn you to cultivate great humility; ... beware lest the flattery of the world lift you up ... let your ministry be first ... the souls of men are committed to your charge ... It is necessary that you receive testimony from heaven for yourselves... when the proper time arrives you shall be able to bear this testimony to the world. Never cease to strive until you have seen God face to face; strengthen your faith; cast off your doubts, your sins, and all your unbelief. With regard to superiority God does not love you better or more than others ... you are as one ... you are equal in bearing the keys of the kingdom to all nations .... It is the will of the Father that you proclaim his Gospel to the ends of the earth and the islands of the sea .... Be zealous to save souls .... Bear the message to those who consider themselves wise and such may persecute you-they may seek your life... be prepared at all times to make a sacrifice of your lives should God require them in the advancement and building of his cause. Murmur not at God. Be always prayerful; be always watchful...."

Oliver paused, overcome by his feelings and wept, then continued:

"You will not see another day like this;-the time has fully come-. It will require your whole souls, it will require courage like Enoch's... you will be in the midst of congregations who will gnash their teeth upon you ... did I say congregations would gnash their teeth at you? Yea, I say whole nations will oppose you, you will be considered the worst of men. Be not discouraged at this. When God pours out his spirit the enemy will rage ... the lives of those who proclaim the Gospel will be in danger. This has been the case ever since the days of righteous Abel ....

"Tarry at Kirtland until you are endowed with power from on high .... the greatness of your commission consists in this: You are to hold the keys of this ministry; you are to go to the nations afar off-nations that sit in darkness.

"You must prepare your minds to bid a long farewell to Kirtland, even until the great day come .... You have a work to do that no other men can do; you must proclaim the Gospel in its simplicity and purity ... all nations have a claim on you; you are bound together as the three witnesses were; not withstanding you can part and meet, and meet and part again till your heads are silvered over with age."

Oliver Cowdery ceased speaking, then took each of the apostels separately by the hand, and said, "Do you with full purpose of heart take part in this ministry, to proclaim the Gospel with all diligence, with these your brethren, according to the tenor and intent of the charge you have received?" Each one answered, "Yes." And in the answer of each was his oath to do, and his covenant to obey the charge. And thus did Joseph Smith commission the witnesses to the Book of Mormon to instruct the twelve apostles. No one doubted that it was by the Spirit.

Brigham Young entered his house that night stirred by many sobering thoughts. He was to take no thought of earthly things-he was to go forth. Mary Ann would have the responsibility of his family on her shoulders. In the long hours of the night they discussed and talked. If she had any great misgivings she hid the fact from him. He was called, he must go; she would manage. She believed as he did; her faith was like his, and she was humbly grateful to share the life of this man who had been called to be an apostle even as men had been anciently. Brigham felt her strong support and was comforted. He could go; his family was in the hands of the Lord; Mary Ann would work it out.

NOTE: The account herein made is assumed to be as Brigham Young might have viewed it. He was not a part of the preliminary work of the Prophet and the Three Witnesses as we know it to have been. Although he knew he was chosen, not until afterwards would he know the means taken to arrive at the choice.

---
Notas:
[^1] Lyman E. Johnson 2. Brigham Young 3. Heber C. Kimball 4. Orson Hyde 5. David W. Patten 6. Luke S. Johnson 8. John F. Boynton 9. Orson Pratt 10. William Smith 11. Thomas B. Marsh 12. Parley P. Pratt
