S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

May-September 1835

Brigham together with his brethren of the Twelve were sent on their first mission to spread the word of the restoration of the Gospel of Christ and to regulate the affairs of the eastern branches. Up until now, men called on missions had preached throughout the eastern and some of the southern states. Wherever they had gone they had organized branches of the Church. But these had little knowledge of the body of doctrine which was developing by revelation at Kirtland. Word-of-mouth talk about revelations they had heard or read; and an occasional copy of a communication from the Lord, written laborously out in longhand, and doubtless containing errors of the copyist, was cherished. An effort to publish the revelations in Missouri had been frustrated by armed mobs, one of which destroyed the press and scattered the pages being printed. Another effort was in process, but the book, though nearly ready, had not yet been published.

The custom of worship and the significance of such custom as instituted by Joseph Smith was watered down in the separate communities and interpreted variously according to the sectarian habits of those presiding over a branch or attempting to hold a service. Even though services were very simple-consisting largely of hymns of the Protestant churches which spoke truth (many of which are still sung in our Church to this day), the careful administration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper according to the set prayer available in the Book of Mormon, and preaching by various members of the congregation-still there was margin for error to creep in. The Twelve were now to regulate these branches, correct error there, teach them correct principle, and generally strengthen them. In places where men were leading their congregations astray such men were to be released if they would not take correction and others appointed in their stead. These branches were not in the Stake in Kirtland or in Zion. They were the unsupervised branches scattered over the eastern United States.

The Prophet and his counselors and the Three Witnesses had given the Twelve a great deal to think about. But most important, they went forth under the direction and power of the Holy Ghost. At the moment of need they would receive inspired direction both as to what to say and as to what to do. Of this they had perfect assurance.

As one follows the travels of this group of men as they started, fanned out, and met again at the appointed places for conference, it is surprising how uniform their general actions were. And why not? This time they spoke with authority. Even as the apostles of old went forth confidently after Pentecost, speaking boldly and without hesitation, so these modern apostles went abroad to bear witness, to teach, to expound, to regulate, and generally to "bear up" the Kingdom of God.

How did they travel? Without purse or scrip. (Scrip was not paper money, but a bag which contained articles of clothing and comfort. It was usually carried at the side suspended by a strap slung over the shoulder.) They depended on the hospitality of those to whom they preached. They accepted help from anyone who would give it, whether it was in the form of money, food, or shelter. And as they traveled they solicited the Church members for donations to be spent on the new temple at Kirtland.

While they were traveling in this manner their families at home were also living "without purse or scrip." Let it not be supposed that manna from heaven took care of the wives and children of these men. It is true that heaven blessed them, but the practical application of the blessing was generally the softening of people's hearts to supply some of the physical needs of the children, while the lion's share came as a result of the heroic efforts of their mothers.

Mary Ann did all she could to be independent. She struggled to utilize the means which Brigham had supplied in a rural economy. There was milk and some butter, and, when the hens were laying, some eggs, if one could find the eggs. Hens were adept at concealing their nests in thicket and fence row. Children were continually searching them out. Gardens furnished a small variety of vegetables, but still there was the need of meat. The Church was beholden and the Bishop could be appealed to, but pride often prevented the appeal, and even if it was made, the Bishop's store was often scanty. More than likely there would be an oversupply of corn in his storehouse and an undersupply of meat, for example.

It may be assumed, without exaggeration, that for every man who had a family and went on extended missions, "depending on the Lord" for support, a heroic and determined woman as full of faith as he kept the home fires burning, the wolf from the door, and the children protected from both physical harm and the sins of the world.

The general route of the Twelve was eastward. At Fairport they boarded the lake steamer and sailed to Dunkirk. Their first conference was at Westfield, New York. That the flavor of their effort might be savored here we give the order of business set up by the Twelve in their first official conference. Here, too, it will be noticed that the word conference has been given two meanings. A conference is a gathering of people, but as used in the first resolution it is also a geographical area with definite, limited boundaries. One of the Twelve's chief assignments was to organize the area they covered into geographical "conferences." Notice this in the quote from Documentary History of the Church which follows:

The First Mission of the Twelve.

The Twelve left Kirtland this morning [May 4th], and embarked on board the steamer Sandusky, at Fairport, and landed at Dunkirk, New York, 5 o'clock p.m., and after preaching in those regions a few days, met in conference at Westfield, May 9th, according to previous appointment; the church being present, and Thomas B. Marsh, the oldest of the quorum, presiding.

The following items were suggested for the consideration of the council:

Resolved. 1st: That the limits of this conference extend south and west to the line of Pennsylvania, north as far as Lake Erie, and east as far as Lodi, embracing the branches of Westfield, Silver Creek, Perrysburgh, and Lavona, to be called the "Westfield Conference."

2nd. Inquire into the standing of all the Elders within the bounds of this conference.

3rd. Inquire into the manner of their teaching, doctrines, etc.

4th. Inquire into the teaching, conduct, and faithfulness of all traveling Elders who have recently labored within the bounds of this conference.

5th. Hear a representation of the several branches of the Church.

On investigation, the standing and teaching of the Elders present met the approbation of the council, except the teaching of Elder Joseph Rose, which was, "that the Jewish church was the sun, and the Gentile church was the moon, etc.; when the Jewish church was scattered, then sun was darkened: and when the Gentile church is cut off, the moon will be turned to blood;" also some things relative to the apocalyptic beast with seven heads and ten horns.

He was shown his error, and willingly made a humble confession.

The faithfulness of all the traveling Elders was found to be good.

The members of the Westfield branch were represented as in good standing, but with a difficulty in the minds of some, relative to the baptism of Brother Lloyd L. Lewis, inasmuch as he was baptized by a traveling Elder without the church being called together to know if they would receive him to fellowship.

The council decided that if there was a fault, it was in the administrator, and not in the candidate. The branch numbered seventy-five.

The Lavona branch numbered twenty in good standing, but lacking in the enjoyment of the Spirit in consequence of a neglect to keep the Word of Wisdom.

After further instructions on general principles, the conference adjourned until 8 o'clock a.m., Monday, May 11.

Sunday, May 10.-Elders Marsh and Patten preached to an attentive congregation of about five hundred; after Sacrament, five persons desired baptism, which was attended to by Elder M'Lellin.

Monday, 11.-Conference met pursuant to adjournment.

Resolved unanimously-That this conference go to, immediately, and appoint their "wise men," and gather up their riches, and send them to Zion to purchase land, according to previous commandment, that all things be prepared before them in order to their gathering.

Much was said to the conference upon these important things; and the Saints covenanted before the Lord, that they would be strict to attend to our teaching.

After preaching by Elder Young at 3 o'clock p.m., and the farewell exhortation of the Twelve, seven individuals were baptized by Elder Orson Hyde, and they were confirmed in the evening. After laying hands on many sick, who obtained relief, adjourned to the 22nd instant, to meet in Freedom, New York.

ORSON HYDE, Clerk.

Messengers caught up with the Twelve at Lyonstown with word that a lawsuit brought against the Prophet was to be tried and the men who were witnesses in the case were to return to Kirtland and testify. Brigham Young, Orson Hyde and William Smith were the men concerned and they immediately set forth on the return journey. It may be assumed that, being at Lyonstown, they would take passage on a canal barge, provided they had means for the tickets. Otherwise they would have to walk back a distance of nearly 350 miles. This return gave Brigham an opportunity to give his family encouragement and assistance for the few days he lingered there. He had been away just over a month.

Testimony given, and the suit won by the Prophet, the three apostles hurried east again to catch up with their brethren and complete their missions. They were with the Twelve once more at Pillow Point, New York, on June 19. That was a hurried trip, fifteen days in all.

Progressively they kept their appointments with one another at West "Loboro" Canada (near Kingston); St. Johnsbury, Vermont; Bradford, Massachusetts; Dover, New Hampshire; Saco, Maine; and ended finally at Farmington, Maine.

At Saco, Maine, the Saints raised a purse of about $80 to assist the Twelve on their return journey to Kirtland. Finally, at the end of September the Twelve arrived back in Kirtland able to report to the Prophet and the Church that they had reorganized branches, corrected false doctrine, stamped out error, and disciplined or excommunicated those who persisted in error after rebuke. They could also report that most of the journey had been on foot, that there had been plenty of persecution and abuse, many hardships suffered because people refused to satisfy their needs, many days without food, and many nights without shelter. They could also report that the weather had been hot and their feet sore and blistered much of the time.

But these emissaries were also able to tell of progress, of the continued faith of the people in the branches, of many baptisms, and of a general success in setting the Church in order in the eastern provinces. More important, they had learned to get along with one another; stubborn and opinionated, they had been able to compromise; in a sense they had become a team.
