S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

February 1836

The whole effort of the Prophet and his close associates was to teach the people, to prepare them for more and greater knowledge and spiritual power. One of the yearning desires of their hearts was to read the scriptures in the original. The Prophet knew that there were errors in the translations of these great testimonies of the Christ, both in the forerunning prophecies and in the histories of His life. So to be able to read the scriptures in the Greek and the Hebrew would, it was felt, help to eliminate much of the error.

Professor Joshua Siexas, a Jewish scholar and a teacher of Hebrew, was accordingly employed to teach the brethren. Classes were held in the upper room of the unfinished temple. The professor was doubtful whether these unlettered men could learn Hebrew, but he was agreeably surprised to discover that he need not have worried, that their progress was rapid. Morning and afternoon classes were conducted in which the learned professor taught, corrected and instructed.

Brigham was an avid student of the subject and he had strong hopes of achieving the objective for which the class had been started. Then one day in February, the 22nd, the Prophet told him that the assembly room of the temple was now ready for the painters and decorators and called upon Brigham to assume the direction of this final phase of the work in that portion of the building. That ended the lessons in Hebrew.

From then on the mixing of paint and its application became Brigham's life. From daylight to dark he and a few helpers applied the paint to the walls, the pulpits, the furniture. Meanwhile the wives and older daughters were busy sewing together the yards of cloth which were to make up the veils of the temple. (These curtains, or veils, were hung from the ceiling in such a way that they could be raised or lowered separately or together, thus dividing the room into halves, or quarters, or screening the occupants of the pulpits from the gaze of the audience.) It took about thirty days to finish the painting to Brigham's satisfaction. He regretted of course that he could not continue the study of Hebrew, but if the requirement was that he mix and apply paint, he would perform that task.

Meanwhile, evenings were taken up in preparing the quorums of the priesthood for the great events that the completion of the temple promised. There were new, and (to them) strange, ceremonies of cleansing. They were washed and anointed preparatory to receiving more of power and revelation. The Counselors in the Presidency, and the Twelve, were taught and participated in the ordinance of the washing of feet after the pattern set by the Savior when he washed the feet of His disciples.

In the midst of all of this time of spiritual feasting a most important and comforting revelation came to Joseph Smith. He saw in vision the "celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. I saw Fathers Adam and Abraham, and my father and mother, my brother Alvin, that has long since slept, and marvelled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set His hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sins.

"Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me saying- 'All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to the desire of their hearts.'

"And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven."

Other visions followed in rapid succession. A most touching vision was shown him where he "saw the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who are now upon the earth, who hold the keys of this last ministry, in foreign lands, standing together in a circle, much fatigued, with their clothes tattered, and their feet swollen, with their eyes cast downward, and Jesus standing in their midst, and they did not behold him. The Savior looked upon them and wept." And Joseph, ever after, in relating this vision, wept each time he told it.

And he saw Brigham Young "standing in a strange land, in the far south and west, in a desert place, upon a rock" surrounded by a dozen men of dark skin, who appeared hostile. "He was preaching to them in their own tongue, and the angel of God standing above his head, with a drawn sword in his hand protecting him, but he did not see it. And I finally saw the Twelve in the celestial kingdom of God. I also beheld the redemption of Zion, and many things which the tongue of man cannot describe in full."

Others received visions, and there was generally an outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord upon the humble men who, as quorums and groups, received the ordinances and waited upon the Lord. So full were they all, that on evenings when meetings were not held they sat together and rehearsed one to another what each had seen and heard. Many saw angels of the Lord in the temple rooms.

Brigham was a part of this preliminary Pentecostal experience. The dignity of the occasions made a lasting impression on him. Once when the quorums were being taught and instructed on the order of waiting on the Lord, the members of one of them exhibited a rebellious spirit, one or two stating that they had their own teachers and did not need those sent them. The group lost the Spirit and had no revelation and no vision given them. All soon found that they must be in harmony with one another, sit quietly, each in his place, listen attentively to what was being said, enter into prayer both public and private with full heart. There must be no shouting or other disturbance to mar the dignity or the spirituality. And the endowment they all received as a result was rich indeed.

Brigham did not say much about it. But one night, on his late arrival home from a meeting in the temple upper room, Mary Ann asked him what he had been doing. He replied:

"The upper part of the temple was illuminated and I have been watching my friends."

"Who were they? Did you converse with them?"

"The brethren who have been ministering in the temple have been quietly observing personages passing to and fro, and about in the upper part of the building."

What more did he tell her? It is not recorded, but he loved her and she was a faithful wife. One does not doubt that he described to her the glory and joy of being ministered to by angels of God. Very likely, the reality of their presence was impressed upon her, and then, as was necessary, he would tell her that this was between him and her-she understood-he didn't want to be quoted. Certainly she did not allow more than the above conversation to be recorded, and that after his death. But one cannot deny fact. There are too many testimonies of sober, controlled men to question that this time in the Church history was one in which the Lord God left no doubt that He accepted the Temple as His and with it the sacrifices of the people who built it.
