S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Sunday, March 27, 1835

Unless one has experienced the peculiar joy which comes from the influence of the Holy Ghost he cannot conceive of the feelings of the loyal crowds of people who gathered at seven o'clock on Sunday morning, March 27, 1836, and patiently waited for the doors of the temple to open. The meeting time was set for nine o'clock, with the doors opening at eight. This was the culminating act on the part of the Saints in Kirtland. The loyal ones had given all they had of time, effort and means to complete this building. Now they wanted to be present when it was given to the Lord. They took steps to be early so that as the doors opened and the ushers directed each person to a seat, in a short time the building was crowded to capacity and the Prophet was constrained to tell those not admitted to go to the schoolhouse and hold a meeting there. Soon that building also was full and people were turned away.

It would be presumptuous to try to imagine the feelings of Brigham, or of Heber who sat next to him, or of his brothers Joseph, Phinehas, and Lorenzo, or of John P. Greene, his brother-in-law-or how Mary Ann felt either. That the exercises were eminently satisfying there can be no doubt. Who would not feel a solemn thrill as the choir, trained especially for the occasion, sang a special hymn composed by the poetical Parley P. Pratt:

"Ere long the veil will rend in twain, The King descend with all His train; The earth shall shake with awful fright, And all creation feel His might."

(This they felt to be true.)

"Lift up your heads, ye Saints, in peace. The Savior comes for your release; The day of the redeemed has come; The Saints shall all be welcomed home."

(What a joy when there is no persecution!)

Kirtland, Ohio, with the temple in the background.

"Hosannah! Now the trump shall sound, Proclaim the joys of heaven around. When all the Saints together join In songs of love, and all divine."

(We shout "Hosannah!" too-with all our hearts.)

"Our hearts and tongues shall join in one, To praise the Father and the Son; While all the heavens shall shout again, And all creation say, Amen."

(Amen, Amen, Amen, and Amen.)

The prayer of Elder Rigdon was devout, humble, and appropriate. It seemed fitting to the brethren who were listening with bowed heads.

The second song, the words of which were by William Phelps, was equally uplifting.

"O happy souls, who pray Where God appoints to hear! O happy Saints, who pay Their constant service there.

We'll praise Him still And happy we Who love the way To Zion's hill."

The song ended with a glorious promise.

"He will bestow On Jacob's race Peculiar grace And glory too."

Sidney Rigdon then began with the scriptural verses from Matt. 18:18-20, emphasizing the 20th verse, "Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven...." He spoke for two and one-half hours, during which he spoke of the apostasy from the primitive Church, the persecutions of the modern Saints, and the consequences of rejecting modern revelation. And at the close of his sermon he called upon the quorums to manifest, by rising, that they were willing to acknowledge Joseph Smith as a Prophet and Seer, and to uphold him as such by their prayers of faith. Each quorum, as called, arose in confirmation. Then the whole congregation was invited so to manifest. En masse the people rose in affirmation.

The stirring new hymn by W. W. Phelps was a sort of benediction to the sermon and the voting:

"Now let us rejoice in the day of salvation, No longer as strangers on earth need we roam; Good tidings are sounded for us and each nation, And shortly the hour of redemption will come; When all that was promised, the saints will be given, And none will molest them from morn until even, And earth will appear as the Garden of Eden, And Jesus will say to all Israel, Come home."

There was an intermission of twenty minutes, but all kept their seats. This spiritual feast was satisfying; one must not leave or he would miss that part which was still to come.

After the recess, the Prophet took the stand.

Would the several quorums acknowledge the Presidency as Prophets, Seers, and Revelators, and uphold them by their prayers? Again the quorums, then the congregation, covenanted to do so by rising. Would they likewise acknowledge the Twelve Apostles, who were present, as Prophets, Seers, Revelators, and special witnesses to all the nations of the earth, holding the keys of the kingdom, to unlock it, or cause it to be unlocked among them, and uphold them by their prayers? Again the sober affirmation, quorum by quorum, and then the congregation, gave added solemnity to the acknowledgement.

Would the Saints acknowledge the presidents of the Seventies, who act as the representatives of the Twelve, as Apostles and special witnesses to the nation, to assist the Twelve in opening the Gospel kingdom among all people, and would the Saints uphold them by their prayers? Again the quorums and the congregation arose in turn.

The High Councils in Kirtland and Zion were presented and accepted in like manner; likewise, the presidencies of the quorums and the bishops. The solemn moment had now arrived. Joseph Smith offered the dedicatory prayer, given to him by revelation.

With closed eyes and bowed head Brigham listened to the prayer. It was a paean of thanksgiving, a reminder of what needed to be done, a grateful expression that the Lord's house was completed, a plea that from then on the Lord's servants might go forth "armed with thy power, and that thy name may be upon them, and thy glory be round about them, and thine angels have charge over them." Brigham would remember that.

Joseph pleaded with the Lord that whosoever digged a pit for the Saints should fall into it himself, that no combination of wickedness "shall have power to rise up and prevail over thy people, upon whom thy name shall be put in this house." He asked for mercy upon the Saints and that their sins and transgressions might be forgiven. He prayed, "let thy house be filled as with a rushing mighty wind, with thy glory;" and that the house of Israel would be gathered as had been prophecied. He asked a special blessing on himself and family that they might be preserved in the hours of affliction and persecution. And he closed with a plea for the Church, that it might fill its great destiny and be finally accepted before the throne of God, to sing Hosannas to God and the Lamb.

As he finished, the stirring notes of a song of dedication were taken up by the choir:

"The Spirit of God like a fire is burning! The latter-day glory begins to come forth; The visions and blessings of old are returning, And angels are coming to visit the earth."

Chorus

"We'll sing and we'll shout with the armies of heaven- Hosannah, hosannah to God and the Lamb! Let glory to God in the highest be given, Henceforth and forever: amen and amen."

There were six more verses of the inspired song, expressive of the anticipation of the Kingdom. It was a fitting and exciting climax to an inspired prayer. A solemn vote was taken to accept the prayer of dedication and to acknowledge the house dedicated.

The ordinance of the Lord's supper was then administered to the assembled people by the Twelve. Joseph Smith bore record of his mission and of the ministration of angels. Several brethren, upon invitation, bore testimony of the truth and stated that they had seen angels present in the temple that day.

The Prophet led in the sacred shout "Hosannah, hosannah, hosannah to God and the Lamb," thrice repeated, each repetition being sealed with "Amen, amen, and amen."

Brigham arose and spoke in tongues; David Patten interpreted what Brigham had said to the people, then he himself spoke in tongues.

The conference adjourned at a little past four, having been in session since 9 a.m., except for a twenty-minute recess-seven hours of spiritual feasting.

That evening, the quorums met again for instruction and testimony. George A. Smith rose to prophesy and as he was speaking "a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing of a mighty wind, which filled the Temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and I beheld the Temple was filled with angels, which fact I declared to the congregation," so the Prophet later described the occasion.

"The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. This continued until the meeting closed at 11 p.m."

Brigham, his heart full of thanks and his spirit fed, walked home satisfied that the House had been accepted.
