S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April 1836

The development of knowledge and spiritual strength in Brigham Young during the time of the Pentecostal events at Kirtland must have been profound. Perhaps he himself could not have defined how deeply he was impressed, nor could he have foreseen to what purpose this absorbtion of such stirring events would be put. From his few observations which have come down to us concerning those days, it is safe to say that there flowed into his soul a full and satisfying testimony of the Spirit. Certainly he considered it a sacred experience, not to be worn on his coat sleeve but rather to be recalled in the watches of the night, to marvel at, to probe into, to feed upon, over and over again.

Newly printed and available now was the new book of the Doctrine and Covenants. There would be no more necessity to copy the revelations in labored longhand from the copies held by the fortunate ones, or to hoard every scrap of paper which purported to contain revelation. Now one could read, reflect, study, and absorb the eternal words which had come direct from the Lord, for Brigham had no doubt that they were direct from the Lord. He had signed the testimony of the Twelve witnessing the truth of each one. At the time of their ordination, Oliver Cowdery, in his charge to the Twelve, had mentioned that on reading the revelations anyone could testify that he had heard the voice of the Lord.

"These words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore, you shall testify they are of me and not of man; For it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them; Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words." (Doctrine and Covenants 18:34-36.)

Brigham knew that in each revelation he heard the voice of the Lord.

While some of the twelve were assigned, the fact that a few were left to their own decisions in their work is apparent in the request of Heber C. Kimball to the Prophet Joseph to instruct him as to what he should do, stay home and labor at the potter's wheel and in the Church round about, or go out on a mission. The Prophet told him he could do either one, as he himself felt he should. Heber could have stayed home; most likely he would have preferred to. Leaving Vilate with the responsibility of finding a livelihood for his family was distasteful to him. But he elected to go.

If Brigham asked what to do it is not recorded. It is quite likely, however, that he also consulted the Prophet. He would want to know the "mind and will of the Lord in his personal behalf." All he put in his personal history was a copy of the license to preach issued by the Presidency, and recorded in the county according to law. It is interesting to read it both for form and content.

"To WHOM IT MAY CONCERN

"This certifies that Brigham Young has been received into the Church of the Latter-day Saints, organized on the sixth of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and thirty, and has been ordained an Elder according to the rules and regulations of said Church, and is duly authorized to preach the Gospel, agreeably to the authority of that offiice.

"From the satisfactory evidence which we have of his good moral character, and his zeal for the cause of righteousness, and diligent desire to persuade men to forsake evil and embrace truth, we confidently recommend him to all candid and upright people as a worthy member of society.

"We, therefore, in the name, and by the authority of this Church, grant unto this our worthy brother in the Lord, this letter of commendation as a proof of our fellowship and esteem; praying for his success and prosperity in our Redeemer's cause.

"Given by the direction of a Conference of the Elders of said Church, assembled in Kirtland, Geauga county, Ohio, the third day of March, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-six.

Joseph Smith, Jun.

Chairman

Brigham's license to preach.

F. G. Williams, Clerk.

Kirtland, Ohio, March 30, 1836."

"This certifies that the within license was recorded on the 30th day of March, 1836, in Kirtland, Ohio, in the License Records, Book A, page 5

Thomas Burdick

Recording Clerk."

With the license to preach in his possession, Brigham once more arranged his affairs, did what he could for Mary Ann and the children, and with his brother, Joseph Young, started east to preach to their relatives and to others in New York, Vermont, and Massachusetts. Before leaving, however, they had an abiding and glorious experience in meetings in the temple. After a spiritual morning session at the Sunday, April 3rd meeting, the afternoon was occupied in assisting the others of the Twelve in the administration of the Sacrament to the large audience. After this, as they sat quiet, the veil separating the upper pulpit from the audience was lowered and the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery engaged in "solemn and silent prayer." Upon rising, a marvelous vision burst upon them.

The Risen Lord appeared and accepted the House.

Moses and Elias appeared and conferred upon them their keys of authority, one for the gathering of Israel and the other for the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham.

Then the Prophet Elijah appeared, in fulfillment of the declaration of Malachi, restoring the keys of the "turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest the earth be smitten with a curse."

The Prophe described the vision in solemn words, a benediction to the entire audience.

What this portended Brigham and Joseph did not then know. But they were satisfied. Elijah had come. The prophecy had been fulfilled. The application of the restored keys would be made known. Being present, in the same room during the moments when such a mighty vision was given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, was profoundly stirring. It was with a sweet taste and more firm determination that they took their way to Fairport, to Buffalo, and thence east by the line boat on the Erie Canal.
