S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Summer 1836

This second missionary journey followed along the lines previously laid out. Where there were Saints, branches had been organized, and these now needed visiting and strengthening. It was a rare thing in New York or New England to have a large branch. If there were a hundred members in a branch, it was a large one indeed. Often the organization consisted of two or three families. The most fruitful place in New York had been at the east end of Lake Ontario. Kingston, Canada, was the largest center, but members were found also across the St. Lawrence River, in the New York woods, in a number of small hamlets. The size of a branch was limited because as soon as a family was converted it was urged to emigrate to Zion or to Kirtland. Remarkably, a spirit to do so was the common experience. Nearly all of those who could liquidate their holdings did emigrate, so that in the end those who stayed did so because they had no means by which to move.

It is quite likely that the travels of the two brothers were through the hamlets of the Lake Ontario region. From there they worked their way to Vermont and into Massachusetts. Here they visited with their relatives, the Richards, the Howes, the Brighams, the Bicknells (Joseph's wife was Jane Bicknell), and other more distant cousins. Many of these accepted the Gospel at their hands. Others were stirred to investigate in their careful Yankee way. Some of these joined later.

Joseph Smith the Prophet, Hyrum Smith, and Sidney Rigdon reached Salem, Massachusetts, in early August, and here Brigham and Joseph joined them for a week.

The party of the Prophet had hired a house for a month, from which headquarters they taught the people from house to house, preaching publicly when they could persuade people to listen. They found time to study the history of the community which the Prophet described as "rich in the history of the Pilgrim fathers of New England, in Indian warfare, religious superstition, bigotry, persecution, and learned ignorance." The excursion into these realms Brigham found interesting.

But he did not tarry long. He had work to do, and so after a few days he and his brother Joseph returned to Boston and there separated, Joseph remaining there and Brigham taking a small steamer for a conference in West Central Maine at a little town called Newry. The steamer ran into a storm during the night, and being old and worn out, put into a small fishing village called Port Ann. While the storm was blowing itself out the next day, Brigham spent the time picking whortleberries. Those who have known New England will understand that these are the famous blueberries which ripen at that time of year. He said the day was pleasant. This one would expect. Given weather that is passable, blueberrying can be a gastronomic delight. Brigham was interested in the acres of drying cod "flakes," or fillets, surrounding the village, for at that time drying was the only way the fishermen could preserve their catch.

The storm over by evening, the vessel put to sea, and during the night arrived safely in Portland. From there Brigham's overland journey took him through the beautiful Maine woods via Norway to Newry, where Lyman E. Johnson was waiting. Lyman had been laboring in and around Sackville, New Brunswick. It was customary for people to come to these conferences and represent those who could not attend. Besides the local folks present, Brigham said that he represented the Saints in Boston and Rhode Island, while Lyman E. Johnson represented the branch at Sackville, New Brunswick. Thus a total of 17 branches and 317 members were "represented." From this it may be assumed that 317 was the total membership, at that moment, contained in 17 branches in the area mentioned. But it is likely that at the conference they would be fortunate if they had more than thirty present. The apostles gave good instruction during the three-day conference, and as a result baptized two people.

After the conference, Brigham returned to Boston and rejoined his brother Joseph. The latter had not been idle, for they baptized seventeen people as a result of his efforts. They made the return to Kirtland by way of Providence, Rhode Island and thence across Massachusetts, preaching where they could, staying with and encouraging members en route. Then New York state was traversed in the same manner. They walked much of the way, took stage occasionally as means were donated to them, rode the Erie Canal at times, and arrived back in Kirtland in late September. It took about a month to make the journey of roughly five hundred miles.

It takes but little imagination to picture the feelings of joyous reunion that took place in the family. Not knowing exactly when he would arrive, Mary Ann would have arisen each morning hoping that this was the day, while half-preparing, half-planning how she would welcome the returning husband. Then as night fell, and the long shadows were engulfed in the dark, she would retire in disappointment. Even though one knows that the loved one might not come, indeed most likely will not, yet hope is such that it builds the waiting one and sustains him to carry the daily load with light heart. Without hope one is lost. But always the day arrives. Mary Ann at last could see Brigham, coat over his arm, briskly swinging his strong figure up the road toward their gate. This day loneliness vanished. The family was once again united.
