S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

October 1836-July 1837

Brigham loved his family. As the demands of his new calling allowed, he always tried his best to convert his cousins, his uncles and his aunts. He had some success, but there were some of his kin who did not respond. And at no time did any of them join without careful investigation.

One of the most careful of these was Willard Richards, his first cousin. Willard had always shown an independence of spirit in family affairs. He had read a copy of the Book of Mormon and had been profoundly influenced by it. Twice reading through it, with a strong spirit of testimony accompanying the reading, convinced him that he must know more about it and the people from which it came. He commenced to arrange his affairs to visit Kirtland, when he was stricken with palsy, which laid him low for a considerable period of time. Finally he was sufficiently recovered to be able to begin his journey, and with his Brother Levi as his physician he managed to arrive in Kirtland in October of 1836. He sought out the house of Brigham and was promptly made welcome. Not only must he enter the home, but he must stay there, Brigham insisted.

Then followed nearly three months of most intense investigation. Willard was well versed in the Bible and in the tenets of the Protestants of his day. Every objection he raised was countered by Brigham; every doctrine was followed through and justified by the Bible; every error of doctrine common to the churches of the day was pointed out by Brigham, argued through, and the truth substituted in the mind of Willard. Every night that Brigham could be at home the dicussion continued. And Willard talked to others. He heard and measured the stories and arguments of the apostates. He attended the services and heard the preaching of the brethren. He gained close acquaintanceship with the new book, "The Doctrine and Covenants," having thus before his eyes the actual revelations of God and not just the "talk." And he met Joseph Smith. For his physical comfort it would have been easier for him had he been able to accept the Gospel immediately. But that was not to be. Brigham had taken a year or so to think things through. Under Brigham's influence Willard was convinced in three months. On December 30 he told Brigham he was ready for baptism.

Physical comfort was not considered. Heber C. Kimball with a few friends spent the afternoon cutting the ice on Chagrin Creek to prepare for the baptism and, once it was cleared, kept the water from freezing again. In the late afternoon as soon as a large enough place had been cleared, Brigham led his cousin into the water, and between gasps for breath pronounced the required words: "Willard Richards, having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen." Levi followed Willard into the waters of baptism. If the usual custom was followed the two men were immediately confirmed members of the Church and ordained elders.

Like Athena who sprang full grown from Zeus' head, so Willard Richards was in the work among the leaders almost overnight. His ability and sincerity were immediately recognized. He began to have responsibility almost at once. He proved to be a powerful defender on the side of right.

Meanwhile without fanfare, Brigham not even mentioning it in his history, Mary Ann gave birth to twins, Mary Ann and Brigham Junior. It was December 18, 1836 and cold. Officially Brigham was busy with the Church and Willard Richards. Privately he was exceedingly proud of Mary Ann.

Three months later the Prophet Joseph assigned Brigham Young and Willard Richards to a business mission. What the business was they did not record, but one can imagine that it had to do with the collection of tithes and temple funds from the eastern branches. It was the 13th of March, 1837 when they left. Presumably Lake Erie was not passable because of ice, for they traveled day and night by stage coach to Buffalo, by way of Erie and Dunkirk. This was one trip which Brigham described as causing great weariness of body. The roughness of the turnpike in early spring, which was accentuated by the springless coach, was something to be endured and not enjoyed. They were forced to stop at Buffalo for a day or two to rest up, after which they endured another leg to Canadaigua, where they again stopped "two nights and one day." Martin Harris lived there at the time. Brigham and Willard visited with him. It is likely that they had not had much opportunity to know this one of the three witnesses. Martin Harris was up and down in the Church; he blew hot, then cold. But in one thing he did not waver: He was firm in the statements he had made that the angel had shown him the inscribed plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, and he had truly heard the voice declare that the translation was done by the power of God. This he knew, and this he declared. Brigham no doubt pressed him for details.

After this short and warming interlude the two pressed on again day and night to Albany. At nearby Troy they transacted considerable business. Many years later Brigham mentioned a personal transaction made en route to Troy: "I purchased from a gentleman there a fine tavern establishment which was situated in Auburn directly across the street from the gates of the penetentiary, which property I still own." From this simple statement it can be believed that Brigham was industrious; to have gathered enough means to purchase a tavern meant that he had kept busy. It could also mean that he was guided by sentiment. Could this be the building on which he had commenced to learn the trade of carpenter, when he first came to Auburn? It was on the same spot.

It was a relatively short distance from Troy to West Stockbridge where Willard's parents now lived, they having left Hopkinton some years before. Getting into a few discussions with Uncle Joseph Richards was the natural thing to do while resting there, then they were off to New Haven and New York. After a few days there doing the Prophet's business, they took ship for Boston via Providence. A side trip to Lynn and Salem visiting and "transacting much business there" completed their assigned duty.

The return was overland by turnpike stage to West Stockbridge. Here Willard decided to stay for a time. But Phinehas Richards and his son George, desiring to go to Kirtland, joined Brigham in place of Willard. They crossed the remaining Berkshire Hills to Albany and took the passenger barge on the Erie Canal for Buffalo. Brigham left his cousins at Utica while he visited friends in Madison County. His cousin Hepzibah Richards was there and joined him in the journey, all of them meeting finally in Buffalo for the final stage of the journey. Since the ice was still on Lake Erie, the lake steamers were not in operation. The cousins decided that they would not attempt the rigors of the stage coach journey, but would wait for the ice to break up. Brigham, however, could not wait. Mary Ann and the children were needing him; the Prophet needed his report and accounting of this business mission, so he took the stagecoach, arriving at Kirtland the later part of May. This year the season was late, so he was in time to plant a garden. As soon as the lake was free from ice the cousins came on and were made welcome.

The arrival home was but a few days before his birthday, Thursday, June 1, 1837. Brigham was thirty-six years of age. In the prime of vigorous manhood, he could survey his accomplishments with some feeling of pride. Once more he had begun to prosper. He had some means. There was work to do. Mary Ann was a complete complement to his nature. She kept a good house, watched over his girls, little Joseph and the twins, and stood as one with him in his efforts to do all that Joseph asked in addition to his apostolic calling. As he saw it one was expected to have initiative in seeking ways to increase the work; one was expected, too, to accept invitations to do the Prophet's work.

There were other events, too. During the previous January Heber C. Kimball, with the remarkable gift of prophecy which he possessed, had said to Willard Richards that he felt impressed that he would go on a mission to European shores. "And shall I go with thee?" Willard had asked. Heber had said that he would. But as the weeks and months passed, the threats and efforts of the apostates grew to such a pitch that all of the time of the loyal brethren was taken up in countering their efforts and holding the Church together. It almost seemed that there were more apostates than good members.

On Sunday, June 4, Heber and Brigham and their families were attending services. These leaders were seated in the place usually occupied by the Twelve, above the sacrament table at the Melchizedek Priesthood end of the temple. Joseph the Prophet came to Heber and, speaking in a low tone, said that the Spirit of the Lord whispered to him to "Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my gospel and open the door of salvation to that nation." Even though he had received the premonition five months earlier, Heber was surprised and overwhelmed. His first thought was that he could not do the work, that he had not the ability. To whom could he go? Where should he start? How would he begin? How could he get there in the first place? Who would take care of Vilate and the children? Who would fill the gap in the ranks? The Church needed every valiant defender.

One cannot imagine the consternation this whispered call raised in Heber's bosom. But he knew also that Joseph was an inspired prophet, and soon he left the warming influence of the Spirit confirming the truth and rightness of it. He became calm, but still he felt incompetent to fill the requirement of such a vast proposition. In view of the importance and magnitude of the mission he would feel better if he could take his close friend and associate with him, one he could trust absolutely, whose integrity was without question, whose zeal was unwavering. Could he take Brigham Young with him? The Prophet did not hesitate: No, he could not. Brigham should remain at home where there was other work for him to do. Each one accepted the decision without argument and without rancor. The Prophet had spoken: Heber was to go; Brigham was to stay. So be it.

Apostasy is not quite like disagreement. Men disagree. At every political election men argue and get angry, accuse and counter, but the feelings are forgotten as soon as election day is over. Not with apostasy. Often the apostate is not satisfied merely to disagree. His anger, resentment, and hate rise until finally he burns to see that which he hates destroyed, killed, wiped out. He may not have courage to perform violent acts alone, so in company with others who are feeding on the same hate he develops mob spirit which, once loosed, kills and destroys all in its path.

This spirit was in Kirtland. It was fostered and fomented by the men who should have known better. John Boynton and Warren Parrish were particularly heinous, for they were among the leaders, Boynton being a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Parrish was a Seventy and the close, trusted friend and assistant of the Prophet. Both were traitors. They had the gall to hold their meetings of hate and conspiracy in the sacred temple, in open opposition to the spirit which should reign in such a holy place, where they openly breathed their threats. And they influenced other members of the Twelve. Orson Hyde was swayed by their stories, but when he heard that Heber C. Kimball was going to England he became repentant and confessed all that he had done to conspire to overthrow the Prophet. He pleaded to be accepted as a missionary to accompany Heber. The Prophet forgave him, accepted him, and appointed him to go. Orson Hyde had strength. He needed guidance, but when given direction he was a powerful determined agent in completing a task once he had made up his mind.

The remainder of the missionary force for England was composed of a Canadian imigrant from England, Joseph Fielding, and John Goodson, Isaac Russell, and John Snyder, who joined the others on the way via Canada. These men wanted to take the Gospel to their relatives in England.

As soon as the mission was announced all hell seemed to break loose in Kirtland. Heber was taunted and threatened. John Boynton said to him, "If you are such a fool as to go at the call of the fallen Prophet Joseph Smith, I will not help you a dime, and if you are cast upon Van Diemans Island I will not make one effort to help you." Lyman E. Johnson, another members of the Quorum, said to him, "I don't want you to go on your mission, but if you are determined to go I shall help you all I can." With that he took off his cloak and laid it over Heber's shoulders. It was the first cloak Heber had ever owned. Others of the Twelve encouraged him. Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith, Senior, the Prophet's father, Newel K. Whitney, and his loyal friend Brigham continually blessed him and Brigham prophesied constantly that if he would go he would prosper beyond his fondest expectations. Heber was determined to go, but the loyalty of his friends was comforting and gave him renewed and added courage.

We make no attempt to intrude on the family as he blessed each one of them, beginning with Vilate, nor on the tears and sobs of parting. A lesser woman than Vilate would have quailed at the thought of being left alone with no support and a family. A lesser man would have refused to go, feeling that such a call was an imposition. These were not lesser people. She prepared to send him away, smiling, while comforting her brood, and hiding her own fear all the while.

The day before the time for departure Willard Richards arrived from an eastern trip which he had taken on business for himself and Brigham. Here is an entry from Heber C. Kimball's diary:

"June 12: Elder Willard Richards arrived from his mission yesterday. I met him on the street today and told him I was now ready to fulfill my engagement with him. I told him I started for England tomorrow and wanted him to go with me. Considering himself involved in business with Brother Brigham he did not believe he could go, but upon consulting with President Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon, and Brother Brigham agreeing to take charge of his business responsibilities, he was set apart at 6 p.m. by Brother Hyrum and Sidney to accompany the mission to England."

And thus was the company completed. On June 13 they left Kirtland and journeyed to Fairport, twelve miles away. Several friends accompanied them that far and watched as they boarded the lake steamer. Mary Fielding gave him $5 with which he paid his and Orson Hyde's fare to Buffalo. As night fell, Vilate returned to Kirtland to take charge of her children, and Brigham entered his house more lonely than he had felt in many a year. He had not realized how difficult that final handshake and embrace at the Fairport dock would be.
