S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

June-September 1837

There was not much time to brood about the gap left in the ranks by the departure of Heber C. Kimball. Albert P. Rockwood, whom Brigham called his cousin (they were distant relatives-kinfolk) arrived in Kirtland. Like Willard Richards, he had learned of the Gospel a year earlier and had experienced the unrest caused by the certain whispering of the Spirit that here was the truth. Now he wanted to see for himself. There was plenty to see. The Church, torn asunder by the gales of bitter attack, of disloyalty and hate, seemed about to flounder in the sea of apostasy. Certain it was that the most noise was being made by the apostates. The loyal members were on the defensive. They could not move fast enough to meet and counter the rumors and accusations of the evil men engaged in the attack. Lies and accusations have a way of multiplying. People love gossip, and the bigger the lie the more the tongue fondles it, caresses it, feeds it, enlarges it. A. P. Rockwood heard plenty. Through it all he could see the dross, while he listened to the still small voice whisper to him that Joseph was indeed the prophet he claimed to be. On July 25 Brigham baptized him. Added strength came as a result. A. P. Rockwood was a strong man.

Now occurred an incident which Brigham could not forbear talking about later. Called to accompany Joseph Smith, Hyrum his brother, David W. Patten, Sidney Rigdon and Thomas B. Marsh on a mission to the east, Brigham was joined by A. P. Rockwood. (A mission has various purposes. Today, to go on a mission means normally to go with the purpose of proselyting, but in that day it meant any trip or errand having to do with the business of the Church.) They were jarred from their peaceful and pleasant conversation as they passed through Painsville. Enemies, apparently told in advance about this journey, were lying in wait for them.

Brigham said, telling of the adventure later:

"When we arrived at Painesville, the Prophet was arrested by an officer for some pretended debt. Joseph immediately entered into trial before the court, which found no cause of action. After his release he was again arrested and brought before the court, when he was again dismissed. He was arrested the third time, and on examination was held over to trial. Brother Anson Call, who had lately joined the Church, stepped forward and proffered to become his bail.

"The Sheriff, who was personally acquainted with Anson Call, took him to one side and advised him strongly against being bail for the Prophet, asserting the Prophet would be sure to abscond, and he would lose his farm; but Brother Call willingly became his bail. On being released he was arrested a fourth time, for a debt of a few dollars, which was paid forthwith, and the fifth time he was arrested, which cause was soon disposed of, and he concluded to return to Kirtland for the night. As he got into his buggy, an officer also jumped in, and catching the lines with one hand, put his other hand on Joseph's shoulder and said, 'Mr. Smith, you are my prisoner.'

"Joseph inquired what was the cause of action. The officer informed him that a gentleman, a few months previous, had left a stove with him, for the price of which he was sued. Brother Joseph replied, 'I never wished to purchase the stove, but the gentleman insisted on putting it up in my house, saying it would bring him custom.' Joseph left his watch and other property in security, and we returned home to Kirtland.

"Next day we started again, and travelled by land as far as Ashtabula, shunning Painesville and other places where we suspected our enemies were laying in wait to annoy Joseph. We tarried in Ashtabula through the day, wandering over the bluffs, through the woods and on the beach of the lake, bathing ourselves in her beautiful waters, until evening, when a steamboat arrived from the west. We went on board and took passage for Buffalo."

As night fell they retired for rest. In Brigham's words:

"I gave the Prophet my valise for a pillow, and I took his boots for mine, and we all lay down on the deck of the vessel for the night."

Ever it has been the joy of loyal men to minister to the comfort of the Prophet of the Lord. It was so in that day; it is so today. Brigham was filled with satisfaction to be able to give the Prophet that much more comfort as he slept. Certainly an 1830-style traveling bag was softer than a pair of boots. And wise prophets accept a certain amount of this loving attention. Love is fed by acceptance as well as by giving. Few there are who can accept constant attention graciously and not become vain over the attention. Joseph Smith had no guile and knew that the spirit prompting the attention was right; that satisfaction came to the giver. Brigham gave and was satisfied and happy; Joseph was glad to accept. Thus great and good men feed their love.

At Buffalo they separated, Joseph and the other brethren proceeding to Canada, while Brigham and A. P. Rockwood "took the cars" to Lockport, then the "line boat" on the Erie Canal. Brigham's business took him to Auburn, Albany-with a quick side trip to West Stockbridge, Massachusetts, to visit Uncle Joseph Richards-then back to Albany and by steamer to New York.

Here he sought out Parley P. Pratt and found him preaching on board a schooner at the foot of Canal Street. He stayed in the city long enough to hold three meetings. He ordained A. P. Rockwood an Elder, and predicted at the same time that the Rockwood family should all be gathered into the kingdom, and that there would be a branch established at Holliston, Massachusetts (the Rockwood home town), and he set apart Brother Rockwood to preside over the branch when it should be established. Then he started for home.

By August 18, he had arrived in Buffalo, where he took steamer for Fairport. When the vessel was about three-fourths of a mile out, a woman fell from the stern into the water. A small boat was launched to search for her. The mate, seeing her about ten feet under water, dived. He was gone about a minute, then surfaced with her, holding her by the back of the neck at arm's length so that she could not grasp him. She was quickly pulled into the boat and was soon able to speak. The passengers took up a purse of $60 as a reward for the mate for saving her life. Brigham's comment was, "Here I learned something I did not know before, that the motion of the water caused by the paddles will keep a person from sinking." Whether this is true or not we have no way of proving in this day of screw propellers.

The next day Brigham was home once more. It was a good thing. He was needed, and needed badly.
