S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Late Summer and Early Fall 1837

It was good to be home. If ever a time of year brings emotional delight, the months of September and October are that time. Indian summer covers the land. The soft morning and evening haze seems to say to the quiet fields, "Rest. You have produced; now lie back and relax in the luxury of the production." As though to celebrate the victory over adverse forces, Nature outdoes herself in decorating the countryside with vivid color. Crowning the glory of the Kirtland hills, the Temple could be seen for miles around. Storm is minimal in the area during this season, and what little there is of rain is more caressing than violent.

In all this beauty of the physical world, Brigham set forth again to earn a living for the family. He sharpened up his tools and shook the dust out of his paint brushes. He was not long in finding work. Kirtland was booming with a building splurge the like of which was not to be seen anywhere nearby. The gathering of converted people, some of whom had the means to build, inspired the inflation. It also increased the demand for lots on which to build. Prices mounted sharply, and the more grasping individuals seeing opportunity to become wealthy, speculated on the demand. Many, holding land purchased on promissory notes and valued at $100 per lot, discovered that some would pay $1000 per lot, also on promissory notes, with little down. Paper profits were enormous, and so long as the demand held, the promissory notes were negotiable. Sharp financing became the rule; the members of the Church indulged in the practice, forgetting their duty to their brethren and preying upon them like wolves on the sheep fold. The worst thing about it was that a few of the Church leaders, two or three of them apostles and two seventies, were engaged in this activity, Brigham learned. The Prophet had rebuked them and they turned against him. Rumors were started accusing Joseph of taking advantage, of drunkenness, of adultery, of being a fallen prophet. Whereas when Brigham had departed the previous spring the spirit of joyous Pentecost was on the people and the warmth and glow of the spiritual feasting was in the heart, here now he found the spirit fled and contention and bitterness in its place.

"Did you hear that (whispered) sold that corner lot for a thousand dollars?"

"Why he paid only $100 for it, the rascal."

"I know where you can get a piece of land for $800 per acre, and you can divide it into ten lots at $800 per lot-a cool profit of 900%. You can buy it for $300 down and give your note for the remainder; you can sell it to these incoming Saints. They mean to have places; they have some cash and you can take their notes. As they pay you, you pay your note, and keep the profit." Such siren songs were sung into folks' ears by many prominent men. Certainly, they knew where to get land; they had bought for $100 on notes, and sold for $800. Very little hard cash changed hands, but the gullible thought Utopia had come.

Brigham heard the talk and the complaints as he worked. Newly arrived members could not buy at the inflated prices; others with small means obtained from the sale of their lands before migrating to Kirtland were caught in the excitement of the speculation, and instead of investing what they had in what they could afford they invested their assets in speculative ventures.

Brigham heard, too, of leading men who callously took the money of these folks on promise to deliver deeds to land and who gave false deeds, or no deeds at all, and his anger rose. He denounced such dishonest acts, and he named names. But above all he was most indignant when he heard Joseph Smith named as the author of the chicanery and fraud.

Those who lost the spirit of the Gospel pointed sneering fingers at those who still contributed to the fund for the temple or attended the meetings held there. They began to call the Prophet "Joe Smith" in derisive disrespect, imitating the most active nonmembers in the surrounding territory. There began to be talk of physical violence on the Prophet's person. Supposedly loyal leaders held clandestine meetings where means of deposing the Prophet were discussed, the discussions building up more bitterness and hatred. One needs but to feel even a small slight, and nursing it to his bosom he can soon have a bitter fire burning in his heart. Hearing others breathing forth their hate, he is fired to greater indignation and hate.

Brigham nailed nails and sawed lumber and held steady. Every time he heard someone revile the Prophet he rebuked him with outspoken vehemence. He did not have time to investigate the stories. He was earning his honest living by doing honest work for honest pay. And, further, he knew Joseph Smith. The Prophet could no more take advantage of the people than the Genesee River could run up hill. His whole life was dedicated to their service and to their heavenly salvation. Had he not endured more than most in persecution and reviling? Had he not taught the Saints honor and honesty? Was he not fearless in rebuke, correcting the strongest as readily as the weak? Was he not the first to forgive sin upon repentance, restoring men to their standing as though no deviation had taken place? Was not his house open to the sick and to the hungry? Brigham's advice was that the critics had better think twice. They stood or fell with Joseph; he held the mantle of authority; he was the Prophet of God.

Brigham knew his man, and he defended the good name and the prophetic calling of Joseph Smith. There were others who stood firm also. His devoted friend, Heber C. Kimball, was equally strong but he was now in England. The Prophet's brothers and father were busy in his defence. This little core of loyal devoted people, and others of the Twelve who were apparently less outspoken than Brigham but still dependable, were alert to circumvent the plans of the wicked.

All that summer and fall men were being tested by events. The loyal formed a group intent on protecting the Prophet from physical harm. The haters joined conspiracies to do damage to his person, and at worst to kill him. Those who sympathized with the apostates but were too timid to say so stood by, hoping that these evil men would succeed in their machinations.

The main cause of public trouble centered about the Kirtland Safety Society. This was a banking effort designed to protect the poor Saints from speculation and from those intent on taking away what means they had, but the men who operated it became disaffected through sin and chicanery and used it for evil purposes. A close associate, friend and secretary of the Prophet brought the establishment into disrepute through sin and dishonesty, but he was abetted by others. He later admitted that he had embezzled $20,000 of the Society's funds. With thievery and deception in the saddle the bank could not have succeeded in good times. But as the nationwide financial landslide of 1837 added to the troubles caused by the crooked dealings of the Society's managers and others, the crisis became too great. The Society dosed its doors.

The result was that the honest leaders of the community who had subscribed stock, guaranteeing the notes of the Society, were forced to meet demands of those holding notes to the extent of their stock holdings. One man, John Tanner, who arrived in Kirtland well-to-do by the standards of the day, gave everything he owned to meet the demands. When he left Kirtland for Missouri in the fall of 1837, he did not have enough to equip a decent team for travel. Others suffered similarly.

This is not an attempt to explain the causes back of the apostasy and disloyalty. It had beginnings in the acts of men who had lost or were losing faith. These acts were many and varied. One man who became most bitter and violent had been caught in acts of infidelity to his wife. The spirit of liars and murderers is akin to that of adultery. This man used the Kirtland Safety Society as a means to throw discredit on the Church and the Prophet.

As tension rose and a murderous spirit developed, Brigham became more alert to try to circumvent it. He mentions one incident. He learned that an attempt was to be made to kill the Prophet at a selected spot as the stagecoach in which he was riding was returning to Kirtland. Brigham promptly procured a horse and buggy and took William Smith with him to meet the Prophet. They met the coach and stopped it. Brigham explained the situation to Joseph. It was agreed that Joseph would return to Kirtland with Brigham in the buggy while William Smith would take Joseph's place in the coach. Once the Prophet was with him, Brigham drove the home and buggy to Kirtland by using back roads through the woods. They arrived safely. Brigham did not record who the conspirators were, but he was able to defeat their purposes.

One would expect a man as astute as Brigham to leave no stone unturned to discover the plans of the enemy. He could keep his own counsel. He heard rumors, he learned of meetings held; but unlike some fearful ones frightened by the threats of the apostates, who neither helped nor hindered, he was publicly vigorous in his efforts to counter the apostasy.

In addition, there were outside influences which had to be countered or controlled. Some of these were humorous to Brigham, though annoying; others downright dangerous. One has already been mentioned-a meeting of leading citizens discussing how they might get rid of the Prophet by tar and feathers. Brigham breaks his own taciturnity long enough to tell of one circumstance which, while annoying, had the humorous touch in the telling. Let him tell it:

"A man named Hawley, while plowing his field in the State of New York, had an impression rest down on his mind, with great weight, that he must go to Kirtland and tell Joseph Smith that the Lord had rejected him as a Prophet. He accordingly started right off, with his bare feet, and, on arriving in Kirtlnad, told Joseph that the Lord had rejected him for allowing John Noah, a Prophet of God, to be cut off from the Church, and for allowing the women to wear caps and the men to wear cushions on their coat sleeves. He was called up before the Bishop's court and disfellowshipped.

"He went through the streets of Kirtland one morning, after midnight, and cried, 'Woe! woe! unto the inhabitants of this place.' I put my pants and shoes on, took my cowhide, went out, and laying hold of him, jerked him around, and assured him that if he did not stop his noise and let the people enjoy their sleep without interruption, I would cowhide him on the spot, for we had the Lord's Prophet right here, and we did not want the Devil's prophet yelling round the streets. The nuisance was forthwith abated."

As events developed during that time of crisis, with move and counter move, the apostates grew bolder and bolder. At some time during this period the apostates Boynton, Parrish, and their gathered cohorts of like mind held a meeting in the Temple. The meeting was called, apparently publicly, with the avowed intention of making plans to depose Joseph Smith and install David Whitmer as the Church President. This act, alone, indicates the fact that they felt quite sure they had enough sentiment backing them to brave the rebuke of the Prophet for desecrating the Temple with such a meeting. The fact that Brigham, Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith and others were present means that the apostates were all the more sure, felt that they could sway the uncommitted and successfully complete their intentions. Otherwise the faithful would have been barred.

As the meeting went forward the point was reached at which Brigham felt he must speak. He arose and demanded the floor, then in a plain and forceful manner "he told them that Joseph was a Prophet and he knew it. They might rail and slander as much as they pleased, they could not destroy the appointment of the Prophet of God. They could only destroy their own authority, cut the thread that bound them to the Prophet and to God, and sink themselves into Hell." Many present were enraged at this determined and pointed opposition to their plans and one especially, Jacob Bump (an old pugilist, a person who had worked hard on the Temple construction), was so exasperated that he could not be still. Some of the brethren near him put their hands on him and requested him to be quiet. He writhed and twisted and kept shouting, "How can I keep my hands off that man." Brigham told him that if he thought it would give him any relief he might lay them on. Bump did not accept the offer. Others besides Brigham stated their certainty that Joseph was not fallen, that he was a Prophet, that the Lord favored him. Joseph Smith, Senior, spoke, defending his son. Joseph's defenders branded the derogatory stories about him for the lies they were.

The result was that the group of the rebellious could not get enough of those who wavered to solidify their feeling into a view point. Without these wavering ones they could not command a majority and the meeting therefore broke up without any agreed decision to take any action. More than anything, it threw the opposition off balance. It didn't change their determination to destroy the Prophet, but it caused them to retreat temporarily to regroup their forces and to try to persuade the temporizing not to vascillate, but to "screw their courage to the sticking point." Thus always do the forces of darkness work. But they did one thing more; they added the name of Brigham Young to their list of those to get rid of in their proposed destruction of Joseph Smith. The meeting had brought into the open the avowed enemies of the Prophet. It was clear now which of the Twelve Apostles, which of the Seventies, which of the Elders were the ring leaders. Steps could now be taken to counter them and relieve them of their authority in the Church.
