S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Early Fall 1837-January 1835

There was to be a conference, the purpose of which was to "reorganize the Church," that is, to present its officers for the sustaining vote for another period. (It has been the custom for all Church officers to be "sustained" every six months, in the fall and in the spring.) Brigham sensed that if there was an organized effort in opposition to the Prophet, a refusal to sustain him, it might well come from the opposition at this impending conference.

No firm effort had been made to call the apostates to account. Apparently the Prophet was hard put to it to believe that these people, many of them his tried friends, could turn against him and the Church. In any event he was long-suffering and willing to forgive, given the slightest sign of repentance. Brigham rightly was concerned. But he figured out a method to render any opposition harmless. It was a simple plan. He went to those who he knew could be trusted and asked them to occupy the stand and the prominent seats in the audience. They accordingly came early and were arranged and in order, so that when the recalcitrants arrived, no large group of them could sit as a body. The fact that the strategic seats were already occupied was disconcerting to them. With the loyal men sitting in the prominent places where their votes could be easily seen, acts of determined loyalty would influence the vacillating.

When the time came to vote, the Prophet was sustained. Not a voice was lifted against him. And before the voting was finished Brigham had objected "plainly and firmly" to the sustaining of John F. Boynton unless he repented. On this occasion he showed his quality of sustained determination to see right triumph. Boynton, his fellow member of the Council of the Twelve, was the arch conspirator, and Brigham faced him with clear and simple proof of his activity, demanding that Boynton and the others also who were with him be tried for their Church membership unless they repented.

He summed it up this way: "Joseph and his first counselor were received (sustained), F. G. Williams was laid over, not being present. The members of the Twelve in good standing were received, and the authorities generally. We were also able to disfellowship those of the Twelve and others seeking to bring disunion and destruction upon the Church. The apostates and disaffected, not being united, were compelled to endure the chagrin of witnessing the accomplishing of the will of God and his Prophet."

Thus Brigham dismissed the incident. What actually happened was that when the name of John F. Boynton was presented, Brigham rose to his feet, accused the man of his evil deeds, stated evidence supporting his accusation, and demanded that Boynton be disfellowshipped unless he repented. The same applied to Lyman and Luke Johnson and Warren Parrish and others. Boynton spent sometime justifying his acts, basing them on what he considered the fraudulent use of the Kirtland Safety Society. He stated that the Prophet had said the banking organization could not fail, for it had the inspired backing of the Lord. Joseph told Boynton and the audience that what he had said was that unless the Society was operated under righteous principles it would fall. He had withdrawn his support from it some time before its demise, when those operating it resorted to chicanery in its operations. Those Brigham accused then said that they were sorry and repented. The congregation accepted them and they were forgiven.

That the action of September 3 was Brigham's idea, and that he carried it out without consultation with the Presidency, is made evident by the statement of Sidney Rigdon in the Sunday meeting of September 10. Sidney, in that meeting, "reproved some for the conjectures they had respecting President Smith and himself conniving together to remove certain individuals from office, or to use their influence to do so . . . not one word had passed between them on the subject, neither had he a premeditated thought upon the subject." To show final approval of the acceptance of the forgiven men, Lyman Johnson, Luke Johnson, and John F. Boynton administered the Lord's supper to the assembly. This act of sacred significance was an important sign of both repentance and acceptance.

Brigham's act was simple logic. He had the right to circumvent the evil opposition. He was an apostle. To watch over the Church was his duty. Why worry the Prophet with it? Joseph had enough to worry him without being irritated by curs snapping at his heels. Brigham could and would take care of the nuisance, and in his own way. The nuisance was accordingly abated.

That the Boynton and the Johnsons' act of administration of the Lord's Supper on September 10 was one of hypocrisy was soon evident. Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon left for Missouri on a hurried trip to stem apostasy there and to correct some evils of administration. With them out of the way momentarily, Boynton, Lyman E. Johnson, his brother Luke S., Warren Parrish, and Joseph Coe made a bold move. They "publicly and officially renounced the Church, claiming to be of the 'old standard,' calling themselves the Church of Christ, excluded the word 'Saints,' denied and set at naught the Prophet and his supporters as heretics."

They then turned their fury and anger upon Brigham, who continued "publicly and privately" to proclaim that Joseph was the Prophet and was the true leader. Brigham stood firm and was such a block to their efforts that they began to conspire to destroy him. The Prophet and Sidney Rigdon returned about December 7 and were shocked to learn of the turn of affairs. The mounting fury of the angered apostates more than ever turned on Brigham for his frustrating efforts to hold the people firm.

On December 22, after consultation with the Prophet, Brigham became convinced that his life was in danger. He made hasty arrangements with Mary Ann about what to do for the children, kissed the year-old twins, and caressed his little girls and Joseph. Consigning his family to the mercy of God he then mounted a horse and fled the town. He traveled toward Missouri-Zion-finally reaching Dublin, Indiana. There he found his brother Lorenzo and Isaac Decker and their families who were temporarily settled and were resting before continuing to Zion. For the time being he joined them.

And now the fury of the mob descended on Mary Ann. For some reason they did not do her physical harm, but they threatened and persecuted her. Mobs of men frequently came to the house at all hours, searching, they said, for Brigham. Forcing their way in they would enter all the rooms, ransack closets and other possible hiding places, force open locked doors, all the time cursing her and threatening the lives of herself and children if she did not tell them where he was. She did not know where he was, and she would not have told them had she known. The constant strain of this fearsome experience was too much for her and she became desperately ill. No record is left of how she managed to feed the children or obtain food during that period. One can guess that Vilate Kimball, herself alone with her children, and other loyal women nursed her, kept the house warm and fed the children.

Twenty days later after Brigham's departure the apostates turned on Joseph and Sidney. Forewarned by a few hours, these two men saddled horses and fled at ten o'clock at night, having quickly made arrangements for their families to follow them in wagons. They rode to the haven of loyal brethren in Norton township, sixty miles away, traveling all the night and early next day. It was two days later that their families joined them there. Then they began the slow march across the wintry hills of Ohio, through Dayton and Eaton, to Dublin, Indiana.

Why did not the loyal men who helped the families of Joseph and Sidney to leave include Mary Ann in the company? It is most likely that they tried, but that she could not go. No doubt she was too ill.
