S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

January 1838

Let us pause to consider winter travel. In our day we have hard-surfaced highways which are cleared within a reasonable time after a snowstorm by great scraper-plows driven by powerful engines. If snow is deeper than six inches, or if it drifts to more than that amount deep, all traffic stops until the roads are "plowed out." As late as 1924 such highways became snowpacked to depths of eight to ten inches or more. A thaw would permit the whirling wheels to dig ruts clear down to the pavement, after which, at night, freezing would make it impossible to alter them. Once in the ruts, a car could not get out of them unless the driver, with pick or ice ax broke the walls of both ruts so that the front wheels could turn out of the track. When two cars travelling in opposite directions in the same set of ruts met each other, unless at least one of the drivers had remembered ax, shovels, and pick, the two cars on the road just sat there until someone came along with these implements. There were not two lanes of traffic on the road-just one. That was 1924.

In 1838 there were turnpike roads-graveled, sometimes macadamized, rutted, and full of chuckholes. These roads were narrow, barely wide enough to allow two vehicles to pass, being actually wide enough for only one wagon to travel in safety and comfort-on the crown of the road. Side roads were still merely wagon marks through the woods and countryside, passable or impassable according to the amount of rain or snow which had fallen.

Winter travel was easiest by sleigh, but in Ohio, Indiana and other mid-west states, as often as not what started out to be good sleighing ended up as grinding through mud and gravel. Horses soon became exhausted ("gave out," as people said) dragging bob sleds on raw earth. So if a person were going a long distance in middle or southern Ohio and Indiana, Illinois or Missouri, if he expected to arrive he used a wagon. There were other means, but those without ready cash could not hire stage coach, go by canal (usually frozen in winter) or take a river boat (often this means being curtailed by ice in the channel).

Let us place Brigham Young and Joseph Smith in their proper setting. Brigham traveled by horseback to Dublin, Indiana. He could travel quite rapidly, being alone. He must have stopped for the night with Church members along the way, occasionally using a tavern. He had to care for his horse, seeing that it had proper food and shelter from the cold. Brigham stopped at Dublin because his brother Lorenzo had made that town a resting place on his way to Zion. Lorenzo lived in a small rented house. Isaac Decker and his family and a number of other members were there also.

Sixty miles from Kirtland the families of Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon and George W. Robinson arrived in wagons and joined their men folk. The travel of this party was slower and more difficult. Care and shelter at night now had to be provided for women and children and teams of homes. Joseph wrote that the weather was cold. But by the twentieth day they were in Dublin, finding Brigham and the others there. En route Joseph and Sidney had been followed for about two-hundred miles by men intent on killing them. Their escape was truly miraculous, for on one occasion they were actually in the same room, presumably in a tavern, with the would-be killers but were not recognized. Another time they met the pursuers on the street with the same result. Several times they were hidden in houses when the hunters searched in them, and one night were in a room adjoining one occupied by their pursuers from which, through the partition, they could hear the threats and imprecations of the determined murderers. There were times when they were hidden in their wagons while women were driving. The searchers did not find them. Such escapes were impossible without a miraculous blinding of the eyes of those bent on killing them.

The meeting at Dublin of all of the people mentioned seems on the surface, to have been one of those incidents which just happened. But Lorenzo Dow Young tells how he happened to be at that spot. During the fall, Lorenzo sold out his holdings at Kirtland and with his family and that of Isaac Decker started for Far West, Missouri. At Dublin, Indiana, Lorenzo's wife was taken too ill to travel farther, and as winter was upon them they stopped there until she recovered. There is little doubt that Lorenzo wrote to his brother Brigham telling him of his location and his circumstances. It is quite likely, too, that Brigham knew that it was but a matter of time before he would similarly move west with his family.

In the latter part of December, Lorenzo hitched up his team and started on the back track, hoping to meet and help any stranded Saints who might be having trouble. On the road he met Brigham, whose plans had been disjointed by the threat on his life. Lorenzo returned to Dublin with Brigham, where the two brothers discussed what was the best thing to do. Lorenzo was ready to move west, but Brigham told him that Joseph Smith would be along in a few days and proposed that they all wait for him and then all go on together. To this Lorenzo readily agreed. It might be asked why Brigham did not wait for Mary Ann and have her come on and meet him there. It can be conjectured that they had not been ready to move and had not sold their property. The violence of the mob forced Brigham to leave sooner than planned, and quite likely, Mary Ann had to stay anyhow and dispose of the property before she left. They could have had no idea that the mob, formerly friends and neighbors, would treat her as they did. But this is conjecture. No word comes down to us, except that their position demanded the action taken.

Immediately upon his arrival in Dublin Joseph Smith faced the problem of care of his family and teams. He tried to obtain work of the only kind available in the community, cutting and sawing cordword. Pay for this labor must have been extremely low in that day. That same winter out in Illinois, at Springfield, Abraham Lincoln paid fifty cents for a cord of wood. It could not have been worth as much in Dublin, a town of extremely small size.

Here the Prophet startled Brigham with a proposition which gave birth to a new relationship and new thoughts.

"Brother Brigham," he said, "I am destitute of means to pursue my journey, and as you are one of the Twelve Apostles who hold the keys of the kingdom in all the world, I believe I shall throw myself upon you, and look to you for counsel in this case." At first Brigham could hardly believe his ears; then the new thought was born. This was right. The Prophet was conferring on him the right to receive inspiration in order to advise him. It was a clear example of a principle: A prophet may delegate others to advise him. Brigham asked the Prophet if he was in earnest and was assured that indeed he was.

Brigham promptly said, "If you will take my counsel, it will be that you rest yourself, and be assured, brother Joseph, that you shall have plenty of money to pursue your journey." A brother Tomlinson had, previous to this time, asked Brigham for counsel as to the sale of his tavern stand. He had been counseled that if he would do right and obey counsel he would have an opportunity to sell soon and that the first offer he would get would be the best.

A few days later Brother Tomlinson told Brigham that he had an offer for his tavern. He was asked what offer he had. He stated he had been offered $500 in cash, a team of horses, and $250 in store goods. Brigham told him that the hand of the Lord was in it to deliver President Smith from his present necessity. The good man went to Joseph and gave him $300 to pursue his journey. We do not moralize on the incident. Brigham told of it; Joseph confirmed his story.

Taking up their slow, laborious journey once more they reached the Mississippi at Quincy, Illinois in February. Getting across posed a problem. The ice had broken up on the river and then had frozen again leaving piled up floes, a rough and difficult obstacle. Joseph and Brigham went to the river and examined the ice. It looked firm, and proved to be so. The problem was how to cross the thin ice near the shore to the solid ice where it had formed a jam. Brigham's practical eye soon found a way. An old scow was anchored to the shore, its stern shorebound. By placing a few planks from the river end of the scow to the firm ice farther out they could drag the wagons by hand through the scow, over the planks onto the solid ice. They would lead the horses by the same route. The plan worked. Once on the ice, the horses were hitched to ropes some distance from the wagons to distribute the load, and in this way they dragged the wagons across the ice to the far shore. Three hours later Isaac Decker followed in the tracks of the other brethren. He was almost too late, but by nimble moving and scattering of people and load, he managed to reach the Missouri shore just as the ice broke and moved downstream. All were safely across.

Brigham mentioned one final incident on the way from the Mississippi: "One day while crossing a large Prairie, six or eight miles from any house, we crossed a small stream. The ground was frozen deep on each side, and we sprung one of the axle trees of Brother Barnard's carriage. Brother Barnard said we couldn't travel with it any farther. Brother Joseph looked at it and said, 'I can spring that axle tree back so that we can go on our journey.' Brother Barnard replied, "I am a blacksmith and used to work in all kinds of iron, and that axle tree is bent so far around that to undertake to straighten it would only break it.' Brother Joseph said, 'I'll try it.' He got a pry and we sprung it back into place, and it didn't trouble us any more until we arrived at Far West March 14, 1838." No one needed to teach Brother Barnard the lesson. Seeing the axle sprung into position he "concluded that he would never say again that a thing could not be done when a prophet said it could."

A welcoming delegation with a more comfortable carriage for the Smith family met them about 120 miles from Far West with assistance and money. They were escorted to Far West and made welcome among the Saints.

Brigham wasted no time. He procured land on Mill Creek, proceeded to fence it, get in a crop and build a small cabin. The Prophet instructed him to give priority to his efforts for his family, based on a revelation directed to Brigham:

"April 17," he said, "I also received the following:

"Verily thus saith the Lord, let my servant Brigham Young go unto the place he has bought on Mill Creek and there provide for his family until an effectual door is opened for the support of his family, until I shall command him to go hence, and not leave his family until they are provided for."

Brigham sent for Mary Ann, who was by now better but very weak. She liquidated what she could of the family assets and set out with the children, being taken by wagon to Wellsville on the Ohio, and from there by river steamer to Richmond, Missouri. Brigham hardly recognized her when he met her, being greatly shocked by her appearance. "You look as though you were almost in your grave," he said, and she was. She suffered a relapse as soon as she was safely on the new farm, remaining desperately ill during the summer and fall. Though coming close to death she rallied and began to recover. Brigham gave praise and credit to the Lord.

FAR WEST

You talk to me of Civil rights! Have you heard of Far West?

Men and women and Children Clinging to one another, Banding together for Safety.

There's safety In numbers.

They hoped there Would be.

But if-when Evil men control The law, what Then? When judges laugh at Murder. Who can know Where safety Is?

When mobs become the Instruments of State, when Lawless men Control The State,

There is no hope in Redress from the Law.
