S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

The Stage is Set

Far West was originally chosen as a townsite, the center of the area to which the Saints would "gather." It was land not yet settled. No one claimed special rights to it. There were no "old settlers" to build up mobs to drive the Saints out. Far West was established in 1836 with the idea that the Saints would eventually move still farther north in order to have enough room to build a Zion, a place of refuge and rest. This idea of further movement was dropped when the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon had decided that there was enough land-unsettled land-at Far West for a gathering place to strengthen the Saints and build a Zion, a place of peace and refuge. So the people stayed. They petitioned the state that a county be organized. In response Far West became the center of Caldwell County, in Northwest Missouri. The stage was set.

Scene I

Some of the brethren dose to the Prophet engaged in land speculation at the expense of the immigrating members from the east. John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were the leaders in this. These men usurped authority, arrogated to themselves powers they did not possess, and finally were excommunicated. The two last-named were in a position to do great damage to the Church. Out of harmony with the Church, and with a grievance against the Prophet, they needed but to declare that the visions they had seen, in which the angel had shown them the Gold Plates, and the voice had declared the translation true, was a figment of their imagination or a conspired falsehood. For these were two of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon. If there had been collusion and conspiracy in the beginning, here was a chance to expose the Prophet as a liar and a cheat. But they did not deny the vision, they continued to affirm it. Their anger at the Prophet did not affect their testimony given of an event which they could not deny because it was true. Since the Church was built on the results of actual happenings, and was truly the restored Gospel in action, those intent on doing things wrong were judged without fear or favor. There had been no fakery in the past, and there being nothing to conceal, judgments were made without fear.

These recalcitrant ones knew the truth, although in their evil moment they expressed the feeling that they had no more confidence in the Prophet. And so at a time when unity was vital, the high leaders next to the Prophet defected. They contributed their part to the growing prejudice against the Church.

Scene II - Contributing to the Drama

Over in neighboring Daviess County there were a number of the brethren who had previously purchased farms. At Gallatin an election took place, and on election day the old time townsmen grouped themselves together to make certain the "Mormonites" did not vote at the election. The instigator and leader of this sudden revival of hate was one H. P. Peniston, who handled a mob in the persecutions of the previous year. The brethren were warned of the danger of bodily harm if they tried to vote, but being of the stock which holds its rights sacred and foremost, they ignored the warning. On election day the inflamatory speeches of Peniston urging that the Mormons be driven away from the voting places quickly aroused murderous response in the townsmen. The brethren arrived together unarmed, and were immediately attacked. Defending themselves as best they could, several were knocked down and kicked and beaten. They managed to extricate themselves, but few if any voted that day. Not one civil officer lifted a finger to protect them; rather they helped the lawless achieve their unlawful and evil purpose.

Hearing of the trouble, Joseph rode over to Gallatin with several of the brethren to protest the action of the mob and the illegal prevention from voting. He tried to obtain a pledge from Justice Black, the representative of the law and a participant in the disorder, that the Saints would be protected in their rights, but all Black would give them was a signed note which merely said he was bound to support the Constitution of Missouri, and of the United States, and if the Mormons would not molest him he would not molest them. This was small satisfaction, but at least they knew him now as a bitter enemy.

As soon as the brethren left, Black circulated the story that they had called as an armed mob and forced him to make the statement at gunpoint. Peniston swore out a complaint against the Prophet before circuit Judge King, and Black later added another to the effect that Joseph had illegally forced Black into signing a "disgraceful paper." This event does not of itself loom large. It was a pattern of the conduct of the average community wherever Joseph lived, but it was a straw in the wind. The Saints could expect no legal protection of their rights or persons. Rather, the law would be aborted and the legal officers of the county and state would use their legal authority to encourage and incite lawlessness and would sustain such lawless acts as the mobs of evil men could conspire to commit-even to murder and rapine. Black's act was the warning signal to the brethren as to what they might expect.

Scene Ill - Straws Point to the Wind

DeWitt, Carroll County, Missouri, lay quiet in the September haze. A small body of the Saints on their way to the Far West settlements had settled at this point near where the Grand River empties into the Missouri. Suddenly a large mob of about 150 men descended upon the town and demanded that the Saints there leave the state forthwith upon pain of death if they did not do so by October 1. The leaders of the Saints were not to be overawed and sent a messenger to Gen. Clark, commander of the State militia gathered to quell the mob around Adam-Ondi-Ahman. When Clark and his men arrived they found the little settlement-which comprised mostly wagons and tents, with but few cabins erected-surrounded by about three hundred armed mobbers thirsting for the blood of the inhabitants. These latter, however, were alert, armed, and determined to defend themselves. In his efforts to get them to disband the mob, Clark's men were mutinous and refused to act against the mob. Clark then sent messages seeking help from Generals Atchison and Doniphan, two other militia officers, who had previously partially mobilized their companies of militia but later disbanded them.

Meanwhile the Prophet Joseph Smith, hearing of the difficulty, rode to DeWitt, managed to elude the mob and entered the settlement. He immediately appealed to several old settlers for help. These agreed to make affidavits stating the true condition of the defending Saints and the unwarranted action of the mob. The governor made a remarkably callous response. To a Mr. Caldwell who had delivered the message and the affidavits he said:

"The quarrel is between the Mormons and the mob and they can fight it out."

In addition, General S. D. Lucas, an old enemy who had led in the Saints' expulsion from Jackson County, journeyed toward DeWitt, passing down the Missouri River a few miles from the place, and thus learning nothing except by heresay, he reported to the governor that he had no doubt that "a fight had taken place, and that it would stir up the whole of upper Missouri, and those base and degraded beings will be exterminated from the face of the earth."

The episode ended when the Saints ran out of provisions. The local settlers who took no part in the action proposed that the Saints be allowed to leave unmolested. The Saints, having no other alternative, packed up what was left of their personal property, placed their sick and aged in the wagons and made their slow way toward Far West. Looking back, they could see the smoke rising from the cabins they had built. As they traveled they were continually on the defense against small groups of mobbers who hung on the edges of their weary march. Occasionally they stopped to bury the bodies of brethren who had been too worn out to stand the rigors of a march even of this distance, while saddest of all was the pause to bury the body of a sister who, weakened from childbirth, had been cruelly forced from the shelter of her cabin. All of these burials were done without coffins, the bodies being interred with only a blanket between them and the enclosing earth.

Scene IV - A Faint Stirring of the Wind

Mob action breeds mob action; mutinous conduct is contagious. No sooner had the mob been successful at DeWitt than their counterparts in various parts of the country became more emboldened. It was not long before other mobs were marching. The Mormons could be forced out. The governor would give only token protection to the Saints.

So now began the long series of annoyances which spread terror and yet were not of themselves large enough to call out the whole armed force to protect the people. Individual homes were attacked. One of these was the home of Don Carlos Smith, the Prophet's brother, who lived on a farm a short distance from the Diahman settlement. The mobbers surrounded the house, inside of which cowered Mrs. Smith with two helpless babies. Don Carlos was in Tennessee on a mission, of which fact the mobbers were probably aware. They forced Mrs. Smith and the babies out into the night, then set fire to the house. Mrs. Smith carried the babies in her arms and, walking and resting, finally reached Diahman. In the process she negotiated Grand River waist deep, and was lucky at that. Why the mobbers did not rape her in addition will never be quite understood. Terrible acts such as this were their most bragged-of performances when they found unprotected women, or isolated families.

This fiendishly cruel act had its compensation. General Clark, whose troops had refused to disperse the mob at DeWitt, was at Diahman in command of the militia there. He passed the house of Don Carlos Smith which was smoldering in its embers and was horrified. He ordered Colonel Lyman Wight to call out the companies of the 59th regiment of militia, then under his command, but not yet called up by the state. These companies comprised mostly members of the Church at Diahman and the surrounding territory. Clark then ordered Colonel Wight to put down mobs wherever he found them assembled. He wished it distinctly understood that Wight had full authority to suppress all mob violence. Wight called out two companies of sixty men each, placed one company under the command of Captain David W. Patten, and took command of the other himself.

Scene V - The Good Strike Back

Captain David W. Patten's detachment rode through the darkness toward Crooked River to protect the persons and property of Brothers Parsons, Pinkham and others nearby. Gillam and Bogart, two of the most violent of the mob leaders, had warned Parsons to leave by 10 o'clock the next day, telling him that they expected to give Far West "hell" the following day before noon. They had entered the house of the old gentleman Pinkham and taken three prisoners and, when they departed, four horses. Cursing him all the while, they had threatened the old man that if he did not leave the state they would have his scalp. This was witnessed by Joseph Holbrook and his companion, a man named Judith, and the two men immediately started for Far West to give the alarm. They arrived at Far West about 10 p.m., and within two hours Captain Patten had assembled his company and was on his way through the night. Dismounting, they approached the area where they thought the mob to be. They found the mob camped on a bend of Crooked River, several miles southwest of Far West. Day was breaking when they were first challenged by a sentry of the mob, who fired on and mortally wounded Patrick O'Banion.

Thus aroused, the mobbers formed a battle line under the bluff of the stream. Captain Patten ordered a charge, which was carried out. The mob could not stand the attack and broke and ran. Captain Patten was pursuing one mobbet when the man suddenly turned and shot him in the intestines. He died several hours later. His death, with that of Gideon Carter and O'Banion, totalled three for the militia. There were nine wounded. The casualties of the mob were never learned. Thus died the first martyr among the general

authorities of the Church. David Patten died doing his duty as an officer in the militia defending the helpless Saints from lawless mobs. He was a brave man. He was possessed of great courage, as is attested by his many narrow escapes from mobs when a missionary. He had faith in Christ and His Gospel beyond that of most men. And he was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Scene VI

The Traitorous Hand: The Wind Increases

Suddenly that same day in October, while David Patten was losing his life in the defense of the Saints, there appeared at Richmond, Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde, both members of the Quorum of the Twelve, Marsh being its president. Marsh had a tale to tell about the secret activities of the Saints. He swore to an affidavit that there was a secret band called Danites, organized to "use up" the enemies of the Church, to raid Jackson County and surrounding counties, burning, killing, and destroying the families and homes of the mobbers. They had passwords, and secret meetings. Further, Marsh swore, Joseph Smith was their inciter, having said that the Saints would track down their enemies and tread over their dead bodies. Orson Hyde made an affidavit to the effect that he knew most of what Marsh had said to be true and believed the remainder to be true. The enemies of the Church were filled with glee. Here was the grand excuse for their actions in inciting mobs. It was not long before the word was passed that two of the chief Mormon Apostles had revealed the horrible, bloody oath and the secret intentions of the Mormons.

To this day no clear reason can be given for the traitorous action of these two men. Marsh had taken umbrage at some fancied slight at the hands of the Prophet. He had become conceited and difficult in his position as President of the Twelve. But to betray a people into further mobbing by lying about something which he must have known to be false, or about which he could easily have found out by asking is beyond understanding. He may have believed that Avard acted under the direction of the Prophet, but if this were true, had he any love for Joseph Smith, he could easily have asked him about it.

How Orson Hyde could be so blinded as to follow Marsh or be influenced by him to the extent of betraying the brethren, is hard to explain. One thing is certain; when men are angered at Church leaders the spirit of righteousness departs and they seem to walk in darkness, apparently uninfluenced by any righteousness that may have previously guided their lives. Anyhow, whatever the cause, these two men swore to the statements that were made.

Scene VII Hypocrisy Within the Tent: Whirlwinds Within

Three or four months previous to the incidents just mentioned Dr. Sampson Avard had appeared in Missouri from Ohio, and immediately exhibited his character to a chosen few whom he invited to a meeting. He said he was meeting secretly with full approval of the Church authorities. He had passwords, countersigns, secret signs of recognitions-all dear to the hearts of men in all ages. Those who "fell" for his blandishments he organized into companies of tens and fifties, after the model of Zion's Camp. He called his followers "Danites." All this seemed authentic to the men who attended his meetings. Finally he revealed to the captins of tens that his purpose was to lay waste the mobbers and with their confiscated property build up the Church and Kingdom. He and those who joined would be safe enough for they would swear to any kind of lies to protect themselves and each other.

As soon as his purpose was revealed, the leaders he had appointed rebelled and refused to have anything more to do with him. Joseph Smith excommunicated him from the Church and the Danites died a sudden death. But not so the stories and rumors. Let the Saints organize in tens and fifties and the Danites were at the bottom of some mischief. Let an apostate want sympathy, all he had to do was to say his life was in danger from the Danites. Never had a worse falsehood been fastened on an honorable people and persisted so long. To this day many believe the tale.

As soon as he was exposed and excommunicated Avard joined the mobs in their work of mobbing and persecuting the Saints. Overnight he became one with the mobs surrounding Far West.

Lorenzo Dow Young attended the meetings of Avard. He was suspicious of Avard, for he had known him before, when in the course of one of his missionary journeys he had found Avard presiding over a branch of the Church in southeastern Ohio. He liked neither the spirit nor the teachings of Avard. It developed that Avard and Sidney Rigdon were on quite intimate terms, and that Sidney rather favored his views.

Lorenzo gives the following account: "I returned to Kirtland and in a short time I was requested to attend a council of the First Presidency, which consisted of the Prophet Joseph Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams. I was requested by the Prophet to make a report of my mission and particularly that part of it connected with Dr. Avard, and the branch of the Church over which he presided. The impressions I had received of him were not flattering to his character for honesty and integrity. Without bringing any accusation against him, in a moderate way I expressed my views to the council. Elder Rigdon manifested his displeasure by animadverting rather sharply on my remarks. After he was through expressing his views the Prophet Joseph said, 'Brother Young I wish you to express your views of Dr. Avard without fear or favor." I expressed a wish not to do so, to which he replied that he really desired that I should. I then more fully expressed my opinion that Dr. Avard was a dishonest, hypocritical man. I said to Elder Rigdon, 'give Dr. Avard time and he will prove my estimate of his character to be correct.'

"The Doctor attracted no further attention from me until my arrival in Far West. In the latter part of the summer I found he was in Far West among the Saints holding secret meetings attended by a few who were especially interested. I was one of the favored few. I found the gathering to be a meeting of a secret organization of which, from what I could learn by diligent inquiry, he was the originator and over which he presided. At one of these meetings he stated that the title by which the members of the society were known, "Danites," interpreted meant "Destroying Angels," and also that the object of the organization was to take vengeance on their enemies. He considered it the duty of the members to pursue them to the death, even to their homes and bedrooms. At different times new members were sworn in by taking the oath of secrecy and affiliation. The teachings and proceedings appeared to be wicked, blood-thirsty, and in direct antagonism to the principles taught by the leaders of the Church, and the Elders generally. I felt a curious interest in these proceedings and determined to hold my peace and see what would develop. The culmination finally arrived. At one of the meetings Dr. Avard particularly required that all present who had been attending their meetings should at once join the society by making the required covenants, and I was especially designated. I asked the privilege of speaking, which was granted. I began to state my objections to joining the society, and was proceeding to state my reasons and in them expose its wickedness, when Dr. Avard peremptorily ordered me to be seated. I objected to sitting down until I had fully expressed my views. He threatened to put the law of the organization in force there and then. I stood directly in front of him and was well prepared for the occasion. I told him with all the emphasis of my nature, in voice and manner, that I had as many friends in the house as he had, and if he made a motion to carry out his threat he should not live to get out of the house, for I would instantly kill him. He did not try to put his threat into execution, and the meeting broke up. From the meeting I went direct to Brother Brigham and related the whole history of the affair. He said he had long suspicioned that something was going on but had seen no direct development. He added we will go at once to Brother Joseph, who had suspicioned that some secret wickedness was being carried on by Dr. Avard. Dr. Avard was at once cited before the authorities of the Church and cut off for his wickedness. He turned a bitter enemy of the Saints."

Scene VIII Interlude in the Storm and in the Drama

It must be understood that the scenes thus painted in this unbelievable drama are but high spots in the action. Unmentioned are the numerous incidents which caused the gathering of the majority of the Mormon settlers into Far West for protection. Bands of from ten to one hundred men were constantly harrassing, burning, killing, murdering indirectly by forced exposure to the elements, shooting livestock, frightening women, and in some cases forcibly raping them. Far West was an armed camp. The men were members of the state militia authorized to defend themselves. And besieging them was an uncontrolled mob who were encouraged by the governor to exterminate the Saints or drive them from the state. One of the saddest events brought their fear to a high pitch, the event which drained them of most of their hope.

On the morning of October 30, as the town was surrounded by a mob of about a thousand unorganized Missourians-led by the Saints' enemies from the Jackson County expulsion and fortified by several "Christian" ministers-there was discovered approaching the town what looked like a body of the militia. The leaders of Far West sent out men to discover the intent of this new group-menace or succor. They soon found out. Numbering about two thousand, the new arrivals bore the official name of the state militia, were commanded by state officers, and were ordered to destroy or expel the Saints. The mob already there welcomed them, mingled with them, joined with them and went into ecstasies of fiendish glee over the bloody prospect of the immediate future. Only one of the generals of the now-legal mob, General Doniphan, had any sympathy for the beleaguered Saints.

AN EXPLANATION OF POSITION

Nothing has been said concerning the Kirtland Camp. During the summer the Presidents of the Seventy had gathered with their quorum members and organized themselves to travel to Far West together. Joseph Young was one of the leaders of that camp. It was a large group of more than one hundred families and was well organized. En route it had occasionally stopped to allow the men to work on contract labor so as to earn money to pay expenses. Once they had delayed long enough to construct a quarter of a mile of highway grade. They had arrived in the Far West area in late summer. One group under Joseph Young's direction was camped on Shoal Creek, about twelve miles east of Far West at Haun's Mill.

Scene IX - The Hurricane Strikes

While the events of Far West were reaching a climax on October 30, and the dismayed inhabitants saw the ring of evil begin to squeeze them in, a band of more than two hundred men under Nehemiah Comstock suddenly rode in on the encampment at Haun's Mill and began shooting at all they could see. None were spared that could be found. At the blacksmith shop where several gathered for what protection its log walls offered, the mobbers fired through the chinks in the logs. One boy was found hiding under the bellows and the mob blew the top of his head off. His brother, shot through the hip, feigned death and was not molested further. An old revolutionary soldier, Father McBride as he was affectionately called, pleaded for mercy, was callously shot while pleading, and then his body was hacked to pieces with a corn knife. The Saints who escaped did so by fleeing into the hazel brush which was thick on the hillsides. For some unknown reason they were not pursued when out of sight. Then, their hands covered with the blood of the awful massacre, the mobbers rode away laughing and shouting in exultation.

When the stunned survivors dared to return to the desecrated bloody camp, they counted nineteen dead and fifteen wounded. The dead were interred en masse in an old well and the wounded cared for as well as could be done under the circumstances. The survivors fully expected the mob to return and finish their extermination. And this awful deed still stands in the historical records of the state as a "battle!"

At the same time Colonel Hinckle, the commanding officer of the defenders' militia, was making a secret agreement to surrender the leaders of Far West to the attackers and to turn the town over to the enemy.

On the 31st this agreement was carried out. A flag of truce was sent out to the beseigers. Lucas, the commanding general, met Hinckle and made an agreement that Hinckle would deliver Joseph and Hyrum Smith and other leaders to Lucas as hostages. The others were specifically, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt, and George W. Robinson.

Hinckle told those of this group of leaders who were available that Lucas wanted to confer with them on a truce basis, to which they agreed. The little group marched forward and were met by Lucas who was escorted by a large band of the mobbers. When they met, Lyman Wight shook hands with Lucas and said, "We understand, General, you wish to confer with us a few moments. Will not tomorrow morning do as well?" He was interrupted by Col. Hinckle who said, "General Lucas, here are the prisoners I agreed to deliver to you." Lucas ordered the brethren to march to his camp without delay. Later Hyrum Smith and Amasa Lyman were added to the "hostages." That night at a drumhead court martial it was decided that the men should be shot on the public square at Far West at dawn in the presence of their families as an example to the people.

At this point General Doniphan told Lucas he would have no part in such cold-blooded murder, and withdrew himself and his troops from Far West. He further said that if Lucas executed the prisoners, he would make him account for the deed before the highest tribunal in the land. This cold, furious warning gave Lucas pause. Finally, after threats and the most heart-rending scenes of separation, in which the Prophet and his fellow prisoners were not allowed to speak to wife or children, Lucas turned the prisoners over to General Wilson for delivery to Independence, Jackson County. There they were to stand trial for murder, arson, treason, theft-acts in fact perpetrated by the mob upon them and the other Saints.

Meanwhile the brethren remaining in Far West were forced to give up their arms, and the mob was turned loose on the town. It is better not to describe the results of this act.

Morning came and the men of the town were then forced to line up. Fifty-six names were read off, and as the men stepped out of the line, they were placed under arrest to await a trial. Then all were told by General Lucas the terms to which they had been bound by Hinckle:

Finally, Lucas forced the Saints to listen to a speech in which he reminded them of their "crimes" and read to them the order of the governor to exterminate them or drive them from the state. As for their leaders, they would never see them again-their "die was cast, their doom was sealed." They were further ordered not to gather in groups, but to prepare to leave the state immediately. Twelve men were given permission to move the women and children from Adam-Ondi-Ahman to Far West and these must wear white bands on their hats for identification.

Scene X Quiet After the Hurricane - And Devastation

The benumbed Saints knew not which way to turn-
