S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Fall 1835

In spite of the sympathy aroused when one reads of the continuing, mounting harrassment endured by the Church members, he cannot maintain the emotion. Finally, the accounts of continual cruel persecutilon, threats, livestock stolen or wantonly slaughtered, fear of physical violence, murder, or rape-these arouse no emotion. Will the pitiful tale never end? Will its tragic final curtain never fall?

It is difficult to trace the part played by Brigham Young in the earlier action of that year simply because he has left no record of it. Heber C. Kimball brings him into the action during the final three weeks in October, for he wrote about it, but Heber did not land from England until summer, and it was late September before he reached Far West.

Brigham and Heber were not known to the mobbers and consequently their names were never on a list of those to be arrested. They could travel about and observe without being recognized. This was a distinct advantage-in fact it was the salvation of the Church toward the end. What would have happened had there been no one with any real authority to take up the leadership when the Prophet and most of the known leaders were arrested and taken away is only conjecture. The fact is that the chief apostle and the second in line, tried and true and present to take command, made it so that the problem never arose. The leader was there and took charge.

When Brigham arrived in Far West in the spring, Mary Ann was ill, so the first task was to nurse her back to health. With a sick wife, five children (three very small) and a new farm to put in order, Brigham was busy. The farm was several miles out of Far West, so that, except when the Prophet called him, one can imagine that he did not go far from the farm during the growing season. As the tension mounted and conditions worsened in the fall, being prudent he no doubt obeyed the Prophet's advice to all outlying farmers to move into Far West for safety.

During the rise and fall of the Danites under Dr. Avard he was informed of its activities. When Lorenzo, Brigham's brother, got all the facts for him, he reported to the Prophet. It is likely that Joseph Smith had other reports which were not recorded. As we have said, the Prophet excommunicated Avard and repudiated his organization. There must have been anxious moments over the Crooked River expedition. Lorenzo was on that ride also. The death of David W. Patten, followed by the apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh, made Brigham almost overnight the senior apostle. One can imagine that he sensed the responsibility of holding the line whenever the Prophet was away.

Knowing too that Joseph Young, his wife Jane, two daughters, and his year-old son Seymour Bicknell were at Haun's Mill when the first reports of the massacre there began to trickle into Far West, Brigham doubtless worried about his brother's safety. The raw events were close to him, for living kin were in grave danger. We have no record from him or from anyone else what suffering his aged father went through, nor how others of his brothers and sisters fared.

Heber C. Kimball said that when the thin line of defenders was drawn up facing the thousands of mobbers who threatened them, he and Brigham were made captains of fifty then and there, without previous experience. And after the betrayal of the Prophet and the people, who had been bereft of their arms, Heber tells of how he was badgered and taunted by Wm. E. McLellin. McLellin wanted to know whether Heber now felt that Joseph was a Prophet in view of his "downfall." He got more than he bargained for, as Heber bore solemn, vehement witness not only as to Joseph's being a Prophet but also as to where McLellin was going in the hereafter. One catches oneself wishing that McLellin had gone after Brigham in the same way, but if he did neither Brigham nor Heber recorded it.

As soon as the Prophet arrived at Richmond with the other prisoners, Brigham and Heber rode over and visited him, asking for instructions. Now that the apostacy of the chief apostle (Marsh) was confirmed, and the death of David W. Patten had removed the second, the Prophet told them that the next senior apostle should be the President of the Twelve. Brigham was accordingly appointed. Then the First Presidency nominated John Taylor and John E. Page to fill the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. Advise was sought, and given, on the means to be employed to evacuate the Saints from Missouri. And, too, assurance was given to Joseph that the brethren would do everything that was physically possible to take with them every soul who wanted to leave. When the Prophet was transferred to Liberty Jail Brigham and Heber called on him again and arrangements were made for Heber to make regular visits there to keep him informed and to bring food and other comforts as he could.

But the greatest task was to gather up the broken remnants of organization, bring order out of chaos, and steel the Saints to their responsibility in this exodus. The Saints must not only be advised where to go but what to do when they got them. Both leaders had their families to provide for, and both must share with those who had nothing.

They spent the month of November gathering in the loyal men, and on December 13 held the first conference of the High Council. "President Brigham Young presided" say the minutes. The first item of business was to "fill the council," that is, appoint others to take the places of those either absent or apostate. Then Brigham told the brethren assembled where he stood. Joseph was still the Prophet. He was not fallen, as the apostates had declared, but stood in favor before the Lord. He was still the President of the Church, which Church was still the true Church and would yet rise to fill its prophetic destiny. With firm fervor he declared that he stood for Joseph. Then one by one each name was called, and one by one the members of the Council stood and was counted. Each declared his faith and his loyalty. That was good. At least one could tell who was loyal, could be sure where to put his faith and trust.

The next meeting of the Council was on the 19th of December. At this council John E. Page and John Taylor were presented to the group as the nominees of the First Presidency to be ordained apostles. They were accepted by the group and formally sustained, whereupon they were ordained by Brigham and Heber.

And under the direction of these two chief apostles committees were organized to handle the exodus from the State.
