S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

February 1839

Brigham had good cause for the indignation he must have felt as he saw the suffering of the people. Wintertime on the frontier under good conditions is difficult. In the circumstances, scarcity of food, cold drafty cabins and several families crowded into each cabin were enough to drive a man to cold fury. That Brigham and those with him did not turn on their persecutors with what weapons they could find was a tribute to the effect on him of the teachings of Christ. He was an apostle of the Lord. He was dignified and controlled as an apostle should be. To the Lord belonged the judgment. He would leave it that way. But he did not forget the offenses. tie and his brethren had drafted a memorial to the Missouri legislature describing their wrongs and asking for redress. They had been ignored. But he bore his witness of the wrongs:

"At the time that the exterminating army of Governor Boggs, commanded by Generals Lucas and Clark, came in sight of Far West, I observed their approach, and thought that it might be the militia of the State which had come to the relief of the citizens; but to my great surprise I found that they were come to strengthen the hands of the mobs that were around us, and which immediately joined the army.

"Some of these mobs were painted like Indians, and 'Gillum,' their leader, was also painted in a similar manner, and styled himself the 'Delaware Chief,' and afterwards he and the rest of the mob claimed and obtained pay as militia, from the state, for all the time they were engaged as a mob, as will be seen by reference to the acts of the Missouri Legislature.

"Many Saints were wounded and murdered by the army, and several women were ravished to death. I saw brothers Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and George W. Robinson, delivered up by Colonel Hinckle to General Lucas, but expected they would have returned to the city that evening, or the next morning, according to agreement, and the pledge of the sacred honor of the officers that they should be allowed to do so, but they did not return at all.

"The next morning General Lucas demanded and took away the arms of the militia of Caldwell County, (which arms have never been returned,) assuring them that they should be protected; but so soon as they obtained possession of the arms, they commenced their ravages by plundering the citizens of their bedding, clothing, money, wearing apparel, and everything of value they could lay their hands upon, and also attempting to violate the chastity of the women in sight of their husbands and friends, under the pretence of hunting for prisoners and arms. The soldiers shot down our oxen, cows, hogs and fowls, at our own doors, taking part away and leaving the rest to rot in the streets. The soldiers also turned their horses into our fields of corn.

"At this time General Clark delivered his noted speech. I copy a portion of it as follows:-....

"'The order of the Governor to me was, that you should be exterminated, and not allowed to remain in the State. And had not your leaders been given up, and the terms of the treaty complied with before this time, your families would have been destroyed and your houses in ashes.

'There is a discretionary power vested in my hands, which, considering your circumstances, I shall exercise for a season. You are indebted to me for this clemency. I do not say you shall go now, but you must not think of staying here another season, or of putting in crops; for the moment you do this, the citizens will be upon you; and if I am called here again in case of non-compliance with the treaty made, do not think that I shall act as ! have done now. You need not expect any mercy, but extermination, for I am determined the Governor's order shall be executed.

'As for your leaders, do not think, do not imagine for a moment, do not let it enter into your minds that they will be delivered and restored to you again, for their fate is fixed, the die is cast, their doom is sealed.

'I am sorry, gentlemen, to see so many apparently intelligent men found in the situation that you are; and oh! if I could invoke that great Spirit of the unknown God to rest upon and deliver you from that awful chain of superstition, and liberate you from those fetters of fanaticism with which you are bound-that you no longer do homage to a man.

'I would advise you to scatter abroad, and never again organize yourselves with Bishops, Priests, &c., lest you excite the jealousies of the people and subject yourselves to the same calamities that have now come upon you.

'You have always been the aggressors- you have brought upon yourselves these difficulties by being disaffected, and not being subject to rule; and my advice is, that you become as other citizens, lest by a recurrence of these events you bring upon yourselves irretrievable ruin.'"

"I was present when that speech was delivered, and when fifty-seven of our brethren were betrayed into the hands of our enemies as prisoners, which was done at the instigation of our open and avowed enemies, such as William E. McLellin and others, aided by the treachery of Col. Hinckle.

"In addition to the above speech, General Clark said that we must not be seen as many as five together. 'If you are,' said he, 'the citizens will be upon you and destroy you; but you should flee immediately out of the State. There is no alternative for you but to flee, you need not expect any redress; there is none for you.'

"With respect to the treaty mentioned by General Clark, I have to say that there never was any treaty proposed or entered into on the part of the Mormons, or any one called a Mormon, except by Col. Hinckle. And with respect to the trial of Joseph and the brethren at Richmond, I did not consider that tribunal a legal court, but an inquisition, for the following reasons:-Joseph Smith was not allowed any evidence whatever on his part, for the conduct of the court, as well as the Judge's own words, affirmed that there was no law for Mormons in the State of Missouri; and I know that when Joseph left the State of Missouri, he did not flee from justice, for the plain reason that the officers and the people manifested by their works and their words that there was neither law nor justice for the people called Mormons.

"The brethren were compelled to give away their property by executing a deed of trust at the point of the bayonet. Judge Cameron also said, 'God damn them, see how well they feel now.' General Clark also said he had authority to make what treaties he pleased, and the Governor would sanction them.

"Although there was so much opposition and persecution carried on against the Saints in Missouri, I never knew a Latter-day Saint break a law while I was there; and if the records of Clay, Caldwell or Daviess Counties were searched, they could not find one record of crime against one of our brethren, or even in Jackson County, so far as I know.

"When the State Legislature convened, they appropriated $2,000 to the citizens of Daviess and Caldwell Counties, the Mormons of Caldwell not excepted. Judge Cameron, Mr. McHenry and others attended to the distribution. This same committee would drive in the brethren's hogs (many of which were identified,) and shoot them down in the streets, and without further bleeding, and half dressing, they were cut up and distributed by McHenry to the poor, at a charge of four or five cents per pound, which, together with a few pieces of refuse goods, such as calicoes, at double and treble price, soon consumed the appropriation."

But now the time had come for action. Discouragement must not be allowed to creep in and rob the Saints of their desire to extricate themselves from the situation, desperate though it was. High resolve can lift men even though they have few tangible assets. A meeting in January supplied the resolve. After discussion of the problem of moving the Saints it was clear that the means of doing so could not possibly be adequate unless all pooled their land assets, sold them for as much as they could, and then used the money to augment what few horses and wagons they already had to transport those who could not otherwise move. The men present covenanted that they would not cease their efforts until all who desired to go were removed from the state. It was voted, after consideration, that a committee of seven "be appointed to superintend our removal and to provide for those who have not the means of moving, till the work shall be completed." And the seven appointed were William Huntington, Charles Bird, Alason Ripley, Theodore Turley, Daniel Shearer, Shadrack Roundy, and Jonathan H. Hale.

It was voted that the secretary, Elias Smith, draft a document which would express the covenant they entered into that day and which all could sign. The leadership of Brigham was here wisely used. This was a community effort, so the meeting was presided over by John Smith, but the "Church" stood by to lend the hand as needed.

The covenant there made will stand for all time as an

example of the love of man for man engendered by the Gospel. There was no selfishness here. Perhaps the Mayflower Compact is more famous; certainly it is not a greater expression of the love of men for one another.

Solemnly it began:

We, whose names are hereunder written, do for ourselves individually hereby covenant to stand by and assist one another, to the utmost of our abilities, in removing from this state in compliance with the authority of the state; and we do hereby acknowledge ourselves firmly bound to the extent of all our available property, to be disposed of by a committee who shall be appointed for the purpose of providing means for the removing from this state of the poor and destitute who shall be considered worthy, till there shall not be one left who desires to remove from the state: with this proviso, that no individual shall be deprived of the right of the disposal of his own property for the above purpose, or of having the control of it, or so much of it as shall be necessary for the removing of his own family, and to be entitled to the over-plus, after the work is effected; and furthermore, said committee shall give receipts for all property, and an account of the expenditure of the same.

Far West, Missouri, January 29, 1839.

Then those willing to do so signed the document. It is not known the number who signed that day at the meeting, but Brigham took the covenant and obtained eighty signatures before nightfall. The next day he obtained three hundred more, making 380 signatures in two days. Thus a determined man can substitute strength for wavering in the weak, and make steel-like the determination of the strong. Brigham did not sign his name first; in the history it stands as number 13. He took his turn.

It was now time to organize. Depots were established between Far West and Quincy, Illinois, the agreed gathering place. Contracts were made with river steamers to haul the Saints the moment the boats could navigate the river in the spring. The appointed committee received the property of the signers of the covenant and sold it for the good of the needy Saints.

Meanwhile Brigham and Heber C. Kimball went to Liberty Jail, there receiving instruction from Joseph Smith as to their course. He listened to their plans and approved. Joseph told Heber to stay in Far West to help, while Brigham was to go to Quincy and organize things there, finally to meet "at Far West on April 26 to depart on your mission." This instruction was a reminder of a commandment of the previous summer.

That Brigham had no intention of forgetting this revelation is evident in his meager diary. Among the few entries of the period is the revelation referred to, copied into the diary in his own hand. Most likely he copied it from the original handwritten copy as it was given that July day in 1838.

"Verily, thus saith the Lord: Let a conference be held immediately; let the Twelve be organized; and let men be appointed to supply the place of those who are fallen.

"Let my servant Thomas remain for a season in the land of Zion, to publish my word.

"Let the residue continue to preach from that hour, and if they will do this in all lowliness of heart, in meekness and humility, and long-suffering, I, the Lord, give unto them a promise that I will provide for their families; and an effectual door shall be opened for them, from henceforth.

"And next spring let them depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name.

"Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next, on the building spot of my house, saith the Lord.

"Let my servant John Taylor, and also my servant John E. Page, and also my servant Wilford Woodruff, and also my servant Willard Richards, be appointed to fill the places of those who have. fallen, and be officially notified of their appointment." (Doctrine and Covenants 118.)

On their return to Far West, so effective had been their organizational activities that the enemies of the Church began to seek their lives. Heber had to go into hiding and do his work at night, while Brigham was forced to leave immediately for Quincy to save his own life.

A little caravan was formed. Heber somehow obtained a team of ponies and a wagon, and with what little of his belongings could be crowded in he loaded Vilate and the children in, wrapped them in quilts, and turned them over to Brigham. Brigham gave the signal and he and his family likewise equipped with as much as they could carry, pulled out of Far West. Others joined them. It was St. Valentine's Day, February 14, 1839.

Mary Ann described that trip across the wintry plains of Missouri. She told how Brigham would drive his team some twenty or so miles with her and the children, and then, after providing them with some shelter, would turn around and return with as many drivers of his caravan as he could muster. They would load up with those who were without means of transportation and bring them forward to where Mary Ann and her companions were sheltered. Then, she said, he would take her and the children forward again, returning as before for the destitute. She said that she had eleven different homes for a day or two each, on that trip across Missouri. She was very weak herself, for she had not quite recovered from the illness of the summer and fall. It is impossible to describe in this day of motor transportation what that trip took in judgment, muscle, and care of horses and people. The slow caravan would do well to make twenty miles a day, for the horses must have special care in order to hold up. They must have grain and hay, shelter and blankets at night. Watering them required skill and time. These horses would not be their best animals-those had long since been stolen or appropriated by the mobs-but these were the best they could find at the moment. While the families made one trip across the state, the horses made several in their shuttling back and forth.

How long that part of the exodus took is not quite definite, but it must have taken the better part of three weeks. Brigham found a temporary shelter at a little town-Atlas, Pike County, Illinois-for a few weeks, and later moved to Quincy.

March 17 he was at Quincy holding a meeting with the brethren of the Twelve and the Church members at Quincy. He read a letter from the committee members at Far West requesting that their teams and what money they could muster be sent back to them to bring out fifty families of the Saints who were still there but were too destitute to move- Brigham must have been filled with a solemn pride as the brethren, poor and stripped of everything they had, still offered to sell their hats, coats, and shoes to help out.

"We broke bread and partook of the Sacrament," he said. "At the close of the meeting $50 was collected in money and several teams were subscribed to go and bring out the brethren. Among the subscribers was Widow Warren Smith, whose husband and son had their brains blown out and another son shot to pieces at the massacre at Haun's Mill. She sent her only team on this charitable mission."

The next day, March 18, in council with the Twelve, he advised the Twelve to locate their families in Quincy for the time being, that "we might be together in council." At the same time Wilford Woodruff and George Albert Smith were sustained as members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Brigham now opened his little diary and read the revelation concerning the mission to England, and dwelt on the instruction that the apostles were to leave from Far West on April 26. Some people had felt that, in view of the difficulties they were under, the Twelve should be excused from going back to fulfill the revelation, especially since the apostates like McLellin and Phelps had bragged that this was one "false" revelation that would not be fulfilled. The lives of the Apostles were threatened if they returned. Many felt that the Lord would take the will for the deed.

"But I felt differently and so did those of the Quorum who were with me. I asked them, individually, what their feelings were on the subject. They all expressed their desire to fulfill the revelation. I told them the Lord God had spoken, and it was our duty to obey and leave the events in His hands, and he would protect us."

To Brigham there was only one course, ever and always: The Lord has spoken . . . our duty is to obey . . . leave the events in the hands of the Lord.
