S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April 1839

Six men rode west from Quincy, Illinois in two carriages on April 18, 1839. Brigham Young and Orson Pratt were in the carriage with Wilford Woodruff, while John Taylor and George A. Smith rode with Alpheus Cutler. They were headed for Far West, to fulfill the prophecy of Joseph Smith made the previous summer. When Brigham and Heber had visited the Prophet in Liberty Jail, he' had spoken to them about it in word and tone which seemed to take as a matter of course that they would get their families to Illinois out of reach of the mobs; Heber would stay in Far West and supervise the moving of the Saints; Brigham would take the families out and return at the appointed time to start from the temple site for the apostles' mission to England, as had been stated in the revelation.

Each of the returning six men had left his family in as good circumstances as he could arrange. But dependence was on the Lord to open the way for food and fuel. The miracle of it was that food and other necessities were provided, often in ways unforeseen. Mary Ann was ill when Brigham left, never having gained her complete strength from the rigors of reaching Far West in the spring nor of leaving it in the winter. With five children to support she must have felt unequal to the Herculean task. But she sent Brigham off with a good front and reserved her tears until he had driven away and the children were fed and asleep. He felt that in the hands of a merciful Lord, he being on the Lord's business, she would be given needed strength and succor. Remarkably, she was. So, too, were the wives of the others, as the men jogged their slow way west.

Before leaving they had started preliminary surveys of lands of eastern Iowa and northwestern Illinois as possible places to build cities for the Saints. What they didn't know was that Joseph Smith had escaped with his brethren from custody, and that the two parties would pass each other, one eastbound, the other westbound. Joseph, Hyrum and the others arrived in Quincy on the 24th. Brigham was scheduled to leave Far West with the Twelve on the 26th.

Thirty to thirty-six miles a day was the average pace they maintained. Keeping mostly to backroads, or to no roads at all, they passed through three towns which Brigham mentioned. They crossed the Mississippi River at Marion City, several miles below Quincy, camping on the bluffs on the west side. They camped at Clinton, Missouri, and passed through Huntsville, then struck across a prairie nine miles in extent. En route they met many members heading east. Brigham said the roads were "full of the Saints" fleeing from Missouri.

Somewhere in this day's journey they came upon John E. Page, their fellow quorum member. He had tried to negotiate a sidling hill and had tipped over his wagon, strewing its contents all about. In the accident a barrel of soft soap was overturned also, and when they came upon him, he was elbow deep in the soap scooping it up with his bare hands. The conversation was enlightening as to what was expected of the Twelve.

"I told him," said Brigham, "I wanted him to go to Far West with us. He replied that he didn't see how he could as he had his family to take to Quincy. I told him his family would get along well enough and I desired him to go up with us. He asked how much time I would give him to get ready. I answered, five minutes. We assisted in loading his wagon; he drove down the hill and camped, and returned with us. We drove 30 miles and camped."

Passing through "Keetsville" (Keytesville) they reached Tenny's Grove where they met Elders Elias Smith, Theodore Turley, and Hyrum Clark of the committee which had been left to attend the removal of the poor. These brethren had been forced to flee from the mobs still ranging in and around Far West. Here they told the returning brethren that on the 16th a large number of mobbers had ridden into Far West and, with some of the apostates, had taunted them about the revelation. They swore that this was one prophecy of "Joe" Smith that would not be fulfilled, as the Twelve and the Saints were scattered to the four winds. And they gave the committee just twenty-four hours to get out, threatening death if they found them there after that. Heber? Yes, he was safe when they left, but hiding and helping them at night. The committeemen turned around and went back with the anxious travelers, leading them on the 25th to Timothy B. Clark's cabin near Far West.

Riding hard from Richmond where he had been to see what he could do for Parley P. Pratt, who was still in prison there, Heber C. Kimball joined the other apostles at the house of Elder Clark that day with Shadrach Roundy his traveling companion. He had expected the Twelve to be there. He did not know just how they would elude the mobbers who were watching for them, but he knew their determination. Preparation had been made for their arrival. What few loyal people were still in Far West had been quietly told that the place and time of meeting would be Clark's place on the late evening of the 25th. Heber recorded that the night was clear with the moon shedding its peaceful light.

At Clark's about midnight a conference was held where official action was taken against thirty-one apostates. They were "cut off" from the Church. Then the whole body moved to the temple site, where, after a song, the men assisted Alpheus Cutler, chief builder of the temple, to roll a large stone weighing nearly a ton into position at the southeast corner, thus recommencing the building of the temple. Then a solemn moment came when the members of the Twelve present-Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, and John Taylor-ordained Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith apostles and made them members of the Quorum. They now had a majority. They paused to ordain Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer to the Seventy's quorum. These men had just been liberated from Richmond prison and had arrived the previous evening.

In the order of their seniority each of the Twelve offered up vocal prayer, kneeling at the large cornerstone in his turn. Such prayers of praise and thanks, such appeals for the way to open for them to fulfill their missionary call as they uttered on that moonlit early morning-these we must imagine, for they were not recorded. But the sincere prayer of the righteous needs no recording on earth. It is heard in heaven and answered to the good of those praying.

The solemn strains of "Adam-Ondi-Ahman" rose on the air. Then the brethren took leave of the few Saints present and departed for their mission to England. The sky in the east was beginning to lighten as they entered the carriages and turned the horses' heads eastward. And with considerable elation Brigham wrote of a surprised member who had not been present and who was informed as to what had taken place:

"As the Saints were passing away from the meeting, Brother Turley said to Page and Woodruff, "Stop a bit while I bid Isaac Russell goodbye," and knocking at his door, called Brother Russell. His wife answered, "Come in"-then to her husband-"It's Brother Turley."

Russell replied, "It is not, he left here two weeks ago." He seemed alarmed, but on finding k was really Brother Turley, he asked him to sit down. Turley replied, "I cannot, I shall lose my company." "Who is your company," inquired Russell.

"The Twelve."

"The Twelve?" (with great surprise)

"Yes, don't you know that this is the 26th, and the day the Twelve were to take leave of their friends on the foundation of the Lord's House, to go to the Islands of the sea? The revelation is now fulfilled and I am going with them." Russell was speechless! The brethren of that day were not above having their little joke, even though it was grim humor.

Brigham then wrote, "We rode two miles and camped at the grove for the night." Following them were the last of the Saints who were able or willing to leave left Far West, never to return. As morning came mobs began to gather, to ride through the town-to watch, to prevent the gathering of the Twelve. Even as they gathered, the wind blew through the empty streets as though in mocking laughter. The mobs were too late; the brethren had fulfilled the prophecy.

One can imagine Brigham talking to Heber that night as they lay on the hard earth, telling him about the trip to Quincy with Mary Ann and Vilate and their families, of how Vilate had a fairly comfortable place to stay in Quincy. And Heber in his turn would tell of how he had ridden to Liberty and ascertained that Joseph had escaped and was on his way to Quincy-probably there by now. And Brigham? He would turn to his little pocket diary the next day and find the page where he had entered, the previous fall, some precious words copied from a paper, where the Prophet had recorded: "... Let them take leave of my Saints in the City of Far West, on the 26th day of April next, on the building spot of my house, saith the Lord.

"Let my servants John Taylor, and also my servant John E. Page, and also my servant Wilford Woodruff, and also my servant Willard Richards be appointed to fill the places of those who have fallen .... " So ran the revelation. Brigham could tell the Lord that all had been done as He had said-except the ordination of Willard Richards. Cousin Willard Richards was next. They would ordain him when they reached England. Why wait until then? Willard had remained in England to preside over the mission when Heber C. Kimball had returned home.

There was one more thing on Brigham's mind as they crossed the Missouri lands toward Quincy:

"We had entered into a covenant to see the poor Saints moved out of Missouri to Illinois, that they might be delivered out of the hands of such vile persecutors, and we spared no pains to accomplish this object, until the Lord gave us the desires of our hearts. We had the last company of the poor with us that could be moved. Brothers P. P. Pratt and Morris Phelps were in prison and we had to leave them for a season. We sent a wagon after Brother Yokum who had been so dreadfully rnutiliated in the Haun's Mill Massacre that he could not be moved."

Perhaps, as was said earlier of the actors in the drama, the Missouri experiences were so tragic that we who read are drained of emotion. Certainly one who reads of them cannot maintain the high pitch of the emotion caused by the reading. But one thing is apparent: The brethren developed and maintained great and noble compassion for their brothers and sisters. Poor themselves, they were the leaders. Most men stayed with wives and children to extricate them from their situation. But not the leaders; not the Twelve. Wives, children, property-all were laid on the altar. Turning their backs on their suffering and needy families they went forth to succor their friends. In this we seem to hear an echo of the words of the Savior-something about laying down a life for a friend.

Brigham copies into his diary the revelation directing the Twelve to go to England in 1838.
