S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April-May 1839

A tentative decision to purchase the land at Commerce, Illinois, and to settle the Saints there came as a result of a special committee sent out as soon as the Saints began to arrive in Quincy. But the final decision was made when Joseph Smith, the Prophet, fresh from his unjust confinement in Liberty Jail, arrived in April and made a survey of the country on both sides of the Mississippi River at that point. The Illinois side of the river contains a cove of bottom land which, while rich in soil was at that time low and swampy. Back of this the land rises with fair rapidity until it reaches the level of the Illinois prairie.

It was into this bottom land, damp and, in June, alive with mosquitoes, that the families of the Saints moved in large numbers. They camped anywhere they could for the moment, until they could obtain lots on which to build their homes. Work was immediately begun to drain the water from the land, but this work progressed slowly because the weakened Saints were unable to put full energy into both the drainage operations and the provision of shelter at the same time. Men were busied building cabins as soon as the available supply already there from other settlers was exhausted. Heber C. Kimball later said, "I built a log house about sixteen feet square, with my own hands. I hewed the puncheons for the floor, and split and made the shingles." Others did likewise.

From here the building and working fanned out into the surrounding territory. Up and down the river, and across it too, the Saints poured in, taking up land as they could.

On the Iowa side the land slopes more steeply toward the river bank, and here was Montrose, the scene of an old army headquarters. A series of barracks still stood, a ready-made haven for the Saints. Some outbuildings were there, too, in which stock could be sheltered, but as soon as the Saints arrived, a small group of mobbers burned these to prevent their being used.

To these barracks Brigham brought Mary Ann and the children, he and Wilford Woodruff joining each other in the moving, both families sharing one room. In the barracks, too, were Orson Pratt and John Taylor and their families who were also together in one room. Crowded though it was, this was a sort of heaven compared to what they had endured.

Brigham in his terse way had expressed the utter and complete happiness which had enveloped his soul as he clasped hands once more with the Prophet under the freedom of the Illinois skies. To see the Prophet free once more, to drink once again the deep draught of eternal wisdom and truth which constantly poured forth from his lips, to be in harmony with the spirit which prompted the sayings and gave understanding to the listener-what more could one want? Nothing, so far as Brigham was concerned, though this did not mean that he was not aware that man has physical needs.

One of the problems which had immediately faced Brigham was a cry of repentance out of the wilderness, for Orson Hyde, truly sorrowful and in deep distress over his traitorous act of betrayal in backing Thomas B. Marsh's lying statements, wrote him a letter. He had dated it March 30, 1839, a month after Brigham had taken Mary Ann and Vilate Kimball to Quincy, and before his return to Far West in April. Brigham, one not prone to record things of little importance or of a personal nature, copied it faithfully into his little diary.

"Dear Sir," it began, and continued:

"I now attempt to write you a few lines to express, in short, the feelings and desires of my heart. I saw Brother Kimball at Far West soon after you left that place, and he invited me very strongley (sic) to come back and go with him to England. I asked him if he could forgive me and he said yes. I asked him if the Church would forgive me, and he said yes, and I told him I would come and go with him, and so I will (if the Lord permit).

"When I see you and the church I will give you a full history of my course, and the reasoning of my mind; and freely confess all my sins; and as to the terms upon which I can be received back into my place. I shall not be particular; for to live in this way I cannot; and to join any other society I have no more disposition than to eat when I am full. I talked of writing to England, but have not don (sic) it. I saw I was placed in a situation that I could do no good, and felt disposed to do as little harm as possible. Sometimes, during the past winter, my mind has been so exercised that I could neither work nor sleep, and would frequently find myself weeping before I was aware of it; and asking myself this question why in God's name is it so? What have I don (sic) that I am left in this situation, or rather that I have been suffered to fall in this dilemna. When I returned from England, my spirit was pure and my soul loved virtue. I was uncoscious (sic) of guilt. When I lay sick at Far West I thought if I could but depart I should be at rest. I felt like taking no part in the Danite Movements. The convictions of my own mind were, that it was not a good and virtuous institution and these convictions were strengthened by the tales of some who had been initiated into the mysteries.

"But these things do not rest upon my mind with that weight which they did at that time, I may say, they are no more in my mind now than a feather in the wind. I have engaged a school which would have been worth three hundred dollars a year or more before I started for Far West. I however would not bind myself for only a quarter at a time. When in the upper country I intended to have gone to Liberty to see the prisoners but their (sic) had been an attempt made to rescue them a few days before, and for this reason they would admit no one into the prison; therefore I did not go. I spoke with Parley through the cracks and thought If I had ben (sic) a Sampson, the prisoners should go free.

"Brother Kimball told me I had better get clear of my school if I could. I have done so since I returned, and I expect Brother Oliver Olney to send a team here for my family in the course of two or three weeks. He will take them to the Iowa Territory, there is a fine chance for me in a wholesale grocery here; can get good wages and I am now in the owners employ until the team comes. And I better remain here in order to fit myself for a mission or a campaign, or had I better leave as soon as the team comes for my family, and if I leave here where shall I find the authorities of the Church; the chastening hand of the Lord has don (sic) for me that which nothing else would. I think if the Church will accept me as a minister, or a solier (sic) or a door keeper, they can have me. I need not write to you that I have litterally (sic) died and been rased (sic) from the dead since I was last in Far West, but I will tell you more about it when I see you face to face. Keep this part to yourself, if you please ----

"Brigham, will you forgive me? Will the Church forgive me?

If so God will forgive me.

Please write me immediately on rct of this. and tell me all you think to be for my good. Direct to New Franklin,

Howard County, Mo.

"Whatever the Church may decide upon respecting my case, they may rest assured that the following are the real wishes of my hart (sic).

"With a fresh remembrance of former times, and former scenes, with feelings of tenderest kind toward you and all with whom you are connected, I subscribe myself your younger brother in a distant land feeding swine."

Orson Hyde [^1]

There has been no indication in anything Brigham later said as to the effect this appeal had upon him. But when the time came for the plea to be considered, Hyrum Smith and Heber C. Kimball each spoke of the sincerity of the repentance and urged a favorable decision. Joseph listened and finally said that he could not go against the pleas of these two beloved brethren, and made the decision that Orson Hyde should be fellowshipped. Not only that, but if the Twelve were willing, he should be taken back into the Quorum of the Twelve. This was the quintessence of forgiveness-not only to forgive, but to reinstate a man as though nothing wrong had been done in the first place.

Hadn't the Lord Jesus done this with Peter, after his denial of Him, and after his sincere repentance?

The decision was made. Brigham voted to sustain the decision, and Orson Hyde was forgiven and received back into the Twelve. Thus a good and a strong defender was saved for greater deeds and service because of the great principle of repentance and forgiveness. Certainly, both these principles go together.

Brigham Young's Diary

---
Notas:
[^1] Give up the leaders - "This you have done"
