S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

June-September 1839

What was the sickness which laid the Saints low that summer of 1839? The accounts say that people got sick. Those who nursed them finally took sick also. In one account of an illness a month or two later mention is made of chills and fever. But one is forced to conjecture that malaria was the disease. The Saints were chronically ill with this scourge at one time or another, during their flights from mobs. Those who had escaped it in Missouri would have been easy victims in Illinois, for all were weakened and undernourished when they reached Commerce. The miasmic marshy bottomland where all arrived at first was a breeding place for the hordes of mosquitoes which made their nights miserable. Everybody was repeatedly bitten, and nearly everybody was sick. There were many deaths from the illness, whatever it was.

Joseph Smith and Emma filled their log house with the sick, their tent in the yard, then other tents, and made Herculean efforts to relieve the distress of the sufferers. After several days and nights of this the Prophet himself became exhausted and fell ill. Finally in his desperation at the plight of the Saints, and of himself, he prayed to the Lord for relief. Then as one suddenly relieved he arose from his bed and began to heal the sick. He laid hands on each one in his house and they arose and walked. Then he healed those sick in the door yard. He went from camp to camp, healing and blessing. Some near death arose out of the stupor of the dying and joined him in his visits of mercy.

The Prophet crossed the River to Montrose. Brigham was lying in his bed ill with the rest of his family; the Prophet blessed him and he was instantly healed as were John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff, all of whom joined the party. Brigham said Joseph's voice was as the voice of God. One man, Elijah Fordham, lay near death, with poultices on his body and legs. His response to the administration was to kick off the poultices and dress himself, then follow Joseph to the next place. Joseph Noble was likewise healed.

Another man, as the Prophet grew too weary to go farther, asked that he come and bless his twin children. The Prophet gave a silk handkerchief to Wilford Woodruff, telling him to go and wipe the children's brows with the handkerchief and bless them. They were healed. Joseph told the Twelve to go up and down the river healing the sick likewise. They did so, Brigham among them, and many were healed at his hands. By the end of that day in July 1839, through the exercise of the Priesthood of the Son of God and faith in Christ the Lord, a great miracle had been performed. Certainly there was need for it. This illness had been the last straw. So many had been stricken that hardly one had been left to nurse the sufferers or care for their elemental needs, not even to get water to allay the feverish thirst. But as in the days of the wilderness when starvation threatened ancient Israel and manna was provided, and when thirst threatened lives and Moses struck the rock and water gushed forth, so in this hour of extremity the gift of faith to heal and be healed was given in such abundance that it could not be denied.
