S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

September 14, 1839

September 14, 1839, Brigham felt too ill to move. Through the haze of his fever something impelled him to arise and to get on his clothes. His trunk and carpet valise were already packed with what little extra clothing he had, but he did not have the strength to lift them. Mary Ann was unable to help him. She could make it to the door, that was all. All of the children were feverishly restless in their beds.

Brigham left no record describing the effort it took to arise or to steel himself to leave his family that day in September. If there was weeping, he does not mention it. But he could not get to the river without help. A neighborly friend drove up in his wagon and Brigham, crawling in by a tremendous effort, lay down in the box. The wagon drove off, Mary Ann waving a weak farewell with one hand while holding to the door frame for support with the other. It was thirty rods to the river; he could not have walked the distance (165 yards).

There was a boat waiting. He was rowed across the Mississippi River, where he lay on the bank of the stream for a time, until Israel Barlow came by on a horse. Brother Barlow agreed to carry him on the horse to the home of Heber C. Kimball. From what deep wellspring did Brigham draw the strength to mount that horse behind Israel Barlow? Who can say? All we know is that he did it with some help from Barlow. And with carpet bag valise, he rode behind Barlow through the raw streets of the town to the home of Heber C. Kimball. The trunk could be retrieved later. This was as far as he could go. Somehow, in spite of their own illness, the Kimballs made room for him in their sixteen-foot-square cabin. He could not move for four days.

Mary Ann, learning of his condition and being now a little stronger, crossed the river and persuaded a boy with a wagon to deliver her to the Kimball home. She did not

record what she did with the children. Of course she took her two-weeks-old baby with her, but the others must have been cared for by the Woodruffs.

September 18, 1839! The test of determination was repeated, but this time Brigham had Heber to support him and Heber had Brigham. Both were still too ill to go. However, a wagon, donated by Charles Hubbard, with team driven by his son, drew up to the cabin and the two men staggered to the tail gate and crawled in seeing the two women standing shakily in the doorway, Heber said "This is no way to leave, let's give them a cheer." The two men staggered to their feet and weakly waved their hats. "Hurrah! Hurrah for Israel." With the women smiling bravely, and the men sinking exhausted to the floor of the wagon the team started away. As long as they could see it, the women stood in the doorway watching their men drive out of their lives. What then! What they thought, their fear, their dismay at the situation-these things they did not mention until memory had made it a hallowed privileged sacrifice. Mary Ann went back to Montrose, while Vilate stayed where she was. What to do next, that was the problem. One thing was sure, the children had to have food.

For the travelers it was a nightmare of endurance for the next few days. The boy drove the wagon across the prairie for fourteen miles to the shanty of Brother Duel, where Mrs. Duel helped get the baggage out of the wagon. The next morning Brother Duel carried Brigham and Heber twelve miles to Lima, giving them a dollar to help them on their way. Another brother hauled them in his wagon to Father Mikesells near Quincy, where they remained for several days, finding strength to preach. They began to feel a little better.

Here Brigham found his father very weak. John Young, now seventy-six years old, had done all he could. The Missouri persecutions had so weakened him that there was nothing left in him to carry him further. Brigham bade him farewell, knowing well that he would not see his father again in the flesh. (John died the following October 12, the Prophet saying he was a true martyr for the faith.) But this was not the time to pause longer than needed to gain strength and means. Brigham left his father as he had left his wife. John, too, was in the hands of the Lord.

The journey then became a succession of daily hauls by friendly members with wagons. George A. Smith, Theodore Turley and Brother Murray, Heber's father-in-law, joined the two apostles.

Lyman Wight took them to C. C. Rich's place; Brother Rich hauled them to Brother Wilbur's. He in turn carried them to Father James Allred at Pittsfield. Allred delivered them to where Brother Harlow Redfield lived. From there they were carried to Brother Decker's in Scott County. October 1 they arrived at the home of Lorenzo Dow Young, who took them to Springfield, and here Brigham had a relapse and was too ill to travel for several days.

Then, somehow, they acquired a scrawny team of horses and a wagon. A bed was fitted in it for Brigham, as he was unable to sit up. For eight miles they endured the rough roads, finally pulling into the yard of Father Draper. As they were entering the house, George A. Smith dropped a bottle of tonic bitters on the hearth, breaking it. Brother Draper, thinking it to be a bottle of whiskey, was startled and dismayed. "You are a pretty set of apostles to be carrying a bottle of whiskey with you," was his sour comment. Explanations were made, he was appeased, finally allowing them to stay all night with him.

The next day's journey saw them in Terre Haute, Indiana. It was now the 17th of November. Brigham and Heber stopped at the home of Dr. Modisetts, while the other three stayed at Brother Stowe's nearby. But let Brigham tell it in his own words:

"In the evening the doctor called in to see them, brother Stowe being very poor, and the brethren quite ill in health. The doctor expressed great sympathy for them when he returned to his house-relating over the poverty of brother Stowe and the brethren's ill health, he shed many tears, but he did not have enough to buy them a chicken or give them a shilling, though he was worth some four or five hundred thousand dollars.

"In the course of the evening brother Kimball became very ill. The doctor said he could give him something that would help him, but the old man was so drunk he did not know what he did do, and he gave brother Kimball a tablespoonful of morphine. His wife saw him pour it out, but dare not say a word, but believed it would kill brother Kimball. A few minutes after he took it, he straightened up in his chair, and said he felt very strange, and thought he would lie down; and on his making a motion to go to bed, he fell his length upon the floor. I sprang to him, rolled him over on his back, and put a pillow under his head, and began to inquire what the doctor had given him. I learned he had given him morphine. Brother Kimball soon came to, and spoke faintly and said, 'Don't be scared, for I shan't die.' We got him on the bed, and I nursed him through the night. I changed his under clothing five times, and washed him previous to changing his clothes. I found him covered with sweat, at first like thin honey. This gradually wore out towards morning, and he sweat naturally. He was scarcely able to speak, so as to be understood, through the night."
