S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

October-November 1839

The poisoning of Heber G. Kimball by a drunken doctor caused a change in plans. The other members of the party were anxious to go on, so Brigham gave them all the money he and Heber had except five dollars and told them to take the wagon and horses. They were to conserve the horses and proceed toward Kirtland. Heber from his sick bed prophesied that he and Brigham would arrive in Kirtland before those now leaving.

Heber was several days recovering before he felt able to travel, then through the kindness of members, each taking a turn, the brethren were relayed to Pleasantville, Indiana. From donations at Pleasantville, their first stop after leaving Terre Haute, they now had $13.50. Brigham was once again the one to become sick, and he was tended and nursed by Heber. The plain fact is that both were too feeble in health to be travelling at all. It was not a case of a day's illness. It was more the proposition that, while doubtful that they could go on, humanly speaking, perhaps by sheer determination and God's aid they would make it to the next stop.

As soon as Brigham was able to move, they decided to spend their $13.50 for a ride on the stage as far as it would take them. To their surprise they were able to ride as far as Indianapolis. Brigham looked in his purse kept in his trunk and discovered enough money to take them to Richmond. At Richmond he again looked and found they had means to take them to Dayton, Ohio. At Dayton they expected to have to stop and work to earn enough to go farther. Brigham went to his trunk for money to pay his bill. Upon looking in the purse where he kept the money, to his surprise he found enough to pay not only for the lodging but also for their passage to Columbus. Again they stayed in a tavern, and again when Brigham looked in the trunk there was enough to pay that night's lodging as well as their stage fare to Wooster. Once more the same thing took place, with enough money found to pay their fare to Cleveland.

The first time Brigham found the unexpected cash he thought that Heber had placed it there, and he asked him about it. One can almost hear him say: "Heber, here are ten dollars that weren't here yesterday. Did you put it in the trunk?"

And the answer: "Why no. I did not. I haven't ten cents to my name, nor have I had since we left Commerce,

except the money you know we've had donated." "You are sure?" "Positive."

"Well, whoever put it there, there it is. I suppose we should use it to pay our expenses."

When Brigham found money the second time, he again questioned Heber. He suspected Heber had a secret store that he had kept from Brigham. But no, Heber was quite vehement about it. He had no secret store, nor had he ever had. The money in the trunk didn't come from him. With this assurance Brigham could no longer question. The money was being placed there by some personage who, knowing their stark need, helped them. Brigham throughout his life testified that the purse in his trunk was never empty all the while they traveled on that journey. There was never more than enough for a day's journey, but there was enough each day when he looked. Further, after Heber's assurance that he had not put it there, Brigham was satisfied that it came as a gift from the Lord and let it go at that. He knew! Heber knew! Both gave thanks.

At Strongsville, twenty miles out of Cleveland, Brigham had a "strong impression" to stop. But the stage kept rolling along and they passed on through the town. Unknown to them, the three who had left them at Terre Haute with the wagon and horses had stopped to rest at Strongsville. Heber and Brigham passed them there.

The most surprised man in the world was Brother Murray when he met Heber face to face in Kirtland. He embraced his son-in-law, exclaiming that Heber had looked so near dead to him at Terre Haute that he thought he would never see him again in this world.

Heber smiled and said: "I told you we'd beat you to Kirtland."

Brigham later reviewed the situation when he arrived:

"We found a good many friends who were glad to see us. I had a York shilling left. On looking over our expenses we found we had paid out over $87.00, out of the $13 50 we had at Pleasantville, which is all the money we had to pay our passages, to my certain knowledge, to start on. We traveled over 400 miles by the stage for which we paid from 8 to 10c per mile, and had eaten three meals a day for each of which we were charged 50c, also 50c for our lodging." We make neither explanation nor comment nor draw any moral from this experience. There is none to make. We do know that these men were honest and truthful men. The last thing they would do would be to concoct a story to deceive. The account stands dear. They had $13.50 to begin the stage journey. They spent more than $87.00. They arrived in Kirtland with exactly a York shilling (an English coin worth at the time about 12c).

Though they found the sneering apostates still active in Kirtland, the time was spent in rejoicing. For one thing they entered the Temple, held a meeting, anointed one another, with shouts of hosannah! They performed the ordinance of washing of feet. They preached to the congregation on Sunday, but the apostate groups were so displeased by what Brigham and Heber said that they said these men should never preach in that house again. They hadn't minded the subject of John Taylor's preaching and said he might be allowed to preach again, but not Brigham Young nor Heber C. Kimball, nor Father Murray, nor Brother Turley. Their accusers spread the story that the ill health of the brethren was because of their wickedness, that God was thus punishing them.

Brigham spent some time visiting with his brother John Young, who was still at Kirtland, and with his sister, Nancy. She and her husband, Daniel Kent, had not moved west.

Finally they asked the loyal Saints for help to get them to New York. They sold the wagon and horses, and with the donation from the loyal members they started once more on their way. Brigham observed that "there was not a healthy man among us and some more fitted for a hospital than a journey."

They waited at Fairport three days for a lake steamer. Though they sailed safely, Brigham mentioned the fact that at about 1:00 a.m. a strong wind arose. Brigham "went on deck and felt impressed in spirit to pray to the Father, in the name of Jesus Christ for a forgiveness of all my sins, and then I felt to command the winds to cease and let us go safe on our journey. The winds abated, and I felt to give the glory and honor and praise to that God who rules all things."

When they reached Buffalo they ran into some slight difficulty. "We found our Ohio money would not pass current, and we had to go to a broker and exchange for Buffalo money by paying a heavy discount." There is some advantage in having a national currency today. In that day with any and all banks issuing currency, bank notes were suspect except where the bankers were known and trusted.
