S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

November 26, 1839 -February 9, 1840

Brigham took six weeks to go from Kirtland to New York where a ship could be found bound for England. It had taken a little more than two months to go from Commerce to Kirtland. Had he been in good health he could have done it in thirty days, as he did when walking home after Zion's Camp. But he was a sick man, as were each of his companions. There was frequent stopping for nursing and recuperation.

Heber left the party at Byron, New York, to visit with friends en route. George A. Smith became Brigham's traveling companion, who if anything, was in poorer health than Heber. To add to his misery, his eyesight became affected. For a time Brigham had to place his food on his plate, since he could not see well enough to find it in the serving dishes on the table. At Joseph Murdock's at Hamilton, Madison County, George A. was put to bed and given a thorough series of Thompsonian treatments. In this modern day the name Thompson means nothing, but in his day Thompson was a controversial figure. He theorized that herbs, given in right proportion, and properly prepared, would cure most diseases. He wrote a book about it and taught his theories. Of course, many disagreed with his ideas. One of the features of the treatment was the administration of herbs which purge and others which cause vomiting. So if George A. got the "Thompson" treatment, he among other things got the equivalent of castor oil and ipicac. However, other phases of the Thompsonian nursing had to do with soothing herbs. It was apparently effective, for George A. seemed to feel better for a while.

Meanwhile Brigham found the Branch in Hamilton in confusion. "They had," said Brigham, "the gift of tongues among them and the interpretation, and they were so ignorant of the nature of these gifts that they supposed that everything which was spoken in tongues was immediate revelation from God; a false spirit had crept in and division was the result. I taught them that when they spoke in tongues, the language might be from the Lord, but with the tongue they spoke the things that were in their hearts, whether they were good or evil; the gift of tongues was given for a blessing to the saints, but not to govern them, nor to control the elders, or dictate the affairs of the Church."

The only glimpse given by Brigham as to his personal wardrobe was a comment he made at this place. "Brother Benager Moon gave me Satinette to make me an overcoat. Sister Lucetta Murdock made it for me. This was a great blessing to me as I had worn a quilt with a comforter run through it, in lieu of an overcoat all the way from Commerce, which," he added wryly, "wasn't much of a ministerial appearance." Brigham Young was a man of dignity. It must have taken a good deal of pride-swallowing for him to appear everywhere that fall and winter with an old quilt for his only coat.

Near Hamilton dwelt several of Brighams cousins, who were of the Brigham family. He centered his attention on Cousin Phinehas Brigham. This was not the first meeting; he had called on Cousin Phinehas before. Brigham did not very often comment on what he told a man, but apparently Cousin Phinehas nettled him: so he described in some detail what he said to Cousin Phinehas: "I preached the gospel to him so plainly that he could not make any reply, but had to acknowledge that what I taught him was scriptural and reasonable, and he could not gainsay it; but being a very staunch Baptist, and a deacon too, he regretted very much that his son was not there, who was educated for a Baptist priest. He thought if his son was there he might be able to enlighten my mind and point out my errors, although he was not able to do it himself. We had not conversed an hour before his son, the priest, came in, to whom he introduced me, and then sat down with a great deal of composure, believing the son would be able to rebut the doctrine I had advanced.

"The son with all the solemnity and air of a priest began to ask questions. I answered and, in return asked him a few questions, giving him the liberty to rebut any statement I had made by bringing in scripture testimony, as I read my doctrine from the Bible; but he could not give me any light, neither could he answer the questions I asked, and he was too much of a gentleman-young and inexperienced-to commence a tirade of abuse, as older priests generally did on the character of Joseph Smith, and the Book of Mormon, consequently he sat as mute as a stock.

"I continued my visit with the family for a short time and when I was about to leave I told them that Baptism, Methodism, Presbyterianism, Quakerism, Shakerism and every other ism I had studied and learned, for I desired to know the truth, and found I could put all their doctrines, when simmered down to truth, into a snuff box of smallest class, put it away in my vest pocket and go on my way; but when I found "Mormonism", I found that it was higher than I could reach with my researches, deeper than I was capable of comprehending, and calculated to expand the mind, and lead mankind from truth to truth, from light to light, from grace to grace, and exalt him in the Celestial Kingdom, to be associated with the gods and angels."

Apparently his testimony had no effect, not even to give him hospitality, for he said "I bade them good night and went over the hill to Hamilton and stayed at Brother Murdock's."

It was this same cousin to whom he had gone in 1833 on his first mission, and who, rather than allow Brigham to ask a blessing on the food, had finally asked it himself, most likely for the first time in his life.

The brethren had other adventures. At a meeting held near West Stockbridge at Richmond, three boys temporarily broke up the meeting by throwing sulphur on the hot stove. The stench reminded the brethren of the sectarian conceptions of hell. As they traveled further in a sleigh a winter storm had piled up drifts, some of which were fifteen feet deep.

But finally they reached New Haven, Connecticut, and took the steamer for New York. The ship struck ice and could take them only within eighteen miles of New York, to the East River. Here they hired a market wagon to carry their trunks to Harlem, where they took a stage to New York. As they alighted from the stage the captain of the steamer got off too. Brigham asked him if he was willing to pay his and George A. Smith's fare. He said he would be delighted, and did so. (It was 50c each. ) At ten o'clock that night, leaving their luggage and inquiring their way, they walked to the residence of Parley P. Pratt at 55 Mott Street. The family took them in, happy at seeing them.

Brigham knelt that night and thanked God for "having preserved us and brought us in safety so far on our mission to the nations of the earth." It was the night of January 31st. We find in our hearts the hope that he was equipped with gloves and ear muffs. But there was more. They could not leave America without added misery. Brigham spent a week preaching and conversing about the Gospel. He went over to Brooklyn with his brethren, all of whom had now arrived. On the return while jumping onto the ferry boat, meaning to catch on to the stanchion with his left hand, he fell somehow on a large iron ring on the deck dislocating his left shoulder.

Intense though the pain was, Brigham did not lose presence of mind. He said to Brother Hedlock: "Roll me over on my back. Now Heber you and Brother Hedlock lay hold of my body and hold me firm. Brother Parley, take hold of my hand and pull; put your foot against my side, that's it. I'll guide the bone into place with my right hand."

They held and pulled as directed, and the bone slipped back into its socket. Then they wound a handkerchief around his shoulder and helped him up. His later statement was simply: "When I came to a fire, I fainted, and was not able to dress myself for several days." He might have added "And was unable to move my shoulder freely for several months."
