S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Early 1840

On February 23, 1840, Brigham completed a short tour of the branches of Long Island, at Hempstead, Rockaway, Brooklyn, and with smaller groups. This day he did something he had never done before. He described his travels toward England and how he and his brethren had managed to get here. It had taken better than four months to come this far. There had been delays; illness had blocked their progress. But now they could go no farther by just starting to walk overland. He said he had never before asked anyone for a dime, but he lacked sufficient means to proceed farther without assistance. If anyone would contribute to help us he would thankfully receive it. After the meeting $19.50 was placed in his hands. Not a great sum, certainly.

Ship of the type of the "Patrick Henry" Courtesy Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Historian's Office

He went down to the dock with the other brethren and engaged passage on the Black Ball Line packet ship Patrick Henry, Captain Delano commanding. The fare was $18.00, steerage class. He paid in addition $1.00 as his portion of the hire of the ship's cook, totaling $19.00. He had 50 cents left. Food and bedding were to be provided by the travelers.

Now commenced a great activity on the part of the local Saints. The women sewed up ticks and stuffed them with straw for beds, filling some smaller bags with straw for pillows. They furnished the brethren with an ample supply of provisions, but what Brigham meant by "ample" he did not say. In that day there would be salt pork, as the meat best liable to keep. Bread might have been the proverbial "hard tack." Vegetables would have to be the kind which would keep over winter, so potatoes, carrots, parsnips and turnips might have been supplied in small quantity. One suspects that dried beans, peas, flour, with the meat, was the type of food they carried aboard. The food would need to last at least a month.

A day or two before leaving they had a good laugh over an incident in which their own teaching had a boomerang effect. Said Brigham:

"On Sunday I taught the Saints to ask the Elders, when they came to stay with them, if they wished water to wash their feet. In the evening we went to Brother Addison Everett's and Sister Everett (having apparently heard well what was taught) asked us if we would have some water to wash our feet. Having no fire she brought us a bucket of ice cold water and we washed our feet. The cold was alleviated by our exceeding good humor." Apparently the brethren had improved in health, and could see their way clear to getting on their journey.

The day of departure came, March 9. A large number of the Saints were on hand to say goodbye. The brethren shook hands all around and entered a small boat. Sailors rowed them to the ship. As they pulled away from the wharf the members of the Church began to sing a song of farewell,

Steerage on the Patrick Henry on east-bound journey to Europe as they leave New York,

"The Gallant Ship is Under Weigh." "We joined them as long as we could hear." One can almost hear Brigham's clear voice ringing out above the rest of the singers. As soon as they were on board, the ship weighed anchor and was towed to Sandy Hook by the steam tug. Brother L. R. Foster, Presiding Elder of the New York Branch, went that far with them, returning to New York on the tug. The brethren were the last contingent of the apostles to leave, and gave thanks to God that they were on the way.

They retired to the steerage and arranged themselves. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball occupied a lower bunk. Parley P. Pratt and Orson Pratt were to sleep directly above them in the upper bunk. In the upper bunk at the feet of the Pratts were George A. Smith and Reuben Hedlock. In the lower bunk, directly below, were two Englishmen not of the party. Thus were the sleeping arrangements made. The straw mattresses were duly installed. What quilts they had they divided among them, and they settled down to their first meal prepared by the cook. By sunset they were out of sight of land as the offshore wind filled the sails and sent the ship cutting through the swells. By dark they might as well not have eaten, for they didn't keep what they ate.

Brigham was seasick most of the way to England, and he had a right to be. Ordinarily seasickness lasts about three days, after which one can brave the swells with some enjoyment. But on the eighth day out they were beset with a heavy gale which increased in intensity until on the thirteenth day water was coming in the hatches and part of the ship's bulwark was swept away. North Atlantic storms can be vicious and this one apparently was one of the worst. Brigham was too sick to care.

Brigham recorded nothing concerning navigation. Was the ship blown off her course? Were there other minor storms? It is likely there were, for the passage was "stormy." One can think with a wry smile that indeed the food supply was sufficient, since no one eats when seasick.

All things, even voyages, have an end. The ship arrived at Liverpool on April 6, twenty-nine days after leaving New York. That was good time; nearly a month. The ship could not get to the dock because of the tide, so the brethren were rowed ashore. Feeling the firm ground beneath his feet, Brigham could not restrain himself. He shouted "Hosannah!" three times at the top of his voice. This he had promised himself he would do before he left America.

They found a room at No. 8 Union Street, and immediately held a meeting. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was served, and the brethren thanked the Lord God for their preservation while on the waters. Then they pleaded that the "way might be opened before us to accomplish our missions successfully." Elders John Taylor and John Moon joined them in Liverpool.

April 8th they traveled to Preston and were overcome with emotion as a multitude of Saints gathered there to meet and welcome them. Preston was the scene of Heber C. Kimball's success in 1837, and the joy of the Saints at seeing him again was overpowering. On April 9 Willard Richards joined them. As Brigham offered his hand, Willard said,

"And who are you, sir. I believe I have never had the privilege."

"I am your cousin Brigham Young."

"It cannot be, you are a skeleton--."

But Brigham assured him that he was indeed Brigham in the skeleton if not in the flesh. He had become so emaciated from his illness in the States and his seasickness that Willard truly could not recognize him.
