S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April 1840

One reading the various diaries of the Twelve during the missions to England would wonder how their efforts were coordinated. The writing tells where they went but very little of how they were sent. What was the guiding hand which kept them a unified group? Since they set a pattern which was followed for many years to come, we shall now digress enough to observe the pattern.

Since not all of the Twelve left Commerce at the same time, the result was that those who left early arrived in England early. Then, too, some were delayed less en route than was Brigham. A brief note in the Prophet Joseph Smith's history states:

"Monday, January 13, 1840: Elders Wilford Woodruff', John Taylor, and Theodore Turley arrived at Preston, England."

Why Preston? Simply because this town was the place where Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, Joseph Fielding and their companions had met with success in 1837 during the first European Mission. This was headquarters for a large body of converts. Here lived Willard Richards who had been left in England to preside over the mission on Heber's return to the States. The three men had a happy reunion with Willard, Joseph Fielding and Hiram Clark at Preston; then they held a conference. It was decided that Elders Woodruff and Turley should go to the Staffordshire Potteries, Elders Taylor and Fielding should go to Liverpool, Elder Hiram Clark should go to Manchester with William Clayton, and Elder Richards should go where the Spirit directed, as he was still the president of the mission. It was agreed that each would correspond with the presidency at Preston, which would act as a clearing house to keep account of their movements. Each would report where he had been and where he expected to be in the next weeks.

On the 18th of January Elders Woodruff and Turley were on their way to Stoke-on-Trent, to the Staffordshire Potteries. These Potteries-famous today for the beauty of the bone white china dishes they produce, and for their decorative china flowers and figurines-were turning out excellent ware in that day. Today Staffordshire ware is a prized possession, as it was prized in that day. The Potteries employed a large number of skilled potters, artists, and decorators. Wilford Woodruff and Theodore Turley found ready reception and acceptance of their message. Large numbers of the people in Stoke-on-Trent and in the surrounding villages were baptized and organized into branches.

The method was very simple. The missionaries would seek "entertainment" to present their message. The man spoken to was moved in his feelings to listen to them. A meeting would be announced at the house of the host, and neighbors, relatives, and friends would crowd into the humble home to listen. Very simply the elders spoke of the Gospel and its restoration at the hands of Joseph Smith. They showed that it was harmonious with Biblical prophecy and they bore their humble witness. Since they had no copies of the Book of Mormon to distribute, all they could do was exhibit their own copies, to be read in small groups after the meetings. The humble witness, acknowledging before God and these people the truth of the messages, was the converting factor. Scarcely a meeting was ended but several would bear witness that they knew the missionaries spoke the truth, and would request baptism. These in turn told their friends and asked that meetings be held in their homes. And they insisted that the elders stay with them. These missionaries did not lack for shelter, food, and small contributions of money while they were in this area having such great success.

Wilford Woodruff was preaching on March 1 to an assembled congregation when he, without warning, said that this was the last time he would be with them for some time. He said he felt it to be the will of the Lord that he go to the south and labor there. He later said that the feeling came to him while preaching, and that he was as much surprised to be telling this to the congregation as they were surprised to hear him say it. But he knew when he heard the "whispering of the Spirit," and he obeyed the prompting. Placing the work at the Potteries in charge of Elder Turley, he commenced his travels south, traveling until he "felt" he had gone far enough and then commencing his work there by stopping at farm houses and inviting the occupants to listen to his message. The beginning of this work was near Ledbury in Herefordshire, one of the most beautiful sections of England, where the Malvern Hills, rise in their wonder of green and mist. Here the nobles of England were wont to vacation, and here the Spirit of the Lord whispered to Wilford Woodruff that there was a work to do. He began the work.

One day he walked up the long lane leading to the large home of John Benbow, past the stone outbuildings and on to the gate leading to the house. Benbow was a very prosperous farmer, tilling more than three hundred acres, which was a very large farm in that day. When one remembers that all farm work was done by hand, with the heavy tilling by the use of horses, one can picture that there were many hired men on the farm. John Benbow was considered wealthy in land and goods.

Elder Woodruff knocked on the Benbow door. The door opened, and facing him was the ruddy, square, honest face of the owner, his sturdy body testifying to his success and his confidence in himself. The missionary stated his purpose and his message. If Benbow hesitated, it is not recorded. He invited Elder Woodruff in, provided him a bedroom and food, and threw his house open to preaching. After listening carefully to what Elder Woodruff said, he and his wife asked for baptism the next day.

Miraculously the field of labor opened, with Wilford preaching one month and five days. In that time he converted, first the superintendent of the Church of the United

The John Benbow farm.

Brethren, a group of dissident Methodists, and with him forty-five of his preachers, and one hundred fourteen members. They immediately turned their preaching places into branches of the Church. These included more than forty licensed preaching places and two chapels.

Thus it is seen that the "way opened;" friends were raised up. Wilford Woodruff need "take no thought" of what he should eat or where he should sleep, for in the hour of need it would be provided. Further, the location and success of his labors were known at Preston, for he kept the brethren informed as to where he was and the points at which mail could reach him.

The conference in Preston, held upon the arrival of Brigham, was, then, the result of orderly work, according to plan, a culmination of an agreement made in January that they would meet in Preston upon the arrival of the remainder of the Twelve. Thus, when Brigham and his party reached Liverpool, they found John Taylor there because it had been agreed that he should work there. With the arrival of the President of the Twelve, they would now organize themselves on a permanent basis to perform the work-whatever it was to be-assigned by the Spirit. And by the inspiration of the Spirit it became a mighty flood as the years went by.
