S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April 1840

The impossible had been accomplished. The commandment of the Lord, not to be gainsaid, was that the Twelve should leave Far West, April 26, 1839, on a mission of proselyting and warning to the world, and especially, they understood, to England as a starting place. Why England? An opening wedge had been driven in 1837 by Heber C. Kimball. There were several thousand members already converted but needing attention and counseling. That seems to be reason enough. "Go from the known to the unknown" is normally good procedure. The accomplishment of this great feat of travel of more than three thousand miles, with every step of the way dogged by obstacles of the body and of the spirit, proved a miracle, for seemingly, when they had had all they could bear and were about to break, "the way opened" as they were wont to say, and they went a little farther.

There was one more item not yet accomplished. The Prophet Joseph Smith had nominated Willard Richards to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. But since he was in England at the time this had not been accomplished. Now, April 14 at Preston, the Twelve met in solemn council. A majority of the Quorum can do business, and for the first time since they began their travels they had a majority. The meeting was called to order by Brigham. It was with satisfaction and solemn pride that he looked at the countenances of his brethren, their faces thin and drawn from the trials they had endured in reaching this place. They had been tried in the furnace and had come forth bright. There was Heber C. Kimball, his most beloved friend; then next to him Parley Pratt and his brother Orson Pratt, Parley of intense poetical nature, Orson scientifically bent; Wilford Woodruff, of unwavering, humble faith; John Taylor, the convert of Parley P. Pratt in Canada, who had already proved his mettle; and George A. Smith, all young men in years, but seasoned and matured by experience and trial.

English License. Brigham's license to preach.

Together the others laid their hands on Willard Richards, ordaining him an apostle of Jesus Christ, and placing him in the Quorum as a companion and associate. The Quorum now had eight of its twelve present. Two more, Orson Hyde and John E. Page had begun their journey to the Holy Land, assigned by the Prophet to dedicate that land for the return of the Jews. William Smith was in Commerce.

There was also an important piece of business to be accomplished. The Twelve had never officially sustained the President of the Quorum. So now the seven solemnly voted to sustain Brigham as President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. All participated as hands were laid on his head and he was "set apart." There is little doubt that Heber C. Kimball spoke the words in the conferring of this honor.

Important decisions were made. First, a monthly periodical in pamphlet form was to be printed. Parley P. Pratt was named as editor. The need of a collection of appropriate hymns was so apparent that this was the next consideration. The Twelve agreed that Brigham, John Taylor and Parley P. Pratt should make the selection.

Of equal importance was the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. It was already known that the duty on foreign books was too high for the brethren to think of importing the books. Some way must be found to publish them in England. The first requisite for this was a copyright. This was needed so that no unofficial printing could be done by others, and so that their legal rights could be maintained. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt were the committee appointed to see to it.

They returned to the first item of business, the new monthly publication. It was decided to name it "The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star." Assignments of areas of proselyting were made. The eight men blanketed the whole of western and northern England. One went to Scotland. Then the enduring struggle to persuade unwilling men and women to listen continued. They applied the already proven simple method. Wherever and whenever a meeting could be called, hold it and bear witness. Go to new towns, see the minister, persuade him to lend his church building. If he is unresponsive or hostile (and he generally was) meet in cottages; talk to people in the public places. Every man was busy; there was not enough time in a day to meet all of the appointments which they arranged for themselves or which were made for them.

The members of the Church rose nobly to their support. The home of each new member became a haven of rest and recuperation. Most of them were poor in earthly means but they shared what they had. Had the Twelve been under the necessity of stopping to earn their sustenance, they could have done but a small fraction of what they did accomplish. One reads that they took the "cars" to a place fifty miles away. Contributions in meager amount by loyal members made the ride possible. Brigham often said, "The purse was never empty. There was always just enough."

Even in village and countryside where they appeared for the first time, a meeting would be held, a sermon of the glad tidings would be given, some man would be touched by the Spirit to be baptized, and promptly he would urge the apostle to make his home with him. Small though the cottage, humble the circumstances, the offer was warmly made and gratefully accepted.

There were others working too. With the party had come to England several of the Seventy. After they arrived one of their decisions was to send for twenty more of these men specially called to help the Twelve. So the force of missionaries was not eight men but varied from eight to eighty, for local brethren were also added.

There was another problem which now had to be confronted. The spirit of "gathering" came upon the new converts with mighty power. There was to be a gathering of Israel; this was the day of the fulfillment of the ancient prophecies; the Saints must gather to Zion to partake of its blessings. One who has not experienced this feeling cannot know its urgency, but that it enveloped and shaped the activities of the Saints, and that it was very real and not fantasy, there can be no doubt. Too many of the members have left behind their written accounts of the new feeling to emigrate after their baptism and confirmation, and then have proved their desires by action, for us to doubt the reality of the fact.

With the surge of this new desire came the inspiration and power to solve it. Most of the Saints were poor, but some had means. Those with means agreed to help those lacking them. Others would go and then send for their relatives as fast as they could acquire means in the new land. Then the Twelve stepped in and began. to organize companies of emigrants. These companies were provided with presidencies; they were divided into tens and fifties, with a captain over each. Ships were chartered, the total cost being divided among the number who could go. This brought the actual cost of passage down to within the reach of many more than could otherwise have gone. The time aboard ship was carefully organized. It is surprising indeed that there was very little of irritation and quarreling on board. Such as reared its head was quickly adjudicated with fairness. Since brotherly love was engendered, and the leaders were acknowledged to have authority to decide, disputes were settled almost before they arose. Finally, the means of those who had were used to help those who had not. Forever this will be the test of a true latter-day Saint. It was so in Far West and Missouri, and it would be now. What later became a smooth, nearly self-financing operation had its beginning here, in England, as the Twelve carried forth the work. Add this accomplishment to the publication of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and Hymn Book, the securing of their daily bread, their constant travels, and one begins to understand the scope of the work begun by these determined and responsible men. They never knew how things would work out, but they knew that they must begin to work. One step at a time they could see. With faith they took that step; then another and another! Now, looking back, we can see that there was a Higher Power than they pointing out the steps to their responsive and alert souls.

As the President of the Twelve, Brigham directed all of this work and kept it coordinated and functioning as a united effort. Until now he had been obedient to counsel and instruction; now he gave the instruction. Because he had learned complete obedience in his own work in the Church he understood the principle and could apply it to the work of others.
