S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April-May 1840

The conference was completed. The missionaries now made preparation to leave for the various fields. Brigham sent the copy of the minutes to the Prophet. Above all else he desired to be in harmony with the wishes of his leader. It is difficult for people who are not acquainted with the ways of the Church, and the spirit by which it operates, to understand this desire for harmony. Ordinarily, one would think, here now is an opportunity to show one's mettle, to have initiative and imagination, to build one's self in the eyes of both the people and the leaders, to put one's self in line for promotion-perhaps, even, to succeed to the presidency if one shows the ability.

But in fact the reverse is true. The Lord reveals his desires to the Prophet, and in that framework, the limitations placed on him, his followers look to him for advice, counsel and revelation. The true spirit of leadership in the Church is one of inquiry as to the will of the Lord and the desire of the presiding leader. It is not a case of how far or high one can carry a responsibility, but how much one can use his imagination, his ability, and his inspiration to meet the requirements of the inspired leader, that is, of the Lord.

This attitude, which is the one which builds confidence and keeps harmony, caused Brigham to be anxious to have the approbation of the Prophet. So with the report of the conference he enclosed a letter in which he told Joseph Smith how he felt:

April 17, 1840

"To President Joseph Smith and Counsellors:

"Dear Brethren,- You will no doubt have the perusal of this letter and minutes of our conference; this will give you an idea of what we are doing in this country.

"If you see anything in or about the whole affair that is not right, I ask, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would make known unto us the mind of the Lord and His will concerning us.

"I believe that I am as willing to do the will of the Lord, and take command of my brethren, and be a servant of the Church as ever I was in my life; but I can tell you I would like to be with my old friends; I like new friends but I cannot part with old ones for them.

"Concerning the hymn books - we found the brethren had laid by their old hymn books, and they wanted new ones; for the Bible, religion, and all is new to them. When I came to learn more about carrying books into the states, or bringing them here, I found the duties were so high we never should want to bring books from the states.

"I request one favor of you, that is, a letter from you, that I may hear from my old friends. I trust that I will remain your friend through life and in eternity.

As ever,

Brigham Young"

When he had finished writing, a laborious task for him, he was ready to join Wilford Woodruff on his return to his field of labor. He had no idea where the money to print three thousand hymn books was to come from; how the Millennial Star could be financed, or what they could do about publishing the Book of Mormon after they got the copyright. It was apparent that they would have to publish in England, but how? Such must have been the thoughts of Brigham as he and Wilford Woodruff started out. One thing was certain in his mind. The way had "opened" to get them this far. His purse had not been empty when the journey to New York was taken, and the way would open now. If the brethren did each his part in obedience to his assignment, when things were ready the books would be published. That was his faith-one step at a time, but take the step firmly and then listen for inspiration for the next step.

The first portion of the journey of the two apostles was to Burslem by rail and stage. Here a Church member, Samuel Johnson, entertained them. The next day, Sunday, Brigham and Wilford met the Saints at Hanley, where Brigham preached at two meetings and attended a third for the Sacrament. After the evening meeting the two men rode to Stoke-on-Trent and thence to Wolverhampton. Worcester was next, where they stopped for sight-seeing. Brigham tells of how he visited the great cathedral there. Here his bent for architectural design felt satisfied. He admired the statuary and especially a small chapel hewn out of solid marble. The two men attended a Church of England service, after which they rode to Ledbury.

On the way Brigham was particularly impressed by the beauty of the Malvern Hills, one of the highest of which was called the Herefordshire Beacon. "Here," he said, "are many large entrenchments, one above another, supposed to have been made by the ancient Britons for a retreat in time of war. These hills have been a famed place of resort for the kings, queens, princes, lords, noblemen, and also the poets of England during the summer season." That day the two apostles traveled fifty-one miles, and then spent the night at Francis Pullen's. They were now in the center of the country where Elder Woodruff had converted so many people to the Gospel but a few weeks before.

On April 22 they walked to Froomes Hill and called upon John Benbow. This meeting was one of two strong men. It ended with John Benbow inviting Brigham to return and stay with him. Brigham met another good convert, Thomas Kingston, the same day. Then after a night's rest the two companions separated, Brigham to return to the Benbow home and Wilford to spend a week with the various branches he had created in that area.

Brigham stayed at the Benbow home for a week. He said he wrote letters to the Prophet, E. Robinson, Don Carlos Smith, Mary Ann, and to his brothers John, Joseph and Lorenzo Dow. And he preached. However, the most important thing he did was to talk to John Benbow. What would they have talked about? Brigham's conversion? his Zion's Camp march? the Missouri persecutions? the doctrine? the Prophet Joseph? John Benbow absorbed whatever was said, mulled it over, made it his own, and verified his first impressions. This was indeed the truth that he had embraced.

Brigham Young and John Berry agree to debate the principles of the Gospel.

Brigham was ever a welcome visitor as he moved about with Wilford Woodruff, preaching, baptizing, bearing witness, until May 20.

One day during this period Brigham and Elder Woodruff met with Willard Richards at the Kingston home, and shortly after, the three of them held another meeting at Benbow's. To these men, new in the faith, Brigham poured out his soul concerning the need of the Church for funds for the publication of the books. Brigham felt inspired to ask for a loan to make the need a reality. The response was ready. John Benbow lent the missionaries lbs. 250. Thomas Kingston lent them lbs. 100. With this sum, a total of lbs. 350 (approximately $1800.00 in those days) they could go to work.

On May 20 the three apostles climbed the Herefordshire Beacon, and there in the quiet of the mountain top, after prayer, held a council meeting. As Brigham records, they agreed that "since we had obtained lbs. 250 from John Benbow, and lbs. 100 from Thomas Kingston toward publishing the Book of Mormon and the hymn book, I would repair immediately to Manchester and join the brethren appointed with me as a committee, and publish 3000 copies of the hymn book without delay. It was also voted that the same committee publish 5000 copies of the Book of Mormon with index affixed."

Brigham started out the next day. At Burslem, en route, he met George A. Smith and told him of the action taken at the council meeting. George A. approved wholeheartedly. By the 25th, Elders Kimball and Taylor were in Manchester to meet with Brigham. They selected hymns until the 30th of May, then the three went to Liverpool. Since a large group of members were about to sail for Zion the three apostles organized them with John Moon as president of the company of forty-one souls.

Returning to Manchester, Brigham hired a house to use as headquarters. That evening he fell asleep and dreamed that his family was well. In the dream he was informed that "the Church was not able to sustain the families of the elders on missions."
