S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

November 1840

Brigham's dream brings to our attention the family left behind in Commerce. The town was booming, but with the application to the State for a charter for a city to be called Nauvoo (meaning "The Beautiful") the town lost its identity in the larger community. Nauvoo it became, a city, the Prophet declared, where the rule of law would protect all men in the exercise of their rights as free men. Here the Saints turned to with a will. The low, swampy bottoms were drained and became a delightful section. The town boundaries were pushed back over the hill onto the high prairie. A beautiful site was chosen for the construction of a magnificent house to the Lord, a temple. All of these things were done by the contribution of physical labor, for the Saints had no assets and little money. But they had the will to work. Things were not easy yet, but they were looking up.

The winter that came after Brigham left had been a hard one for Mary Ann. However there were some things to be grateful for. The family got over the sickness and health improved. But the ever present problem of finding food, warmth and clothing nagged at Mary Ann constantly. She had received some little help from the Bishop's storehouse, but as Brigham's dream warned him, there was little to be had and many to share that which was available. All of the families of the Twelve were in the same condition, as were the families of those away on missions in the states. For ever since the Church had been restored, men had been constantly away on missions for periods of several months to a year. Brigham's dream was correct-the Church did not have the means to care for the families of its missionaries.

The surprising thing is that the children, raised under such conditions, did not rebel. Perhaps the fact that they had never known any other life helped; hunger was the common lot, meager surroundings were the normal thing, constant persecution and calumny their everyday experience. In addition, children in that day had no opinions to offer. They were to be seen and not heard. It was not until a child was of age that he could express his mind with impunity. Later, when grown up, the children of that time mentioned the hardships of their early days as a treasured memory, a sort of condition which set them apart as somebody special.

A winter's day would be followed by others like it. Mary Ann would arise in the chill dawn and light the fire in the little stove. Who cut the wood to keep its fire burning all day and into the night? A wood stove can consume a great deal of wood on a cold day. Assume that she had fifty cents to purchase a cord of wood. Each stick was four feet long and had to be cut into quarter lengths before it would go into the stove. Most likely she was glad that she had only one room in the old barracks at Montrose. More would have been a burden.

When the room heated up the children would rise. The oldest children, Elizabeth and Vilate, now fourteen and nine years of age respectively, would be of help with those younger, especially with the baby, four months old. It could not have taken long to prepare the meager breakfast. Most often there was corn meal mush and milk, for somehow Mary Ann had acquired a cow; while hominy and a little salt pork perhaps was a change when they could get it. Potatoes were available. It is doubtful that they had eggs for hens rarely laid eggs in the winter time. For other meals they had occasional stews. Sometimes they were given a piece of beef, or, occasionally, wild meat. Deer were still plentiful, as were game birds such as partridges, quail, turkey and ducks, but it took hunting to get them. Mary Ann had to depend on the bounty of friends. It is likely that, at times, she labored for food.

Clothing was a different matter. It is probable that much of it was home prepared. Certainly stockings were hand-knit, and sweaters too. Mary Ann knew how to prepare thread and weave cloth. However she achieved it, the children kept warm and survived.

She did what she could to help others. She attended meetings and kept up her spirit. If she was discouraged she never admitted it. If Brigham could be buoyed up by the spirit when sick, if he could be fed comfort in moments of discouragement, if he could press on against all opposition, if he could find money in his purse sufficient for his needs, perhaps she-of equal faith-could do likewise. It would not be as spectacular or as miraculous, because in her case the miraculous became the normal. In subtle ways known only to women-and experienced only by women-she obtained succor and the assurances that she was being sustained. Any gift of food, or clothes, or cut wood, was a miracle to her, a sure sign that the Lord had not forgotten her, and she thanked Him and praised Him in her soul.

Many years later a close friend related an incident which tells much about the life she led. It was a stormy day in November, not quite cold enough to freeze, but very nearly so. A faint knock at the door of this friend was barely heard. When she went to the door and unbarred it, there stood Mary Ann Young, thinly clad and shaking with cold. In her arms was her two-month-old baby, Alice. She was invited in and given warmth and food to eat. There was not much food in that house either, but what there was was now shared with the visitor. The two women talked of Mary Ann's situation. She was out of food, and had been rowed across the river in an open skiff. Her clothing was wet through with the spray and drizzle, but she had had to come over to try the tithing office, in the hope that she would get food. Could she leave the baby here while she went over to the tithing office?

"I kept the baby while she was gone. She came back with a few potatoes and a little flour. I tried to persuade her to stay, but she refused, saying, 'The children at home are hungry too.' She seemed grateful for the food, meager as it was and thanked me for my kindness to her. Then she gathered the parcels of food, and the baby and went off toward the river shaking with the chills and fever."

Sometime during the second summer of Brigham's absence, in 1841, Mary Ann moved to Nauvoo, across the river, into a partly finished cabin. Conditions were a little better now, for there had been two summers in which to garden and raise crops. There was more in her garden, and more available in the tithing office. She could have written to Brigham that things were better, but the likelihood is that she did not tell him how bad things had been. Many a situation fit to try the soul was glossed over in the letters by the statement, "The Lord opened the way, and we got along."
