S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Fall-Winter 1840

Brigham sought the counsel of Joseph Smith in relation to the mission in England. Was the publication of the books satisfactory? What was his advice on the time to return home? How could they better implement "the gathering" of the Saints to Nauvoo? Now that Parley P. Pratt had been to America and returned with his family to England, should he stay and manage the Millennial Star or should he return home too? These were weighty matters and while some could be decided in a council meeting in the field, others were better submitted to the Presidency of the Church. The Twelve were careful to keep in harmony with the wishes of the Church Presidency.

It was three months before the reply reached them. It was good to "hear" from them, the Prophet said, even in writing. He was well pleased with their efforts thus far. With harmony they would continue to reap a great harvest, but they must depend on the whispering of the Spirit. He could not advise them on the many detailed decisions they must make, he was too far away, but those would be resolved by unity and inspiration. As to the emigration of the Saints, there was no way at present to absorb industrially trained workers into a rural economy, so they had better send the artisans over first. These could establish small manufacturing establishments and then give employment to their newly arrived brethren, thus helping them until they could learn the ways of farming. He was happy over the publication of the hymn book; and he could hope the Book of Mormon would be published in all nations. As to the printing of the Doctrine and Covenants, they must decide that according to the local need and demand. Finally, it would be wise for them to return home in the spring of 1841. The local brethren could carry on the work and should shoulder the responsibility. (One is constantly reminded that the Prophet was anxious to pass the responsibility for the spread of the Gospel to others. As soon as a man had a testimony he was expected to share it and to place his assets at the disposal of the Lord's work. Joseph Smith did not seem to fear that these new converts would teach false doctrine. The Spirit would guide them, and any errors they made could be corrected as long as these were of the head and not of the heart.) Brother Parley should remain in England now that his family was with him. He could have general charge, and manage the Star and the other publications.

The Prophet closed his letter with a description of conditions at Nauvoo. They expected a city charter momentarily which would protect free men in their rights. Sickness among the people was much less. They had started quarrying stone for a temple larger than any they had planned before, one which would cause wonder among dignitaries who visited the city. They were starting the work of baptism for the dead, a practice, he said, about which he would tell them more on their arrival home, but one to which reference was made by Paul in 1 Cor. 15:29, when he used the illustration of baptism for the dead to prove and justify the resurrection. Perhaps they had heard of this doctrine from others already. This letter would confirm it. The letter was good news and the brethren felt as if fed with spiritual food as it was read among them.

It would not add to the story to detail every move made by Brigham and his associates during the time spent in England. By June after their arrival they had opened up new fields of activity and organized many branches. They were on their way to financing the publications. They had started the Millennial Star, and the first issue was on its way. In between times they proselyted and held meetings of organization, conference, explanation, and doctrinal teaching. They counseled and corrected. They enlarged the field. Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith went to London and opened the field there, inspite of a great opposition. In the winter following, Brigham went to London, staying several days. He sent George A. Smith to Hereford-shire, where it was hoped his health would be better. George A. had been bleeding at the lungs, and did not seem to improve.

In connection with the work of publishing, Brigham made headquarters in Manchester, and from there, during the next nine months, made eight trips to Liverpool and four to Herefordshire, in addition to the trip to London. The meetings in which he preached numbered more than four hundred. He baptized or assisted in the baptism of hundreds of converts. He held many conferences with the Twelve for instruction, counsel, and decisions. He made no major decision without their full concurrence and support. The other members of the Council of the Twelve were equally busy, each taking his active part in the projects, according to appointment, and each performing Herculean labors in converting and baptizing.

A few events may be mentioned to savor the flavor of the whole undertaking.

As guests in a home, a member of the Twelve was thought to have charge of things of the home in religious observance such as prayers. Brigham wrote an article to be published in the Star, showing that the father was in charge of all things. It is a good sample of his direct approach to things which needed to be corrected:

Liverpool, March 10, 1841

"To the Editor of the Star"

"Dear Brother:-I feel anxious to address a few lines to you, on the subject of family prayer (and shall feel obliged by your inserting the same in your next Star), for the purpose of imparting instruction to the brethren in general. Having traveled through many branches of the Church in England, I have found it to be a general custom among the brethren I visited, that when any of the Traveling Elders are present, they wait for the Elder to go forward in family prayer, instead of attending to that duty themselves. That is not right; and I would say to them that it would be better for them to understand their duty on this subject. My dear brehren, remember that the Lord holds all of us responsible for our conduct here. He held our father Adam responsible for his conduct, but no more than He does us, in proportion to the station we hold. The kings of the earth will have to give an account to God, for their conduct in a kingly capacity. Kings are heads of nations, governors are heads of provinces; so are fathers or husbands governors of their own houses, and should act accordingly. Heads of families should always take the charge of family worship, and call their family together at a seasonable hour, and not wait for every person to get through with all they may have to say or do. If it were my prerogative to adopt a plan for family prayer, it would be the following: Call your family or household together every morning and evening, previous to coming to the table, and bow before the Lord to offer up your thanksgiving for His mercies and providential care of you. Let the head of the family dictate; I mean the man, not the woman. If an Elder should happen to be present, the head of the house can call upon him, if he choses so to do, and not wait for a stranger to take the lead at such times; by so doing we shall obtain the favor of our Heavenly Father, and it will have a tendency to teach our children to walk in the way they should go, which may God grant for Christ's sake. Amen.

Brigham Young

Brigham and Willard Richards took over the editorship of the Millennial Star while Parley P. Pratt went to the States to get his family. Brigham later assigned the whole responsibility to Willard.

Brigham was in Liverpool on September 5, and with Willard Richards organized a ship's company of two hundred members who were sailing for Zion. Theodore Turley, returning home, was made president of the group and given six counsellors. The ship, the "North America" sailed on the 8th, the two apostles accompanying it about twenty miles out to sea. Leaving the voyagers in good spirits, they returned on a small craft which had followed them out.

On the return to Manchester on the 10th they learned good news. John Benbow, who had lent them lbs. 250 towards the Book of Mormon and hymn book printing project, relinquished all claim to the money, except such assistance as his friends who might wish to emigrate to America the next season might need. Since the money advanced for the printing would return, as the books were sold, the money thus made available was a sizeable sum. It gave the mission much needed working capital for further projects. John Benbow further added to the gift the money obtained from the sale of the Godfield Elm Chapel, which money was paid out in emigrating brethren to Nauvoo.

Brigham Young purchased a trunk, November 5, 1840, in Manchester.

Brigham rented Carpenter Hall, Manchester, as a permanent meeting place, for $500 per year. The money was to be raised by subscription. He recounted with considerable glee an incident in which enemies were circumvented:

"Sunday, Nov. 8:

"I had organized the priesthood in Manchester to meet every Sabbath morning, and distribute themselves throughout the different parts of the city to preach in the streets. In this way they occupied about forty preaching stations, at each one of which the congregation was notified of our regular meetings in the Carpenter's Hall. This so annoyed the sectarians, particularly the Methodists, that they made complaints to the mayor, who issued an order to have all street preachers arrested. I went to the priesthood meeting in the morning and felt impressed to tell the brethren to go home. The police, who had been instructed to arrest all street preachers that morning, took up about twenty who all proved to be Methodists. When the Magistrate learned they were not 'Mormons' they were dismissed."

Brigham preached in the forenoon, and during the noon recess heard a gentleman and his daughter play beautifully on a double harp. With all his responsibility he still loved good music and could stop to comment on it.

Within two weeks he left to visit London and the brethren there. Busy as he was, he managed to visit the Tower of London, the Horse Armory, The Jewel Room, and the Thames Tunnel. And as another sight-seeing diversion, he visited St. Paul's Cathedral "from the crypt to the ball which is about 400 feet high," and thence to the British Museum, crossing London Bridge and the Iron Bridge en route.

In January he and Willard Richards prepared the index for the Book of Mormon, which was added to the book, and the printing of five thousand copies was completed. The price was set at five shillings per copy.

In a week in February he and Elders Taylors and Richards organized two ships' companies. One ship, "The Sheffield," sailed on the 7th with 235 Saints, while the other, "The Echo," sailed on the 16th with 109. The three men then returned to Manchester for the final conference there.

They found the others of the Twelve waiting their arrival. Added to their number now was Orson Hyde, he having reached this place on the way to dedicate the land of Palestine. John E. Page, appointed to accompany him, had backed out;

the journey was too hard for him. Orson Hyde received a royal welcome. In a spirit of humility the Twelve met, heard reports of one another's experiences. Much of the time they had encountered calumny, bitterness, and persecution. Wicked and murderous men had made designs on their lives and had been circumvented. Miraculous events had reaped a harvest of souls beyond all expectations.

The Quorum gave its consent to Parley P. Pratt's handling the circulation and the financing of the Millennial Star as he saw fit, but specified that if he reprinted the hymn book, the "book is not to be altered except the typographical errors." Thus the Twelve closed its business in England.

On April 5, the Quorum met again and resolved that "the 17th day of April next be appointed for the Apostles who are going to America to set sail from Liverpool." And at the conference held on the 6th they reported that those present represented 5814 members, 136 elders, 303 priests, 169 teachers, and 68 deacons, a total of 6490-truly a great harvest! The day was spent in assigning the local priesthood to carry on the work in England and Scotland. Presidents of each missionary conference were appointed. In a touching concluding duet, Brigham Young and William Miller sang "Adieu, My Dear Brethren," after which Brigham blessed the congregation and dismissed them.

On the 13th, for relaxation, all of the Twelve went to the Manchester Fair. They saw a man nearly eight feet high, weighing 450 pounds; a pig weighing 1200 pounds; a living skeleton; an elephant said to be the largest in captivity; and many wild animals from Africa. Not being sophisticated men, they enjoyed the sights.
