S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

March-April 1841

The Sailing Ship "Rochester," of 9,000 tons burthen, with Captain Woodhouse in command lay at its dock in Liverpool. The dock was crowded with the Saints who had come to bid the apostles adieu. All were here with mixed feelings. Many Saints were unrestrained in their emotions, for leaving them were the men who had brought them the freedom of spirit which the Gospel gives. Many stood and watched loved ones, 130 in all, file aboard with the hope they would join in a like adventure. Orson Hyde gave them his hand. He was on his way again, but this time in another direction. The Holy Land was his goal, and to get there he was determined. The brethren bade him Godspeed and blessed him. Parley P. Pratt and his family shed tears at the parting. On Parley now rested the responsibility of carrying forward the proselyting, caring for the Saints, organizing future emigrating companies, and overseeing the publications. The brethren filed aboard, sorrowful at leaving, yet anxious to lift the burden from their patient wives and see their beloved Prophet, once more to be fed in the light of his inspiration. There were Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, George A. Smith, Willard Richards and his wife and baby, and finally Brigham Young. When the roster of passengers was finally completed, the captain gave the order to cast off. Dock hands tossed the slackened lines from the restraining capstans, the gang plank was drawn aboard and the ship nosed its way out into the Mersey River. Still in sight of Liverpool the anchor was cast, the ship swung around against the restraining anchor chain at the pull of the tide, and there it waited. The apostles boarded the ship on April 20; they sailed out of the Mersey on the 21st, America bound, and homeward bound, too.

That night of the 20th, at anchor, as Brigham leaned on the rail gazing through the night mist at the sleeping town, many thoughts crowded upon him. Uppermost in his heart was his gratitude to God, his Heavenly Father. This marvelous Being and His Son Jesus Christ were very near to him, and this night he felt drawn to them. There was so much to give gratitude for. Certainly the conditions under which the apostles left were miraculous when compared with those the day they landed.

"We landed in the spring of 1840," he mused, "as strangers in a strange land, and penniless, but through the mercy of God we have gained many friends, established churches in almost every noted town"-he paused and named them to himself, seeing in his mind's eye the people in each place, his special friends-"and city in the Kingdom of Great Britain, baptized between seven and eight thousand, printed five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon, three thousand hymn books, a total of twenty-five hundred copies of the Millennial Star."

He thought of the influence exerted on their readers, miraculously it seemed at times, by the fifty thousand tracts of explanation and defense they had also printed and distributed. Oftimes even a simple tract had stirred people to investigate and to throw in their lot with the Saints.

There had been a permanent shipping agency established; already more than a thousand people had emigrated to Zion-with thousands more to come, he felt sure. But most important to him was the seed sown in the hearts of the people which "will bring forth fruit to the honor and glory of God, and yet," he marveled to himself, "We have lacked nothing to eat, to drink, or to wear. In all these things I acknowledge the hand of God."

Their living conditions were better also, for on the return voyage the Twelve and the Saints occupied the second cabin, while other passengers occupied the steerage. The fare, he wrote, was lbs. 3, 15 shillings.

The wind was favorable. Brigham noticed with satisfaction that the "Rochester" was a fast-sailing ship. She easily passed all of the ships heading to sea that day, "including the Black Ball Line Ship Oxford." The Black Ball Line had a reputation for speed and efficiency; to outdo one of its ships was triumph indeed. But the joy of the day was soon marred. The ship came out of the protection of the headlands and began to breast the open sea. The day was good for sailing, but no one but the crew cared, for nearly all the passengers were promptly seasick, "and vomited at a dreadful rate." Apparently Brigham escaped this beginning attack, for the next morning he, with Elders Kimball and Woodruff, assisted the sick passengers to leave their bunks and take the air. The land of England was low on the eastern horizon by now, and there were ten sails (that is, ships) in sight.

Three days out and they ran into headwinds which increased to a gale. The wind blew away the fore-topsail. And Brigham briefly wrote "all seasick." The seas were mountain high, the ship rolled and pitched; then the winds slackened off and things were better-but not for long.

On the 28th the headwinds increased in strength, this time to a tempest. But let Brigham tell it:

"The sails were close reefed, the tempest raging furiously, sea running mountains high. We shipped heavy seas, and, while in the midst of this scenery, the cry of help was heard in our cabin; we rushed to the scene and found the ropes giving way and breaking which held about 40 tons of luggage, piled up between decks, consisting of heavy trunks, chests and barrels, which, if once liberated from their confinement, would with one surge be hurled with great force into the berths of men, women and children, and would have endangered the lives of all.

"On seeing the foundation of this mass giving way, Elders Richards, Woodruff, Pratt and others sprang to the place of danger and braced themselves against the baggage and held it for a few moments until we partially secured it, when the captain sent several sailors with ropes, who made the same fast and secure. When this was done, I repaired to the aft quarter deck with brothers Kimball, Richards, Woodruff and Smith and gazed upon the grandeur of the raging tempest and the movements of the ship for a short time. We all went below, except Eiders Woodruff and Richards, who remained until a heavy sea broke over the quarter deck, which thoroughly drenched brother Woodruff; brother Richards was partially saved by throwing himself under the bulwarks; they then thought it best to leave, and followed our example by coming below. We did not sleep much during the night, for boxes, barrels and tins were tumbling from one end of the cabin to the other, and in the steerage 15 berths were thrown down, nine at one surge, all the men, women and children thrown together in a pile; but no lives were lost nor bones broken.

"April 29. - The gale has ceased; sea rough; sun shines pleasantly; a fair wind for the first time since the day of sailing. We are sailing ten knots an hour; nearly all had a good night's rest; I was very sick and distressed in my head and stomach.

"April 30. - Fine breeze; sailing ten knots an hour; fears entertained that the ship was on fire, as smoke arose, but it was found to come from the cook's gallery. Brother Woodruff, in the morning, was requested to carry the dishes to the cook for washing; he got his hands full of dishes of various kinds, and, as he stepped to the door of the galley, the ship gave a dreadful lurch and rocked until her studding sails reached the water; this unexpected heave plunged brother Woodruff head foremost about ten feet, the whole width of the galley. The cook, in trying to save him, fell on the top of him. As this was his first introduction to the galley since he had been at sea, he begged the cook's pardon for such an abrupt entrance and withdrew, leaving the cook with three smashed fingers to pick up his dishes at leisure, they being scattered from one end of the galley to the other. When the cook saw me, he beseeched me very earnestly, whoever I sent to the galley, for mercy's sake never to send Mr. Woodruff again, as he came nigh getting killed by him."

And so it was at sea. There is nothing quite so inspiring a sight as a ship in full sail with a good wind. The sails bellying and tugging at their restraining lines, the sailors busily engaged in climbing ratlines, and out on spars adjusting, apparently clinging for dear life, the ship heeling over under the force of the wind-such exciting days between storms were exhilarating. Brigham saw a fin-back whale not more than twenty rods away; a large school of porpoises sported and played around the ship. All this was good. But there was sorrow too. Peter Maughan, recently bereft of his wife, lost his six-weeks-old child. The body was sewed into canvas, weighted with a large stone and consigned to the boundless deep. They

Brigham learns to box the compass while sailing the Atlantic.

were over the Banks of Newfoundland, lat. 42°25', long. 50°10'. The evening was chilly and foggy. The date was May 5, fifteen days at sea.

A few days of good sailing, another terrible tempest-the worst they had yet encountered-more days of wind and cold, then land. "It proved to be Cape Sable, Nova Scotia." There followed two days of dead calm. Nothing is more trying than to be near the land and not able to reach it. On May 15th came a light breeze and at the same moment a view of a large school of mackerel. A sailor "sounded" and found bottom at twenty fathoms. The ship was over Nantucket shoal. In Brigham's diary is this:

"May 17 strong head winds, we came in view of Long Island at 3 p.m. We took on a pilot at 4 p.m., who informed us they had not heard from the Oxford nor any ship which left Liverpool at the time we did, nor for several days before; he also informed us that no word had been heard of the steamship "President." All expected she was lost."

As they sailed in toward the harbor the pilot informed them of the death of William Henry Harrison, President of the United States.

Their hazards were not yet over. Passing Sandy Hook, they ran down a fishing smack and came near sinking her with all on board.

The head wind preventing their docking, they anchored off quarantine at 11 a.m. on May 19. A steamer came down carrying the editor of a newspaper who wanted to score a "beat" on news from England. He paid $45.00 for the ride.

"-20. - Warm, pleasant weather: We commenced early in the morning to get our luggage on deck. There was a fight between the carpenter and second mate, which was ended by the first mate striking the carpenter with a junk bottle, and, as he went to strike the second blow, I caught his arm and prevented him.

"Two quarantine lighters came alongside the "Rochester" and took all the passengers and baggage to the Custom House, where we had to unload all the baggage, which was inspected by the officers, after which we reloaded on board the lighters, which took us to New York City.

"When we arrived at the docks, we found them covered with horses and drays and a great crowd of draymen and pickpockets, who stood ready to leap on board and devour all our baggage, and, because we were unwilling to be robbed and felt disposed to do our own business without being forced to measures by draymen, they cursed and swore at a dreadful rate, and acted more like savages than civilized men; but, after much difficulty, we got our goods out of the lighters and loaded on drays, and had to keep constant guard over them to keep them from being stolen. Many attempts were made to steal our baggage. I collared some of the thieves, and threatened to throw them overboard if they would not let it alone. I was under the necessity of striking their fingers to keep them from carrying off the trunks they laid hold of.

"We were until ten o'clock at night getting from the docks to an inn. We were all very much fatigued, for we had been constantly handling boxes, chests, barrels and trunks from sunrise till ten p.m., without eating or drinking. We took supper about midnight, and laid down to rest at the Battery Pavillion".
