S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

June 1841

Upon landing in New York, Brigham, one would think, in his anxiety to be home, would have started immediately, but there were restraints now. The Church was ever and always on his mind, and here in New York and its vicinity were members. It was a long way to Nauvoo; there was no telling how much time would elapse before he would be back in New York; so he did what he could to get things in order while there. He, Heber C. Kimball, and John Taylor spent their time visiting the branches on Long Island and in the vicinity of New York, sometimes together, sometimes separately. When they had done what they could they met by agreement in New York to start west.

What does one do on his fortieth birthday? Brigham started west. There was no one near who cared enough to celebrate. He wrote a brief sentence: "I am forty years old today."

Brigham and Elders Kimball and Taylor decided to go home by a different route than they had taken on the eastward journey. They took ship to Philadelphia, transferred to a canal, then to cars, railroad cars over the mountains. (One especially elaborate car caught fire and was rendered unfit for service.) Then by canal they continued on to Pittsburgh, where they boarded a river steamer. Within twelve miles however, they ran onto a sand bar, and since getting off consumed the day, Brigham went ashore and took a walk. They were stalled for an hour and a half two days later, during which time a woman and child were scalded by escaping steam from the engine boiler. After another sand-bar wait for three more hours they finally reached Wheeling, West Virginia, docking there for the night. Captain O'Connor was very kind to them, Brigham states briefly. By the twentieth they were at Cincinnati. Here they changed boats, now taking the "Mermaid." Two days to Louisville, then to the mouth of the Ohio on the 26th. Twenty-six days to the Mississippi! They were getting anxious now.

On July 1, 1841, the river steamer rounded the last bend of the river and there, stretched out before their eyes, was the City of Nauvoo. The little swampy town of Commerce had been engulfed in a hive of activity.

At the landing they could see a large group of people gathered. Boys were running to be there when the steamer arrived. Brigham could recognize Joseph the Prophet and others. Then in the front of the group he saw Mary Ann waving a handkerchief. He saluted her with an answering wave. But who was the tall young woman by her side, and the slight one next to her? It must be Elizabeth and Vilate-Elizabeth grown into young womanhood. Brigham suddenly realized she was nearly sixteen now, Vilate eleven. That boy and girl must be the twins, Brigham and Mary Ann. How they had grown! Then the two-year-old toddler trying to get down to the water must be the baby in arms he had left that September morning two years ago.

It was good to arrive by river steamer. One had an opportunity to survey the situation before landing, to be a little bit prepared-to choke up with emotion, and then get it wall under control. Brigham needed these few delaying moments. He did not want to break down in front of all these people.

At last the gang plank was run out-and the suspense was over. Mary Ann was in his arms. He felt the thinness of her body, noted the worn look about her eyes-read there in one glance the things she has endured for him and the Gospel. Then he greeted the children each in turn-all but Alice the two-year-old. She would have nothing to do with this strange man.

Joseph Smith was next. What does one say on greeting the revered servant of the Lord after a two-year absence? Here now was the place for tears, if any were to be shed, tears of joy at the delivering back of a sacred trust handed Brigham two years ago.

Later Joseph Smith recorded, "Elders Young, Kimball, and Taylor arrived in Nauvoo, after an interesting mission to England. The accounts of their missions are highly satisfactory." Such was the accolade.

But greetings at the landing were over soon. Mary Ann guided Brigham to the half-finished cabin she called home. His practical sense told him that beneath the boggy, spongy land was fertility, and he could see his work cut out for him. First he would drain the land, then it would make a good garden. Then he would finish the house, or build a new, better one. They would decide that later. Now he would become acquainted with his children, and court that twenty-two-months-old little hoyden, Alice.

Nine days later Joseph Smith, while calling on Brigham, received a special revelation directly given for Brigham Young:

"Dear and well beloved brother Brigham Young, verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Brigham, it is no more required at your hand to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me; I have seen your labor and toil in journeyings for my name. I therefore command you to send my word abroad, and take special care of your family from this time henceforth and forever. Amen." (Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 126)

What more could one ask? When one labors for the Lord and is accepted, there can be no higher reward or greater joy. With God, Mary Ann's labor was accepted also.

NAUVOO

Weep for Nauvoo- Nauvoo the Beautiful. Solemnly weep. Weep with dignity. Shed tears for her Memory.

Here we shall have Safety. Here no evil man will Tempt The weak. No vice will find Nurture. Protection of the Law - at last Protects.

Weep for broken hopes. Weep for unkept pledges. Weep for evil men's Intentions. Weep with pride for righteous Circumvention.

Weep for Nauvoo, Nauvoo, the Beautiful.
