S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

July 1841

That Brigham Young was happy to be home there is no doubt, especially in being reunited with Mary Ann and his children. It takes considerable time to get used to the idea of a grown young woman in the family, and while she was but sixteen, his daughter Elizabeth had matured in his absence. Vilate, too, at eleven, was shooting up; Joseph was nearing eight; the twins were now nearly five; while Alice, the baby-all of twenty-two months-had to be courted as carefully as a new colt. This man might be her father but it would take a few days of careful approach for her to get used to the fact. She was all the more intriguing because of her shyness, and Brigham delighted in paying her court.

It didn't take long for Mary Ann to outline to Brigham how she and the children had lived during the two-year period. She played down her own heroic effort. She had been left to take care of the children. It had been her job to do this, not to worry her husband about it. He had had his work to do. She knew all along that it was the Lord's work, and she knew, too, that if the Lord tested her husband in the grinding mill of poverty and prejudice He would also test her. If Brigham had performed well and received the gratitude of the Prophet for his loyalty and devotion, perhaps there would be a small share for her. As she poured out her soul to him, her head pillowed on his arm, Brigham gave her the credit due, as a man should. The world praised him, but the code was never to praise the woman publicly. That was a man's private affair.

In the intervening days Brigham took stock of the family situation. It couldn't be much worse, so the only way it could go was toward betterment. For one thing he would bring home the means to obtain necessities. Mary Ann could spend more time with the home problems. He could improve the partly-built cabin, and he could drain that wet ground-which any practiced eye could see was fertile, once freed from its burden of excessive water.

The location was good, the countryside beautiful. The Prophet had said he renamed Commerce, calling it Nauvoo. This word was from a Hebrew word meaning "beautiful." The majestic sweep of the Mississippi gave the community not only beauty, but utility. Past Brigham's very door floated the wealth of the whole Mississippi River Valley. Truly, enterprising Saints could now develop not only agriculture, but commerce. How wise the Prophet had been to tell Brigham to send over from England, first, artisans and men who knew how to organize business and industry. He could see now the importance of having means to absorb the large number of converted poor, the honest, but unskilled.

A walk up the hill to the high prairie which stretched endlessly, its fertile soil depth measured in feet, not inches, convinced Brigham that here the poor could be providedf or. Towns could spring up, as four had already. He and Mary Ann talked about these possibilities and were eager to improve their lot.

Another reason for rejoicing at being home was Joseph Smith and the work of the Lord. Joseph had plenty of problems. Here was a man Brigham could not do without. Never was he in the presence of Joseph but that he was fed from the great reserve of the Prophet's spiritual knowledge and inspiration. And when away he had felt starved. He had not partaken for nearly two years. It was doubly good to be in the presence of Joseph once more, receiving counsel, executing instructions, advising on important decisions, and learning of the Gospel.

While away in England he had raised many questions in his own mind. Some of these he wrote under the heading "Ask the Prophet these questions." They ranged from small incidents which were reported as having come to pass, small rumors of experiences, to questions of deep doctrine.

"Did he see the three Nephites in June 1840?" (Apparently someone said he had done so.)

"Who baptized John the Baptist?"

"Could a woman nominate a president in any presiding body?"

"Were Elijah and Elisha still in the mortal body?"

These questions would have been forgotten but for the fact that he wrote of them. Today the same questions are asked by new members, as they try to apply their new faith and knowledge to the old sectarian memories. For if the Gospel has a definite application, it is to the here and now. There is the promise of the great rewards in the hereafter, in the next world, but the facts of existence are in the present. Today is eternity, and today we hammer out what we are to be. Today we work, we apply the teaching to our relations with our neighbors and other men; today we apply "works" with our faith. Because of this "today" application, the men who lived anciently become very real. They were not Titans, but men; men with an endowment, a commission, but still men who lived as we live, were beset with the same temptations and received inspiration and revelation in the same manner as we do. So, to understand better, it really is important to know who baptized John the Baptist and the physical status of Elijah and Elisha. Since women play a significant part in the Church it is important to know the bounds of their rights and privileges.

Most important, Joseph Smith needed the Twelve and Brigham Young. He had sent them to England at a time of great crisis, when the need for loyal, devoted, trusted men was very great. Men given high trust in the Church in Missouri had turned sour and proved traitorous. To whom was the Prophet to turn for counsel and for action? There were trusted men, of course, but not trusted men of the authority which comes from the second ranking quorum of the Church.

The detail of establishing a new home for the Saints, of purchasing large tracts of land, of financing the land purchase, with the integrity of the people as the only asset to back the claims, were among the pressing problems.

Then there were the missions of the Church. To give all people the opportunity to hear, accept, or reject the Gospel was a main objective. To maintain a constant flow of missionaries was a great problem.

Branches were being established daily all over the United States, in Canada, and in Europe. Each one had to be nursed and disciplined in the practices of the Church, which in the main were a break with established ecclesiastical tradition.

And what about the Temple? There stood its beginnings, crowning the hill and commanding the finest view on the river, promised by the Prophet to be the most magnificent building in the West, a place where the Lord could come and reveal His will to the people. Where was one to obtain lumber? and stone? and the nails to hold it together, or the glass for the windows? Who would go out and persuade people nearby to give their time in construction, and persuade the Saints to give of their means.

There needed to be careful editing of the official paper, "The Times and Seasons." By the printed page explanations clarification of doctrine, and revelations could be broadcast, but because of its importance the material which appeared in the paper must be carefully scrutinized by someone who knew what was truth and what was error.

As if all this was not enough, there was the illness of the people. They had arrived at Commerce half starved and weak. Consequently the incidence of sickness was very great. Believing, as they did, in the gift of healing by the laying on of hands by those having priesthood authority, many reasoned that they had better obtain the highest authority, although the principle is that all holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood may perform the ordinance. The people had a difficult time in accepting the proposition and felt that the higher the office of the one officiating the greater was the chance of his being heard by the Lord. Joseph Smith was constantly importuned and he never refused, but it all took time.

Because of these and other problems pressing upon him, there was no time for the Prophet to work at spiritual things-to meditate, to commune, to translate-or, more immediate pressing, to obtain necessities for his family. The Church was expected to provide his support, but since there was little from which to make such provision, the means often had to be obtained in some other manner. The problems of everyday living were real and pressing.

The Prophet bought tracts of land on notes, the redemption of which were his personal responsibility. The Twelve could relieve him. They could also regulate the affairs of the incoming immigrants, getting them settled on proper farms or in the young growing industries, and above all keeping them out of the hands of the speculators. The sharpers were often men of supposedly good standing, in one or two cases being among the leading Church authorities. There are times perhaps in a certain type of society when men struggle against one another for all they can get. But when Church members came into Nauvoo, looking for the equity, justice, kindness, and cooperation from the Saints there, the speculative ventures of men who knew that the newcomers would have to have land, and knew too that brother should assist brother in the Church, yet still took advantage-these were anathema to the Prophet and the Twelve. They were wolves in the flock-no, they were worse than wolves, for they covered their intent with the sheep's fleece of ecclesiastical office and Church position. The work of supplying cheap land, good land, to the Saints, and protecting them from the grasping speculators preying upon their prime need was more than the Prophet could handle.

All of these pressing problems were enough to make it necessary for the Twelve to take its ordained place next to the First Presidency in earthly affairs as well as spiritual.

A fair summary of the projects which Joseph Smith had projected were as follows:

The organization of the City of Nauvoo on the pattern of the charter finally authorized by the State Legislature of Illinois. (The charter itself had been the work of Joseph.)

The organization of the Nauvoo Legion, the authorized state militia called for in the charter.

The founding of the University of Nauvoo, also authorized by the charter.

The construction of the Temple, parties to go to Wisconsin to establish logging camps, then float the timber down the Mississippi to the site on rafts, where sawmills would cut it into usable lumber. The establishment of stone quarries for the temple walls.

The building of the "Nauvoo House," a hotel for visitors.

The establishment of wards and stakes to care for the spiritual needs of the people.

The multitude of problems growing out of these projects, all urgently needing solution if the program was to continue to move forward, were the prime consideration when the Twelve arrived home. At a conference of the Church held in August of 1841, Brigham presided. He explained that the Prophet was absent on account of the death of his child. Joseph had called the special conference to transact business which it was necessary to do before the October Conference. Brigham said that "he hoped no one would view him and his brethren of the Twelve as aspiring, because they had come forward to take part in the proceedings. He could assure them that nothing could be farther from his wishes and those of the Twelve than to interfere with Church affairs in Zion and her stakes. He had been in the vineyard so long he had become attached to foreign missions, and nothing could induce him to retire therefrom and attend to the affairs of the Church at home but a sense of duty, the requirements of heaven, or the revelations of God." The brethren of the Twelve voiced a hearty "Amen" to this statement. Much business was conducted, and the meeting adjourned until 2:00 p.m. At this time the Prophet arrived and addressed the conference and told the assembled Saints that the time had come for the Twelve to stand in its place next to the First Presidency and to assist the Presidency in the multitude of tasks facing it. They were now to stay home for a season, relieve him of some of his burdens so he could spend more time translating, and have an opportunity to provide something for themselves and their families.

This was the first major decision which placed the Twelve not only in charge of missionary work but in charge of the temporal problems of the Saints themselves. This was a notice too that the authority of the Quorum of the Twelve enveloped the local organizations of stake and ward [^1] and superseded the authority of the local stake high councils.

Note: In the Church the ecclesiastical divisions are two: WARDS: A congregation of members under the leadership of a presiding officer known as a bishop. STAKE: A collection of Wards, presided over by a Stake President. He is assisted by two counselors and a High Council consisting of twelve men.

---
Notas:
[^1] Give up the leaders - "This you have done"
