S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Late Summer 1841

Joseph Smith talked with Brigham many times in 1841. He assigned him many tasks, tested him in many ways. What he had always thought seemed more sure. Brigham would stand true. He now put Brigham to the final test. It would be presumptuous to put the words in the Prophet's mouth, but the subject of his conversation was the sealing ordinances.

Just as a man must be baptized to be a candidate for the Kingdom of God, so he must be "sealed" before he can enter into eternal glory. To whom must he be sealed? To his wife, and to his parents. His children in their turn must be sealed to him. This sealing was an ordinance from the beginning, husbands to wives, children to parents, from Adam to the latest generation. The work was to be done in temples, and for this purpose were they built.

A husband and wife were sealed (married) by the authority of the Priesthood for all eternity, forever, and if they obeyed the principles of the Gospel, they would be exalted into the presence of God, to dwell with Him, to share His glory, to be His son and daughter in the full meaning of the term, and to have eternal increase, eternal family increase. to people worlds in their turn. A man could lay the foundation of that kingdom on the earth by obeying the principles of the Gospel.

Brigham could be sealed to Mary Ann. That was evident, but what in that case happened to Miriam? He had not married her for eternity. Could he be sealed to her too? Certainly he could. He would not have to give her up. If celestial glory had been a place where there was no family relationship, where only single people lived and performed acts of adoration, there would be no need of explanations. But this exalted place was not like that. It was a place of family relations, the heavenly family. Marriage was the greatest sacrament, the most binding covenant of all. If marriage was the normal state in heaven, which wife should Brigham chose? The answer was, both.

All of this was no doubt logical and reasonable to Brigham. He loved Miriam and his two older children. He loved Mary Ann and was perfectly happy with her. She was his complete complement. He could envision heaven with his family around him.

Then the Prophet told Brigham that it was equally righteous to practice the principle on earth when under divine direction to do so; that not only was it right, but that the Lord had commanded him, Joseph, to practice it, and that now Brigham was also commanded to do so.

For all of his forty years of life Brigham Young had been taught that virtue was the sign of the highest conduct; that a man could have but one wife at a time. He had been true to the teaching. His ancestors before him had been taught the same doctrine. Sexual association with any member of the opposite sex except his wife was adultery with a capital A.

Brigham was shocked; on impulse could not believe what he was hearing, and he said so.

Well then, was he condemning Abraham, or Isaac, or Jacob-great Patriarchs who not only found favor with the Lord but received lasting and far-reaching prophetic promises from Him? The true order of marriage was their order. And the Lord upheld them, did He not? If one believed the Bible one could not gainsay that.

The Prophet assured Brigham that he would obtain the testimony of the truth of the doctrine if he would ask of God. From that source he would know of its truth.

And what about Mary Ann? She would never accept such a doctrine! . . . Did Joseph realize this? . . . Tell Mary Arm! If she wanted to know the truth, God would reveal its truth to her as well as to Brigham. She would need to give consent to its practice. Both she and Brigham could be bound by the conventional notion of monogamy, which was based on the sectarian errors about God and His purposes, or they could accept the truth.

The Prophet made clear to Brigham that this principle could at present be revealed only to a few of the faithful, for if revaled to those who were weak they would repudiate it and condemn themselves. Brigham must not talk about it to others, but he might tell Mary Ann. Further, no man could take a wife without the express command of the Prophet who held the sealing keys.

Brigham's chief problem to resolve was whether or not the Prophet was speaking by revelation. If so, then he must obey. If not, his whole relationship with Joseph would be altered. Never had he had a doubt before. He was practical enough to know where this new doctrine would lead. Once made public it would split the people apart and would bring persecution upon them more violent than any they had before experienced. If bigots could murder and rape, and take their property, because they believed in a God who would reveal himself to them, what would they do when learning of this departure from the common understanding? He thought he could see the consequences.

Neither Brigham nor Mary Ann ever wrote of their feelings. How Brigham broached the subject to her is not known. How she felt at the time she did not record.

Brigham did gain a testimony of the principle. He was as sure that it was a revelation from God as he was about the other revelations, and sure that he was duty bound to obey the Prophet. Mary Ann herself came to the same knowledge. His obedience to this most difficult of all commandments had the complete and unreserved backing of Mary Ann. Not only did she give him wives, but she accepted them, presided over them in justice and without jealousy or rancor. That much is also known.

Let no one think that the pure practice of plural marriage robbed a man or woman of virtue. It proved to be a fact that they could not succeed in the order unless they were virtuous. It required great self-control on the part of all parties concerned and a conquering of the petty vices of jealousy and greed. Practiced righteously it cleansed and purified; abused, it condemned and destroyed. Earthly lust had no place in this law. If a man lusted after a woman, he still committed adultery in his heart.

Those of us who are the descendants of Brigham Young, hearing the stories of many wives and many children, have come to one conclusion-Brigham accepted this principle and practiced it as purely before the Lord as a man is capable of doing. That much we know. To him it was the revealed will of God. We know it was, too.

Brigham married his first plural wife, Lucy Decker, June 15, 1842.

Many years later Mary Ann told her grandson, Seldon Y. Clawson, something of the trials of the early days. In the process of talking to him she said she wanted him to know of one incident. This is what she recounted:

She had retired early, being very tired. The weather was very warm, so she had moved the bed against the window, which she opened as wide as possible. The house was so close to the street as to be right against the sidewalk. As she lay there in the dark she heard the voices of two approaching men, and soon recognized them as those of the Prophet and her husband. The two men stopped just outside the window, by the doorstep. She heard Brigham say, "Brother Joseph, I do not believe in the 'revelation on plural marriage' as coming from the Lord. There must be some mistake about it." The Prophet said, "Brother Brigham, the Lord will reveal it to you."

With that Joseph bade him goodnight and walked on down the street. Mary Ann heard Brigham's foot on the doorstep. Then she heard his hand grasp the latch. But he did not open the door. There was an immense silence-a long hesitation-then she heard him call.

"Joseph! Joseph! Come back! The Lord has revealed it to me." They talked again for a few minutes, then bade each other goodnight once more.

Brigham then came into the house.

Many years later Brigham Young himself commented on the same circumstance.

"We were driven from Missouri after Joseph went up there, and we came to Nauvoo, and the Twelve went to England. While we were in England, I think, the Lord manifested to me by visions and his Spirit, things that I did not then understand. I never opened my mouth to any person concerning them, until I returned to Nauvoo. Joseph had never mentioned this, there had never been a thought of it in the Church that I knew anything about at that time. But I had this for myself, and I kept it to myself, and when I returned home and Joseph revealed these things to me, I then understood the reflections that were upon my mind while in England. But this was not until after I had told him what I understood. I saw that he was after something by his conversation, leading my mind along, and others, to see how we could bear this. This was in 1841; the revelation was given in 1843, but the doctrine was revealed before this; and when I told Joseph what I understood, which was right in front of my house in the street, as he was shaking hands and leaving me, he turned round and looked me in the eyes, and says he-'Brother Brigham, are you speaking what you understand,-are you in earnest?' Says I-'I speak just as the Spirit manifests to me.' Says he-'God bless you, the Lord has opened your mind,' and he turned and went off.

"About this time came a revelation concerning baptism for the dead. I know that in my traveling and preaching, many a time, I have stopped by beautiful streams of clear, pure water, and have said to myself, 'How delightful it would be to me to go into this, to be baptized for the remission of my sins.' When I got home Joseph told me it was my privilege. At this time came a revelation, that the Saints could be baptized and re-baptized when they choose, and then that we could be baptized for our dear friends, but at first it was not revealed that a record should be kept of those who were baptized; but when he received an additional revelation to that effect, then a record was kept. Hundreds and thousands, I suppose, were baptized before any record was kept at all, and they were baptized over, and a record kept of the baptisms and the names of the administrator, those who acted for the dead, and of the dead, and of the witnesses. You can read in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, the letter that Joseph wrote when he was away from home in regard to having witnesses at these baptisms. I relate this to show you that the Lord did not reveal everything at once; but I need not dwell on this any longer." (Journal of Discourses, Volume 18, p. 241.)
