S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

November 1841

Mary Ann looked out of the window of the little cabin. When she had moved into it it had been only partially finished, a makeshift at best. Now it was cozy and well chinked, the door straight and easily closed. All of the panes of glass were in the window, and furthermore, there was a new pair of curtains, small and neat. Mary Ann hummed with happiness at what she saw, for there was Brigham, red-faced and sweating, working in the yard. He had finished making a small shed to protect the cow, and he was now building a root cellar of a different kind from that usually constructed. He built two sets of walls of brick, each set containing parallel walls about six inches apart, then arched them over with the same material. He wouldn't have known what was meant by insulation, but he understood something about dead air space and took advantage of it. It worked. He said later as he told of the experience that frost never penetrated it, although in summer things would mildew in it. It was really an aboveground vault. The reason for not building it partially underground was the high-water table of his land, for there had not yet been time to drain it well. A well-kept garden covered a good portion of the lot. Even though planted late, it would "make" green corn, various vegetables, and perhaps, if the frost held off, potatoes would mature enough to store. The famliy would have carrots and parsnips for sure, as well as turnips. Beets would give them late greens, if they did not mature enough to hold.

It was good to look out of the window. Alice, completely won over and captivated, followed her father around, toddling, chortling, laughing with glee, as he would stop his work and toss her high in the air. She liked the mud of the little drainage ditch which lowered the water table enough for vegetables to grow. Later he would sink it another foot or two.

It had not been easy, for Brigham had worked only sporadically on his place. He was on constant call from the Prophet. More and more Joseph Smith called him, seeking relief from his own burdens, and Brigham each time placed the call ahead of his own affairs. But by fall, in spite of the interruptions, he had the place under control.

So willing was he to serve and so promptly did he respond to the calls made on him, that Joseph began to depend on him more and more. In addition he had the big responsibility of taking care of the incoming members from England and all parts of the United States; he directed the Twelve in this mighty effort of guidance and protection.

In his sermon at the October Conference of 1841 Brigham stressed the "need of the call of suitable missionaries; the importance to teaching abroad the first principles of the Gospel and leaving alone those principles they did not understand; on the propriety of many of the Elders remaining at home and working on the Lord's house; and the necessity of a more liberal consecration and more energetic efforts to forward the building of the Temple and Nauvoo House." All of these were important. The giving of a tithe of time to work on the Temple was being pushed. A man or a woman agreed to work for the Temple one day in ten, but sometimes did not keep the pledge.

On October 6 Brigham was taken desperately ill. Elders Kimball, Richards and Woodruff laid hands on him and he recovered. It was a quick and complete healing, for the next day he was meeting the brethren and working hard. Until November 7 he visited branches, attended council meetings, regulated affairs of the Saints, attended the City Council.

At a meeting of the brethren the Word of Wisdom came up for discussion. He expressed, now, a feeling about the Word of Wisdom, "I expressed my views on the subject and said I considered it wisdom to use all things put into our hands according to the best judgment God would give us; wisdom was justified of her children." And this epitome of his talk explained his feeling about many things whenever he expressed himself. All things had their place. The business of man was to find that place and use things properly in it.

On November 8 he did a deeply satisfying thing. Called upon by the Prophet, he offered the dedicatory prayer at the new baptismal font in the new Temple. The font rested on the backs of twelve wooden oxen, carved from planks of closely matched lumber glued together. He recognized the importance of the event by a simple comment: "This is the first font erected and dedicated for the baptism of the dead in this dispensation." Two weeks later he "baptized forty persons in the font, for the dead, Brothers Richards, Woodruff, and George A. Smith confirming. These were the first baptisms for the dead in the font."
