S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

January-April 1842

In his brief notes for the winter of 1841-42, Brigham often mentioned the fact that he attended council meetings.

"Dec. 17 - Met in council with the Twelve at Joseph's Office."

"Dec. 29 - Spent the day in council with the Prophet Joseph and Elders Kimball and Richards; we received excellent teachings."

"Dec. 30 - I attended meeting at Joseph's house. He preached in the evening concerning the different spirits, their operations, designs, etc."

So the notes ran through the winter.

What did they talk about in council? They were concerned over the way the printing plant was being operated by Ebenezer Robinson. This problem was solved by Brigham being appointed to buy out Robinson's interest in the plant "at a very exhoritant price." The reason Brigham gave for paying the price was because "the prophet directed the Twelve to pay him whatever he asked. One item on his bill was $800.00 for the privilege of publishing the Times and Seasons, or the good will of the office." Brigham didn't like to let Robinson thus demand such an exhorbitant price, but he did it because the Prophet told him to.

Then, who should operate the plant now that they had it under control of the Twelve? Elders Taylor and Woodruff were appointed.

There were other problems:

Dr. Galland's power of attorney for the Church was revoked. Brigham went to him and received back these papers.

Gladden Bishop had set himself up as prophet, seer, and revelator to the Church. His "revelations" were read in council. This bundle of "nonsense and folly" was consigned to the flames and Bishop was "cut off from the Church."

Letters were read from Orson Hyde, telling of his success in reaching Jerusalem. Among the letters was the text of his prayer, dedicating the land for the return of the Jews.

One item constantly before the Twelve was the problem of how to further implement the work on the temple.

They wrote a long letter to the Saints in Europe which was signed by ten of the Twelve, and published.

The elders' quorums were put in order, and during the general conference in April 275 men were ordained-the most ever given this office in the priesthood in one day. Zion was beginning to grow.

Brigham regularly attended the meetings of the City Council. There was plenty to do here, for as in all growing communities the ever-present problems of community dwelling came into focus. Complaints of injustices were heard. As there was some stealing going on, the city police were alerted. Occasionally some man, more interested in money than souls, started to sell spirituous liquor. Nuisances of this type were not tolerated.

In the council meetings of the Twelve there was considerable preaching among themselves, for often one reads of two or three preaching sermons which were followed by remarks from the Prophet. Here, one suspects, they clarified their doctrinal understanding, and where misinformed were corrected by the Prophet. In one of these meetings of the Twelve, the Prophet "explained to us the Urim and Thummim which he found with the plates, called in the Book of Mormon the Interpreters."

The Twelve had some time for social life, for they began the year 1842 with a feast tendered them and their families by Sylvester Stoddard. Brigham felt thankful on this occasion for the privilege of being with his family in the home of a good member. Then, after the feast, he spent the evening until midnight in the City Council.

Between times he traveled out to the surrounding settlements of members, preaching, exhorting, helping people get

Brigham writes a cryptogram and spends an evening at home.

settled, supervising purchases of land for incoming members. During this period a strenuous effort was made by the Missourians from Jackson County to kidnap the Prophet and get him into their clutches. For fear of being taken unaware and kidnaped, the Prophet went into hiding. This added to the responsibilities of Brigham as President of the Twelve, for in the absence of the Prophet from public availability, people turned to Brigham for advice in their personal affairs.

However, it was not all worry and problems. There were times when the richness of the Spirit came upon the Saints with such power that their hearts sang with joy. Men will endure much of trouble if they know they are on the right road and that the struggle is worth all they can put into it. Brigham served with joy, for he was fed with the bread of life by the Prophet Joseph. The problem of becoming saint-like is ever before the Saints. What is acceptable conduct before God? What is the future hope? The right answers to these questions builds firm and constant hope.

The Prophet listened to a sermon by William O. Clark which lasted two hours, reproving the Saints for lack of sanctity, want of holy living, solemnity, and temperance, in the rigid sectarian style. Then the Prophet reproved Clark as pharisaical and hypocritical, and not edifying the people, and showed the Saints what temperance, faith, virtue, charity, and truth really were. He said:

"I charged the Saints not to follow the example of the adversary in accusing the brethren, and said, 'If you do not accuse each other God will not accuse you. If you have no accuser you will enter heaven, if you will follow the revelations and instructions which God gives you through me, I will take you into heaven as my backload. If you will not accuse me, I will not accuse you. If you throw a cloak of charity over my sins, I will over yours, for charity covereth a multitude of sins."

Brigham could accept that statement. It became the basis of the relations of the brethren one with another. It is one of the cardinal bases of conduct to this day.

Again said the Prophet:

"I spent the day in council with the Twelve Apostles in the home of President Brigham Young, conversing with them on a variety of subjects. Brother Joseph Fielding was present, having been absent four years on a mission to England. [One may be sure the Elder Fielding gave a complete verbal report on conditions in England.] I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get closer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book."

In another council meeting of the Twelve Joseph said: "Let not any man publish his own righteousness, for others can see that for him; sooner let him confess his sins, and then he will be forgiven, and he will bring forth more fruit. When a corrupt man is chastened, he gets angry and will not endure it."

"Eider Brigham Young said: one thing lay with weight on his mind; that is, that we should be prepared to keep each commandment as it comes from the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet, and as the Lord has commanded us to build a temple, we should do it speedily." Brigham was growing, and his understanding was correct. He applied every inspired word of Joseph Smith in the practical terms of every day living: Be prepared to keep each commandment as it is given. It had been given to build a temple; he would build it now, not later.

It was a prevailing custom among the people of that day, especially those from New England, to give notes for obligations. In a sense, these notes served as a record of financial transactions, but also as a record of promises made. It worked this way: I borrow money. I give my note-my promise to pay and the conditions under which I shall redeem it. I buy a piece of land. I give a note, again stating conditions. I purchase a horse, a cow or a pig; I buy a cord of wood. I have no money, so I promise to pay. All of this is legitimate.

During the Missouri persecutions when the Saints were destitute, instead of sharing what they had of material things, anytime a man shared food or animals he took a note. The result was that nearly everyone was beholden to his brother for one thing or another. Now in Nauvoo, as a measure of economic security began to return, the holders of these notes began to press for payment. They would say something like this: "I let you have half a pig back in Missouri to keep your family from starving. You gave me your note that you would pay me for it. Now I see you with a pig. You must now pay me for what I let you have in Missouri." This sort of thing was multiplied. In spite of their common suffering, many of the Saints had not yet learned to share.

In council with the Twelve the Prophet proposed that all of these promissory notes be donated to the temple fund. Then the people holding notes would not have ill feelings against the man who could not pay; and the note holders would be credited with the appropriate donations to the temple fund. The Twelve would assume the burden of collection of these notes, and the signer of the note could redeem it by a contribution to the temple fund. Instead of paying an old debt, he was invited to contribute that amount in cash or labor on the temple. Those with no cash could labor, so that it was possible to redeem the note without any cash changing hands. Those not able to pay or work were forgiven the obligation. Thus the giver of the note could contribute and the taker also. In this way the people learned a lesson in charity and cooperation.

With Brigham and the Twelve taking much of the temporal responsibility, the Prophet Joseph now found time to complete one project which had been delayed because of the Missouri troubles. This was the translation of the papyrus rolls found with the mummies purchased in Kirtland.

Now as spring broke in 1842, a translation of one of these papyri was published in the Times and Seasons.

"The Book of Abraham"

"A translation of some ancient records that have fallen into our hands, from the catacombs, purporting to be the writings of Abraham while in Egypt, called the Book of Abraham, written in his own hand on papyrus." (This book is contained in the Church standard work, The Pearl of Great Price.)

It made exciting reading. Brigham read it, then read it again. He had Mary Ann read it aloud as they sat before the fireplace on those rare occasions when he was home for an evening. It is not the privilege of everyone to be present when a new scripture is revealed. Brigham was thrilled with this one. He pored over the illustrations of the script, made from Reuben Hedlock's wood cuts. Certainly the book-not very long, it is true-was full of the truth of man's relation to eternity. Brigham received a lesson on the order of stars in the universe as he read:

"And I saw the stars, that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it;

"And the Lord said unto me: These are the governing ones; and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God: I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest.

"And the Lord said unto me, by the Urim and Thummim, that Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its time and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest. This is the reckoning of the Lord's time, according to the reckoning of Kolob.

"And the Lord said unto me: The planet which is the lesser light, lesser than that which is to rule the day, even the night, is above or greater than that upon which thou standest in point of reckoning, for it moveth in order more slow; this is in order because it standeth above the earth upon which thou standest, therefore the reckoning of its time is not so many as to its number of days, and of months, and of years.

"And the Lord said unto me: Now, Abraham, these two facts exist, behold thine eyes see it; it is given unto thee to know the times of reckoning, and the set time, yea, the set time of the earth upon which thou standest, and the set time of the greater light which is set to rule the day, and the set time of the lesser light which is set to rule the night.

"Now the set time of the lesser light is a longer time as to its reckoning than the reckoning of the time of the earth upon which thou standest.

"And where these two facts exist, there shall be another fact above them, that is, there shall be another planet whose reckoning of time shall be longer still;

"And thus there shall be the reckoning of the time of one planet above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob, which Kolob is after the reckoning of the Lord's time; which Kolob is set nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all those planets which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest.

"And it is given unto thee to know the set time of all the stars that are set to give light, until thou come near unto he throne of God.

"Thus I, Abraham, talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made;

"And he said unto me: My son, my son (and his hand was stretched out), behold I will show you all these. And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made, which were many; and they multiplied before mine eyes, and I could not see the end thereof.

"And he said unto me: This is Shinehah, which is the sun. And he said unto me: Kokob, which is star. And he said unto me: Olea, which is the moon. And he said unto me: Kokaubeam, which signifies stars, or all the great lights, which were in the firmament of heaven.

"And it was in the night time when the Lord spake these words unto me: I will multiply thee, and thy seed after thee, like unto these; and if thou canst count the number of sands, so shall be the number of thy seeds.

"And the Lord said unto me: Abraham, I show these things unto thee before ye go into Egypt, that we may declare all these words.

"If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall be greater things above them; therefore Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam that thou hast seen, because it is nearest unto me.

"Now, if there be two things, one above the other, and the moon be above the earth, then it may be that a planet or a star may exist above it; and there is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it." ( Abraham 3:2-17)

Brigham could ponder that for a long time. It was a powerful idea that came to him here: Abraham knew a great deal about the stars; his ideas regarding them were very modern. And why not? They were revealed to him.

He learned something else as he read. There was a paragraph on the order of spirits, declaring that some were more intelligent than others.

"Howbeit that he made the greater star; as, also, if there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal.

"And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all." (Abraham 3: 18, 19.)

Furthermore Brigham learned that not only did man exist before he came here, but that his existence was orderly and for a purpose. Abraham, he discovered, was one of those great ones who were chosen before birth to be leaders on earth. Joseph Smith was one also, he was sure.

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

"And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born." (Abr. 3:22, 23.)

Brigham discovered, too, that not only was Abraham a leader in the pre-mortal sphere, but that there was one there who was directing it all, one who was like unto God. That could be only one personage, the pre-earth Jesus Christ. Then too, with great and deep interest he read not only that the rebellion in heaven, as hinted at by Isaiah (Isaiah 14:12) and as stated by John (Revelation 12:7-9), had taken place, but that here were recited its beginning and the reasons for it.

"And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

"And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

"And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

"And the Lord said: Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first.

"And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him." (Abr. 3:24-28)

By the time he was through reading the Book of Abraham, Brigham had a much clearer conception of the life before birth than ever before. Joseph Smith had taught him much; but here, in addition, was the written testimony of Abraham.

He had already learned a great truth from the revelations of the Lord God to the Prophet in 1830. It is a marvelous statement of a great purpose. To Moses, said the Prophet, the Lord God revealed that:

". . . The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

"And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.

"For behold, this is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 1:37-39)

These two great revelations fitted together like tongue and groove of carpentry. And they fitted into Brigham's orderly mind. He comprehended that he was a son of God; that he had been in that pre-earth world; that he had had a choice; that he was a free agent; that the Creator had made many worlds and would make many more; that the Lord Jesus Christ was the author of salvation; that through Him he had promise of "immortality and eternal life."

These were big ideas and caused big thoughts in Brigham. He could see clearly, too, that the Lord had indeed blessed Joseph Smith as a seer. Joseph saw into the eternities. He grasped eternal truth, held it, taught it. And Brigham was now, more than ever before, sure that the course for Brigham Young was to support and sustain this Prophet and Seer of the last days. Mary Ann echoed his thoughts and in her own heart was lifted up. Surely she was a blessed woman, to have a husband thirsting after righteousness and truth, and to receive, with him, the knowledge of eternity which exalts one into the presence of God.

There was another truth which he accepted with all his heart: that God has revealed truth in all ages to his prophets. Adam, the first man and mighty progenitor, was one of the greatest, while Abraham, father of the faithful, had enjoyed an unusual amount of the revelations of God. Truly Brigham could echo in his heart "Abraham thou wast one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born."

There ancient prophets ceased to be remote legends and became warm, living men, keeping the commandments and obeying the will of the Lord in their day as Brigham was trying to do in his day.
