S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April-September 1842

There were other influences in Nauvoo besides the pains of its growing. Any average American community will have problems as it grows. Men move in seeking financial opportunity and, more important to them, financial advantage. So long as all the men in that community have the same objective they are on guard. Each one expects to be sharper and more alert than his fellows. When a man sees a way to make money and then is circumvented by someone more sharp and alert, he has only himself to blame. When he is circumvented by chicanery and fraud, he should have been more alert; no one wastes any sympathy on him. The winner preens himself on having taken what he set out to take, while the loser, hating the winner, still doesn't blame his minister or his Church for his failure to beat the other man.

Nauvoo was settled with the opposite viewpoint in mind. No one was to take advantage of his neighbor. Men could trust a brother to make fair and equitable business deals. The poor, above all others, were not to be exploited, but rather to be helped. Each and all represented goods and land as these things really were, so that a man could have an opportunity to judge the need against the cost.

Into Nauvoo came men who joined the Church but did not quite understand that membership called for a kind of brotherhood far different from any they had experienced before. Yes, they believed in the Restoration and that Joseph was a Prophet, but they wanted him to stay a spiritual prophet and not bother his head about earthly things. Let them take care of those things. This constant concern for the earthly application of spiritual truth interferred with their ethical conceptions of how to make money.

There was scathing denunciation of the exploitation of the poor; there was condemnation of those who speculated in land at enormous profit, or who, by deliberate deception both misrepresented the value of land and took money without being able to deliver title. Some of the prominent members of the Church indulged in some of this money-making speculation, and were rebuked by the Prophet. They could not accept his rebuke, unconsciously becoming members of the class of whom the Prophet spoke when he declared that evil men would not take correction.

There were some who thought it legitimate to pander to the tastes of men for spirituous liquor. The City Council was so determined that this sort of thing should not exist that it ordered such nuisances abated immediately. This meant the ordered razing of the offending sheds or cabins, to the intense anger and hatred of the proprietors. Such men formed the nucleus of the hate which began to develop against the Prophet and the Twelve.

Then there was John C. Bennett. Bennett was a product of his day, a proud, self-seeking adventurer who had become successful in political influence in Illinois. He was the quartermaster general of the state militia. He was a successful practicing physician, fluent of speech, brilliant in expression, and possessing a commanding personality. He became sympathetic with the suffering of the Saints in Missouri and condemned the Missourians for their part in it. He made overtures to the Prophet that he wanted to cast his lot and his fortunes with the Saints.

Joseph Smith told him he was welcome to come and cast his lot with their poverty, for that was all he could offer; but this did not deter Bennett. He joined the Church. Such was his charm, ability and personality, that he was soon in the leadership of the city. He was elected Mayor, then became a Major General in the Nauvoo Legion (the state militia organized under the direction of the city, by right of its charter). And the Prophet was glad to have him. He had influence among the politicians at Springfield and with the governor of the state, and he used that influence to help the Church. Those who read the history are inclined to believe that he was sincere in joining the Church, and that he intended truly to be a good member. For a time he was just that. But ambition and old habits are strong influences, besides Bennett had been in trouble before. He had left a wife and family in the east, but he had not been divorced. This he did not reveal. He got to seducing young women with the claim that the Prophet was teaching that such things were justified. Finally he was exposed. No man was labored with more than was he. He confessed, claimed repentance, was forgiven-only to retract all he had said to obtain forgiveness and to continue his evil course. Like all adulterers he was a liar and did not hesitate to lie concerning his activities or his intentions. Finally when patience ran out he was excommunicated. He was forced to resign as mayor, and relieved of his militia titles.

Turning against the Prophet, he became his bitter enemy. From that time forward he was a ringleader in efforts to kidnap the Prophet or extradite him to Missouri to his certain death, and joined with others living in Nauvoo who had been circumvented and exposed in their efforts to exploit the Saints and now plotted to murder the Prophet should the Missouri effort fail.

Before he was exposed he was almost certainly one of several men who plotted to kill the Prophet during one of the sham battle drills of the Nauvoo Legion. Joseph was saved only by the "spirit whispering mischief," in the request that Bennett made of him to take an unusual position in the sham battle.

One incident will illustrate Bennett's method after he turned against the Church. To Sidney Rigdon, counselor to the Prophet, he wrote a letter, outlining his plan to turn the Prophet over to the Missourians, enlisting his aid, and asking him to show the letter to Orson Pratt. Bennett had good reason to think he might influence Orson Pratt, for Orson had just been administered a smarting rebuke and brought to trial for his fellowship in the Church. If Orson Pratt was going to be an enemy this was a good opportunity. It is not clear from the history why Bennett felt that Sidney Rigdon would be sympathetic. Sidney read the letter but made no effort to warn the Prophet. He did as Bennett requested him, handing it to Orson Pratt, who promptly took the letter to the Prophet. That act of loyalty on the part of Orson Pratt made possible his being forgiven and reinstated. The fact that Sidney Rigdon did not warn the Prophet, but seemed to be sympathetic toward Bennett, was one of the causes of his repudiation by the Prophet a short time later.

The incidents cited above were straws in the wind. The pattern is dear, and shows a repetition of previous crises. The apostates, bitter, enemies of the brethren, incited mob violence when their own nefarious schemes were brought to naught. Thus it was in Kirtland, so it was in Far West; and now were the beginnings of it in Nauvoo.

Brigham Young left no record about the part he played in these momentous events. It may be safely assumed that he was well informed about every facet of every situation. He sat on the city council, and therefore took part in its discussions and decisions. He and his fellow members of the Quorum of the Twelve were extremely active in the protection of the new settlers and the immigrant poor from the land speculators. They could have named names in these cases. But as the months went by in late 1841 and most of 1842, Brigham's journal merely named the date of entry, then stated that he had attended city council meeting or, more often, had been in counsel with Joseph Smith.

He did not mention at all two important moments in his private life.

The first concerned Elizabeth. She was nineteen now, mature for that day, a woman grown. Out of tne veil of silence that Brigham maintained concerning the family has come this certificate:

"I hereby certify that I solemnized matrimony on the 10th Day of July 1842 Between Edmund Ellsworth and Elisabeth (sic) Young Both of the City of Nauvoo.

Rec'd Feby 9th 1843 Joseph Young

It is hard to believe that there was no pause in his work while Joseph Young, his brother, was the officiator at the marriage of his first-born child, his oldest daughter. There must have been a congratulatory party, an announcement, yet this certificate entered in the city records February 9, 1843, for a fifty cent fee is all there is to attest to the event.

Edmund Ellsworth was six years older than Elizabeth, a promising young man who no doubt was considered a good catch, as his later life attested. Incidentally, Elizabeth bore him eight children.

The second important event was a birth.

Luna Caroline Young was born to Mary Ann on August 1, 1842. One would like to talk about that exciting event, the detail of the birth-whether it was hard or easy, the weight of the baby, who attended as physician, or more likely, midwife, could he say "Mother and child doing well" or did Mary Ann suffer from the dread puerperal fever? Brigham and Mary Ann left no record of this. Birth was common. It was nothing to fuss about.

Even though the Prophet Joseph was harrassed by his enemies, he found time to instruct the Twelve. Those long evening meetings, held every few days, were times of instruction and joy. Not all of these meetings were held for the purpose of counselling on the best way to meet attacks of their enemies. A majority were explanations and counsel on the doctrines of salvation. As Brigham had told his relatives a few years before, one never reached the depths or heights or breadth of the doctrines of the Gospel. The Lord had revealed much to Joseph Smith, and Brigham and his companions were thirsty for the knowledge he could give them. Joseph opened eternity to them, showing them its orderliness, its beauty, its laws, and its conditions.

They had the grand objective to become sons of God, physically and spiritually, and they spared no effort to discover all they could which would further their purpose.

During the late spring Joseph invited Hyrum, his brother, Brigham, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Bishops Whitney and Miller and James Adams to his private office over the store. There he "taught the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days, and I received my washings, anointings, and endowments." This great event in Brigham's life, one he would have considered among the greatest, had been hinted at. The Lord had commanded that a temple be built, the main reason being that there could be revealed the keys which opened the doors of exaltation. The endowment to which Brigham referred was, and is, the ceremony which makes the Latter-day Saints a covenant people. Anciently, the chosen people made the covenant, then through apostasy the Israelites lost the ceremony which binds the covenant, and the covenant itself. But they kept the tradition.

It is ordinarily administered in the sacred temples, but under special circumstances, when there was no temple, the Prophet in charge has given it elsewhere. Such was this occasion. Like all of the necessary ordinances, it can be administered vicariously too, being made available to the dead by proxy work performed for their ancestors, relatives, and friends.

Following this event in that upper room, Joseph's private office, there was all the more incentive to complete the temple. First baptism for the dead; now endowments for the dead. "If I must complete certain ordinances to enter the Kingdom, these ordinances must also be done for my kindred dead." The idea was expanding in Brigham's soul, and the Spirit whispered peace to him.
