S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

November 1842

November 26, 1842 dawned, and before the day was over it proved to be one of the great crises through which Brigham passed in his lifetime. It began with little indication of its wasting seriousness. He was stricken with a slight attack of something which the Prophet said was like a light seizure of apoplexy. By the next morning he was resting comfortably until about twenty-four hours after the preliminary attack, when suddenly he was beset with a violent fever, with accompanying nausea, violent vomiting, and retching. The Prophet was called and administered to him, being assisted by Brigham's cousin Willard Richards, and promised him he would live and recover from the sickness. The Prophet stayed and directed the nursing operations for six hours. In about thirty hours, the frenzied fight to keep him alive with all the known medical means continuing night and day, the skin began to peel from his body until all of his body had a peeled look.

Brigham wanted to be baptized in the river for the restoration of his health, but the Prophet would not permit it, nor would he, until the fourteenth day, when the fever began to break, permit Brigham to be showered with cold water. The fever left him the eighteenth day, but during the whole period he lay on his back, his nurses not daring to turn him over on his side.

He lay in a log house which "was rather open," it being so cold that Isaac Decker, his attendant, froze his fingers and toes while fanning him. Decker was clad in greatcoat, boots and mittens, while Brigham, burning with fever, was shielded from the fire in the fireplace by a blanket.

When the fever left him on the eighteenth day, they bolstered him up in a chair, but he was so near gone he could not close his eyes, which were set and staring. His chin dropped down and his breathing stopped. Mary Ann took in the situation and threw some cold water in his face, but this had no effect. Then she "dashed a handful of strong camphor into my face and eyes, which I did not feel in the least, neither did I move a muscle. She then held my nostrils between her thumb and finger, and placing her mouth directly over mine, blew into my lungs until she filled them with air. This set my lungs in motion, and I began again to breathe. While this was going on I was perfectly conscious of all that was passing around me; my spirit was as vivid as it ever was in my life, but I had no feeling in my body." He spent the next two weeks recuperating and gaining strength.

(Note in 1964: In the past few years this method of artificial respiration has been adopted by the Red Cross and kindred organizations in preference to the old method of prone pressure of the 1920's and '30's. During the period of popularity of the prone pressure method, the mouth to mouth methods of the old pioneers and those living in the early 19th century were looked upon with amused skepticism. Pure superstition, they said! But Mary Ann's instinctive act saved Brigham's life, as this method has done many times for others in the 1960's. These folks were no fools; they had many practices which were proper and wise in their day and still are in ours. )
