S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

June 1843

Sunday, June 23, 1843, was a warm, sticky day. The usual meeting was in session at the temple site. Elder Maginn was preaching a sermon when Hyrum Smith interrupted him. Hyrum stated that an emergency had arisen-would the brethren meet him in thirty minutes at the Masonic hall? Three hundred of the men present, gathered at the hall, listened to Hyrum describe how word has just come that the Missourians were after the Prophet, with the intention of Kidnapping him and carrying him into Missouri. They had a writ of arrest, based on false charges from the governor of Missouri.

The Prophet was at Dixon-130 miles northeast of Nauvoo-and even now was being held under arrest by two Missouri officers in disguise. Hyrum asked for volunteers to go to his rescue. Several companies were organized and sent but and they, blanketing every road leading toward Dixon, determined to continue searching until they had found him and rescued him. Before the companies left they gathered at the home of Wilson Law to await the means to finance the expedition. Hyrum Smith had solicited funds but had been unsuccessful, whereupon Wilson Law refused to go a step unless and until the money was raised.

Brigham told the companies to get in readiness, for by he time they were ready to go the necessary money would be forthcoming; although at the moment "I knew not from whence, but in two hours I had succeeded in borrowing $700 to defray the expense of the expedition."

Seven days later Brigham had the satisfaction of seeing Joseph escorted into Nauvoo by the rescuing expedition, together with the Missouri officers who had arrested him, "where they witnessed the devotion and good feeling in the hearts of the Saints toward their Prophet." It had been a narrow escape, and but for the prompt action of the rescuing party the Prophet might well have been spirited across the river into Missouri.

In Nauvoo at the trial of the Prophet on his plea for a writ of habeus corpus, Brigham testified of the trials of Joseph, himself, and others in Missouri in 1838. His recital, with that of Hyrum Smith, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and Sidney Rigdon, was sufficient to cause the lawyers to shed tears. The Prophet was freed on the writ of habeus corpus, and once more the designs of the Missourians were foiled.

Brigham was now free to go on his mission, to which the Prophet had called him a month previously to go east and collect funds for the Nauvoo House and the Temple. He carried a letter of commission and introduction to all Saints and friends, signed by the Prophet Joseph:

"To all the Saints and honorable men of the earth, greeting:

"Dear Brethren and Friends: - I Joseph Smith, a servant of the Lord, and Trustee-in-Trust for the Temple of the Lord at Nauvoo, do hereby certify that the bearer hereof, Brigham Young, an Elder and one of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has deposited with me his bond and security, to my full satisfaction, according to the resolution of the Conference, held in this city on the 6th day of April last.

"He, therefore, is recommended to all Saints and honorable people, as a legal agent to collect funds for the purpose of building the Nauvoo House and Temple of the Lord, confident that he will honor this high trust, as well as ardently fulfil his commission as a messenger of peace and salvation; as one of the Lord's noblemen. I can fervently say, may the Lord clear his way before him, and bless him, and bless those that obey his teachings wherever there are ears to hear, and hearts to feel.

"He is worthy to be received and entertained as a man of God; wherefore, brethren and friends, while you have the assurance of the integrity, fidelity, and ability of this servant of the living God, I trust that your hearts and energies will be enlivened and deeply engaged in the building of these houses, directed by revelation for the salvation of all Saints; and that you will not rest where you are, until all things are prepared before you, and you are gathered home with the rest of Israel to meet your God. I feel strong in the belief, and have a growing expectation, that you will not withhold any means in your power that can be used to accomplish this glorious work. Finally, as one that greatly desires the salvation of man, let me remind you all to strive with a godly zeal for virtue, holiness, and the commandments of the Lord. Be good, be wise, be just, be liberal, and above all be charitable, always abounding in all good works, and may health, peace, and the love of God, our Father, and the grace of Jesus Christ, our Lord, be and abide with you all, is the sincere prayer of

Your devoted brother and friend

In the everlasting Gospel,

JOSEPH SMITH

City of Nauvoo, June 1, 1843"

It was July 7 when the steamer "Rapids" put into the Nauvoo landing and took Brigham, Wilford Woodruff, and E. P. Maginn aboard. The next day they arrived at St. Louis.

Several items interested Brigham as they toiled eastward. There was, at Louisville, the "Kentucky Baby" a side show freak 7 feet 7 inches tall. There were the fields of strawberries and raspberries, one of the early cash crops of the day.

"Visited Brother David Martin who never asked our names; we staid (sic) with him overnight and lay on a bedstead that creaked so dreadfully that we could neither sleep nor dream."

At Pittsburg they had troubles with their own members. Here Brigham learned that Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt and J. E. Page had organized the branch at Cincinnati. Then after the others had departed for Pittsburg, Elder Page had annulled their proceedings and reestablished the branch as it was. Brigham reproved Elder Page for undoing alone what three of them had done together and exhorted him to more gentleness and mildness. Truly varied were the duties of Brigham!

So seldom did Brigham write outlines of sermons that the two outlines given here are interesting to show the tenor of his thoughts. He defended the Prophet Joseph in one sermon, July 29:

"We met in the evening at brother Savary's to instruct the Elders. I said,-'They should in the first place control themselves and bring their passions into subjection to the law of God, then preside over their wives and children in righteousness, which would qualify them to preside over Branches of the Church; but Elders would contend about presiding over churches who are not able to preside over themselves or the least child they have.

"'Again, the first principle of our cause and work is to understand that there is a Prophet in the Church, and that he is the head of the Church on earth. Who called Joseph to be a Prophet? Was it the people or God? God, and not the people, called him. Had the people gathered together and appointed one of their number to be a Prophet, he would have been accountable to the people; but, inasmuch as he is called of God, he is accountable to God, and the angel that committed the Gospel to him, and not to any man on earth. The Twelve are accountable to the Prophet and his Council, and not to the Church, for the course they pursue, and we have learned to go and do as the Prophet tells us.'"

And in another on the following day (Sunday) he states how he asked a question and then reasoned the answer:

"I asked the following questions, and reasoned thus, - 'Why do the people oppose the gifts and graces of the Gospel?

"'If a man can get faith by the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, so as to lay hands upon his wife and children or friends, when they lie sick and languishing nigh unto death, and command the fever or disease, or the power of the Destroyer, or even death itself, to cease its work and be still, and the person is relieved. I ask what harm is there in all this? Or if a man, by faith and humility before God, can get the testimony of Jesus Christ, and prophesy of things to come, or be able to speak in tongues or cast out devils, I ask what harm is there in all this? Or if a man, by faith and humility before God, can get the testimony of Jesus Christ, and prophesy of things to come, or be able to speak in tongues or cast out devils, I ask what harm is there in all this? Does it do any harm? No, it does not.

"'I know the New Testament is true, for I have proved it according to the pattern given-namely, by believing in Christ and obeying the Gospel; and I know that the signs do follow the faithful believers; then I ask, Do these things harm anyone? No, they do not.

"'Again, the kingdom of God must be concentrated-the people must be together and gathered into one place. How would the King of France, or England look undertaking to reign over a kingdom, when their subjects were scattered all over the world, except in France or England? So with the Saints, they must be gathered together, and this work has already commenced.

"'Who is the author of this work and gathering? Joseph Smith, the Prophet, as an instrument in the hands of God, is the author of it. He is the greatest man on earth. No other man, at this age of the world, has power to assemble such a great people from all the nations of the earth, with all their varied dispositions, and so assimilate and cement them together that they become subject to rule and order. This the Prophet Joseph is doing. He has already gathered a great people who willingly subject themselves to his counsel, because they know it is righteous."

The trip was not without its dangers. The brethren had been given $46 by Charles Beck to help them toward Baltimore, and while they were en route by stage out of Cumberland, down a steep mountain, the irons which held the springs gave way, "letting the coach onto the horses," which frightened them.

"The coachman, at first, attempted to hold them in; but as that only drew them up against the body of the coach, it increased the fright of the wheel horses until they became unmanageable. I told the coachman to keep them in the road, and let them go until they reached the bottom of the hill; he did so, and I assisted in holding him upon his seat, until we got to a piece of ascending ground where we were enabled to stop the team without any damage. We then lifted up the coach into its place, put a pole under and held it there until we reached a blacksmith's shop, and got it repaired."

By the 5th of August they were in Philadelphia, having preached and taught in Cumberland, Baltimore, and Newcastle while on the way. Again Brigham recorded more than usual:

For recreation they joined an excursion of the local Saints to Gloucester Point where to pass the time, after a good picnic dinner,

"The following subject was taken up for discussion, -'Is the prosperity of any religious denomination a positive evidence that they are right?' Elder J. E. Page contended for the affirmative, and Elder J. M. Grant for the negative. Elder Page contended for his position very sharply and warmly. Elder Grant, in meeting his arguments, also manifested great earnestness in sustaining his position, and it appeared to the Saints like contention and caused a dampness of feeling to rest upon the company.

"At the end of the discussion I was called upon to decide the question, and perceiving the feeling among the Saints, I told them I was reminded of the anecdote of the negro's attempt at shooting a squirrel. His master having occasion to be absent from home, charged him to be sure and not meddle with his guns and ammunition; but no sooner had the master got fairly out of the way, when the negro's curiosity prompted him to try one of his master's guns; he accordingly took one down which had been loaded for some time, and went into the woods. He soon saw a squirrel, and crept up a hill behind a log and fired, but the gun being heavily charged, it knocked the negro over, and he rolled down the hill.

Upon gaining his equilibrium and realizing his defeat he looked up from the ground where he lay, and seeing the squirrel jumping from tree to tree as if conscious of victory, he cried, -'Well, well, cuffy, if you had been at the other end of the gun your would have known more about it.' This excited laughter, in which all the company joined, and I then gave my decision, which was, that the prosperity of any people was not positive evidence of their being right."

If by day the travelers were entertained by loyal Saints, they were also entertained by night, as witness:

"Brother George A. and I staid over night with brother Atkinson, who lived in a very large frame house, said to have stood 150 years, which was so infested with bed-bugs that we could not sleep. Brother George A. Smith gave it as his legal opinion that there were bed-bugs there which had danced to the music at the battle of Trenton, as their heads were perfectly grey. We took our blankets and retreated to the further end of the room, and, as the bugs followed us, I lit a candle, and as they approached, caught them and burnt them in the candle, and thus spent the night."

Brigham answered more questions during a meeting in New York.

"1. Can any officer in any Branch of the Church say that his word is law, and shall be obeyed?

"Answer - He can say that his word is law, but does that make it so? Yes, if he has the law of God, and delivers it, otherwise it is not.

"2. Is it right for a Priest to be appointed to accompany a Teacher to visit the houses of each member, when his duty is set forth in the covenants?

"Answer - Yes. Any officer, from a High Priest to a Deacon, may visit the Church, or members, and be set apart for this purpose, if the Church will receive it.

"3. Can a Branch of the Church make bye-laws on the principle of expediency, which are not specified in any revelation?

"Answer -Yes, if they wish they may make laws to stick their fingers in their eyes; but it is like the man who habituated himself to sticking his finger into a knot-hole, in a board partition, every morning, until custom compelled him to do it, for, having omitted it one morning, he felt so curiously at the breakfast table that he could not eat-he then bethought himself, went and put his finger into the knot-hole, and returned with a good appetite and ate a hearty breakfost.

"I said that if Elders or High Priests are so situated that they cannot get word from the Prophet or the Twelve Apostles, they may get a revelation concerning themselves. The Twelve may get a revelation in any part of the world concerning the building up of the kingdom as they have to establish it in all parts of the world; so any person can ask the Lord for a witness concerning himself, and get an answer; but not to lead the Church-that belongs to the head of the Church."

On the 30th he rode out to Coney Island with General James Arlington Bennett. While bathing, Bennett asked for baptism. So Brigham baptized this friend, then and there, and confirmed him a member of the Church.

The mission of the brethren took them to Boston, Salem, and Marblehead before they turned their faces homeward. They arrived back in Nauvoo on October 22, 1843.
