S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

August 1843

In Brigham's absence, all was not well in Nauvoo. Mary Ann was left at home alone, as usual. But though her cabin was now tight things were not easy. She wrote a letter to Brigham about conditions at home. The letter is a model of restraint, and illustrates, too, the attitude of the women left behind. It was to be delivered to Brigham by Parley P. Pratt who was leaving for New York, August 17. He must have delivered the letter to Brigham about the 27th.

"Nauvoo, August 16th, 1843

"My Dear and well Beloved husband while our little family is quietly resting in bed which has been very seldom for four weeks past. I was taken with influenza and Colamorbus the first. Brigham was taken with the Scarlot fever. Before he recovered the three little girls were taken. Mary had the canker so she did not swallow for ten or eleven days anything but drink except a little fish flesh once. Vilate was taken very sick one week with scarlot fever since the Colamorbus took hold of her yesterday in a very severe manner so she appeared nigh unto death, but through mercy of God and the utmost exertion she is quite comfortable. The children are all getting better and I can truly say I feel thankful for I am much worn down with standing over them by day and by night and hearing their cries with pain and distress; oftimes calling for Father to come and lay hands on them. I am shure it peirced my heart with much sorrow. I feel to thank my heavenly father there is prospect of health returning to us again at presant. There is much sickness in this place. Br. Truman is very sick. Mother has been very sick; is now better. There has some children died with the same disease our family has had. There is no change in our temporal affairs-Thursday morning 17-for the better since you left home. I have got along well yet. I do not want to say things to you to trouble you. You must excuse me for saying so much about the distress we have passed through. I feel sometimes as though I could never get anything else on my mind. I thank you for the three kind letters you have forwarded to me since you left home. There is many things I want to tell you I shall not have time to write in this letter as I expect Br. Pratt starts this morning for New York. I will fill a sheet and send by male (sic) as soon as I can. May the Lord bless you and make you an instrument of doing much good you have all our prairs (sic). I am yours in the bonds of the everlasting gospel.

Mary A. Young to Brigham Young"

(The whole letter is copied sic.)

And again tragedy struck for on August 27, 1843, unknown to Brigham until he had turned homeward, Mary Ann his twin daughter died of "dropsy of the heart." Once more Mary Ann his wife was forced to bear the grief alone. The little girl was six years, 8 months old, and had known little but hardship from her birth.

What Mary Ann wrote to Brigham in conveying the sad news has not been preserved nor has what he wrote in reply. Circumspectly they bore their joint grief. One thing is definite. Brigham did not come home until his mission was finished-nor did Mary Ann expect him.

Letter from Mary Ann to Brigham in 1843. Courtesy Mrs. Genevieve R. Curtis, a descendant of Brigham Young and Miriam Works. (Photo-Jay Heslop)
