S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Fall 1843

On his return journey Brigham traveled with Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith and immediately upon their arrival home they called upon the Prophet Joseph Smith. Their purpose was to settle the business of their mission to the east, for all of their preaching had had one objective-to solicit funds for the Temple and the building of the Nauvoo House. Brigham did not record how much they had collected, but he did state that the Prophet was glad to see them. "We paid him every cent of the money we had collected for the Temple and the Nauvoo House." Joseph promptly used the money thus collected to purchase groceries and clothing for the workmen at the Temple.

While they visited with Joseph "he taught us many principles illustrating the doctrine of celestial marriage. . . ."

Brigham soon was engaged in the business of building the Kingdom and defending it from its enemies. His journal entries speak of a variety of efforts and activities. He assisted in conferring the endowment ordinances on the remainder of the Twelve and on other loyal men and their wives. He met in the meetings of the City Council, which was now engaged in a strenuous effort to frustrate the evil designs of the apostate members of the community. He was chosen as a member of a special committee to raise $500 to purchase paper for another edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. There was a memorial to be written to Congress seeking redress from wrongs; he helped write it. In the absence of the Prophet, Brigham presided at a prayer meeting. He later summarized his instructions given to the brethren at this meeting: "I instructed the brethren on the necessity of following our file leader, and our Savior, in all his laws and commandments, without asking any questions why they were so." He was ever anxious to ask for the same standards of obedience from others as he was willing to expect of himself. Loyal obedience was his first requirement both for himself and his associates. Later in company with Wilford Woodruff he spoke at a meeting of the Saints. The house was filled.

"I exhorted the Saints to be subject to the powers that be; said our sufferings are permitted that we may learn by experience the contrast between good and evil, in order to obtain power; never suffer anger to find a seat in your breast, never get angry, treat all mildly, govern yourselves, control your passions, and it will give you power. When the temple is done I expect we shall be baptized, washed, anointed, ordained, and receive the keys and signs of the priesthood for our dead, that they may have a full salvation, and thus we shall be saviors on Mt. Zion according to the scriptures." Brigham meant every word of what he said, and furthermore, put his feelings into action. He lived as he advised, stayed calm, was mild, held his temper and kept cool-but worked hard for the completion of the Temple. He was further confirmed in his feelings when the Prophet showed, in a meeting of the Twelve, that the principle of integrity was eternal, and that the lack of sustaining this principle led men to apostasy. Well, Brigham had integrity and intended to maintain it.

But there were others whose intentions were not so pure. At the meeting of the City Council of January 3, 1844, William Law, Joseph's counselor only a few months previously, and one who had professed that his life was dedicated to the Prophet, complained that "Joseph had administered a secret oath to the police and instructed them to kill him; but the police came forward and unanimously testified under oath to the falsity of his statements."

By contrast, a week later Brigham led the Twelve in inviting the brethren to cut and haul wood for President Joseph Smith. Two hundred men with forty teams turned out and in one day cut two hundred loads, hauling one hundred of them to Joseph's house.

Within a month Brigham sat in a great public meeting of the Saints and listened to the Prophet expose a conspiracy entered into by Chauncy Higbee, Dr. Robert D. Foster, Joseph H. Jackson, William and Wilson Law and others, for the purpose of taking his life. Here Brigham saw illustrated once more the fact that their bitterest enemies were those who had been nearest to them. It was the Kirtland and Missouri spirit over again.

With Elizabeth married, Vilate was more in Brigham's thoughts. Vilate was growing, and Brigham was suddenly made conscious of it by her awkwardness as she performed the household tasks. "Besides," said Mary Ann, "we are now going to have to buy clothes becoming a young woman. She will be fourteen next June 1."

They talked it over one night-one of the few evenings that Brigham was home. He expressed his desire that Vilate should have some advantages. He wanted her to learn to write well and to be able to express her thoughts clothed in the cultured English of the day. He would like her to learn to play a musical instrument, and suggested the piano.

Mary Ann was willing but did not quite see how all of this could be arranged in Nauvoo. Those who had any of the cultural conveniences were few and far between. She wanted a piano for the parlor of the new brick house, and certainly someone should be able to play it. And she wanted each child to gain all of the culture and refinement possible.

Things had been made a little easier when they moved into the new brick house. While it was not a large house it was comfortable and suited to her family. It had all of the conveniences which were available in that day: a water well close by, a good cook stove-not large but ample-beds that could be moved, storage space, a good root cellar which was above ground and serviceable. They had moved in on May 31 and the celebration held the next day was a combined house warming and a salute to Brigham on his forty-second birthday -and Vilate's thirteenth. All of these events were recalled as Brigham and Mary Ann talked over the question of Vilate's training.

Brigham Young home. Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1955.

There was only one thing to do. Brigham would write to Brother N. H. Felt at Salem, Massachusetts, and arrange to have Vilate spend a year with his family. There she could attend the excellent school kept for young women and take piano lessons. Mary Ann did not want Vilate traveling alone. Of course not, agreed her husband, but it could be arranged for her to go to Salem with Sister Cobb. This good woman, a convert, had traveled to Nauvoo with the Twelve on their return but a few weeks before. When her visit was over she intended to return to Salem. She would be happy to take Vilate with her, he felt certain.

So it was arranged, Brigham having received word, in response to his inquiry, that Vilate would be welcome at the home of Brother Felt.
