S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

Spring 1844

Two momentous events took place at this time which had far reaching effects. In February of 1844, Joseph had directed that an exploring company be chosen to go to California to select a location for the settlement of the Saints. The prophecy he had made at Montrose in 1842 predicting that the Saints would suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, there to become a mighty people, was well known by the Church leaders and was common talk. So the appointment of a company to California was no surprise. Several men volunteered to go, and four were chosen as the nucleus of a company-Alphonzo Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt and Daniel Spencer being the fortunate four. Associated with this effort and to give it guidance Joseph now organized a council of about fifty men. They had another purpose also-to set in motion steps to obtain redress for the wrongs which were beginning to be perpetrated by their enemies. This group was known as the "Council of Fifty." Brigham was an active participant in its meetings and discussions.

In talking about "California" they were not thinking of the present state of that name. The State of California was not then in existence. Rather, the whole expanse of the great western area was known loosely as California, what is now Utah, Nevada, California, and Arizona being encompassed by the title. The Great Basin, in which sits the Great Salt Lake, was referred to as upper California. Any exploring expedition, then, which went out to investigate the possibilities of California was also investigating all of the territory above described. It was owned by Mexico, and was not, therefore, a part of the United States.

The second great event had to do with the decision of the Prophet Joseph Smith to be a candidate for the office of President of the United States. This was no fancy dream of a man thirsting for power. The reason for the decision was very simple. Of the candidates for this high office which had thus far presented themselves, one had said in answer to a plea for redress of wrongs done to the Saints in Missouri, "Your cause is just but I can do nothing for you," and another had said that their only recourse was to leave the country, to expatriate themselves. Neither of these candidates was acceptable to the Saints, so, fearing that with no man of just principles to vote for, the heat of a campaign aimed at getting their votes would serve only to divide the Saints and create lasting emnities among them, Joseph with the advice of his brethren decided to become a candidate. At least the Saints could stay united during the hot political campaigning, and vote for someone dedicated to their interests.

Once the decision was made Joseph became an active candidate. He made a declaration of principles on which he would stand. A bona fide convention was appointed to be held at Baltimore for the purpose of nominating Joseph Smith for President and Sidney Rigdon for Vice-President. The Times and Seasons pressed the candidacies, and the presses of this newspaper were operated overtime turning out hand bills to be distributed. These hand bills declared the principles on which the campaign would be conducted.

The brethren divided the nation into sections, and more than three hundred of the elders were called-and accepted the call-to spread out over the land and advocate the candidacy of the Prophet for the high office of President. The Quorum of the Twelve were to spearhead the campaign and to direct the effort, which was to obtain and nominate delegates to the convention. Brigham was called, with the rest of the Twelve, on another eastern mission for the purpose of pressing the candidacy of Joseph Smith. If the nomination came about, not only would the Saints be given the opportunity of voting for a man of righteous principles, but the whole country would be invited to accept the same opportunity of voting not for politics but for one who stood four square for constitutional rights and for Christian principles.

Times were getting more difficult in Nauvoo; enemies were rising on every side, mobs were beginning to harrass the outlying members, conspiracies were being hatched having the murder of the Prophet as the objective. The detail of following these schemes to their related sources would take a special book. Their effect on Brigham was to make him alert to danger, to ride at a moment's notice to the defense of the Prophet, and because the Prophet was in hiding so much of the time, to carry out the detail of his work.

During this period of great difficulty there was a very real danger that the Prophet would be surprised, overpowered, kidnapped and taken across the river to Missouri. Already two attempts had been made on a quasi-legal basis, which, while created out of false accusations, almost succeeded. Had it not been for the power of the municipal court of Nauvoo, granted by the state when the charter was issued, Joseph would not have had a chance. As it was, things were touch and go in this respect.

There can be no doubt that Joseph Smith directed the unfolding of the Church organization and procedure under the inspiration of the Lord of Hosts and by His revealed direction. The fully organized Church did not blossom forth suddenly, but was given its order in a series of steps as needed and as the members were able to receive and digest it. One sees the wisdom of such a course now, a hundred or more years later; at that time, however, men were not conscious of the timing which now we see but walked by the faith that God would reveal His will through the Prophet. Therefore, the practice was constantly to seek His counsel in all their doings.

It is important at this point to explain that there was some confusion at first as to the place of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and its proper function as compared to the High Council. It developed, however, that the Twelve were to stand next to the First Presidency and that their responsibility was to be worldwide, while the High Council was to be confined in its authority to the local stake. This relationship was worked out often at the cost of injured feelings to some men. Jealousy was and is a common sin, and some men in the Church had not learned to conquer it. By the winter of 1843-44, however, it was quite well understood that the Twelve had authority to direct the Saints, as has been explained in describing the relation of the Twelve to the incoming immigrants from the eastern States and from Europe.

During the first months of the New Year, Joseph Smith was inspired to take the next step. That was to confer the keys upon the Twelve. One who held the "keys" held the authority of God to transact all business concerned with the Kingdom of God-spiritual or temporal. Only one man could exercise this authority at a time, the living Prophet and President. Joseph Smith held all of the keys-authority to speak and act for the Lord God-and only he held them.

He now felt inspired to give them to the Twelve. In a series of council meetings with these brethren he carefully explained the meaning of the "keys," what they involved, what were the authorities and responsibilities of each "key," and explained that while each of the Twelve would hold the keys none could exercise them except as he became senior in his apostleship. There had to be order. While all had equal authority the order of seniority should prevail.

He repeatedly told the Twelve that the responsibility of the Kingdom was to be on the shoulders of the Twelve, that they would have to carry the responsibility from now on; that he, Joseph, would not be with them much longer, and that on them would fall the burden.

He had given the keys to his brother Hyrum and stated that he wanted Hyrum to succeed him as the President and Prophet, but now he gave the Twelve to understand that the same mantle was upon them.

His two counselors were not present at these meetings with the Twelve and consequently were not aware of what was happening. Sidney Rigdon had lost the confidence of the Prophet; and William Law was even then conspiring with the bitter apostates to kill the Prophet.

It was left to the Twelve to bear witness of their authority when the time should come, although some few of the "Council of Fifty" knew about it.

Parley P. Pratt wrote a proclamation six months after the death of the Prophet, and described the meetings where the authoritative keys were transferred to the Twelve. Speaking of Joseph Smith, he wrote: "This great and good man was led, before his death, to call the Twelve together from time to time, and instruct them in all things pertaining to the Kingdom, ordinances, and government of God. He often observed that he was laying the foundation, but it would remain for the Twelve to complete the building. Said he, 'I know not why, but for some reason I am constrained to hasten my preparations, and to confer upon the Twelve all the ordinances, keys, covenants, endowments, and sealing ordinances of the Priesthood, and so set before them a pattern in all things pertaining to the sanctuary and the endowments therein.'

"Having done this he rejoiced exceedingly, for said he, the Lord is about to lay the burden on your shoulders and let me rest awhile; and if they kill me, continued he, the Kingdom of God will roll on, as I have now finished the work which was laid upon me, by committing to you all things for the building of the Kingdom according to the heavenly vision, and the pattern shown me from Heaven. With many conversations like this, he comforted the minds of the Twelve, and prepared them for what was soon to follow.

"He proceeded to confer on Elder Young, the President of the Twelve, the keys of the sealing power, as conferred in the last days by the spirit and power of Elijah, in order to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth should be smitten with a curse.

"This last key is the most sacred of all, and pertains exclusively to the first presidency of the Church, without whose sanction and approval, or authority, no sealing blessing shall be administered pertaining to things of the resurrection and the life to come.

"After giving them a very short charge to do all things according to the pattern, he quietly surrendered his liberty and his life into the hands of his blood thirsty enemies. . . ." Thus wrote Parley P. Pratt six months after the death of Joseph and not more than ten months after he, himself, had been given the same keys.

Brigham hinted at these momentous meetings but in making his diary entries he did not say that he had received the keys. That he held the keys, and knew it, his decisive actions clearly indicate, and he knew that the Twelve knew it.

Benjamin F. Johnson, a close friend of the Prophet and one of his confidants during the Nauvoo period, related how the Prophet told the Twelve of their responsibilities at one of the meetings of the Council of Fifty. There the Prophet told the Council that the Twelve had the responsibility-the keys-and that the Twelve would depend on the Council for assistance.

Benjamin F. Johnson wrote to a friend concerning this meeting: "All of these keys he (Joseph) held, and under these then existing conditions he stood before that association of his select friends, including all of the Twelve, and with great feeling and animation he graphically reviewed his life of persecution, labor, and sacrifice for the Church and Kingdom of God, both of which he declared were now organized upon the earth, the burden of which had become too great for him longer to carry, that he was weary and tired with the weight he had so long bourne, and he then said with great vehemence, 'And in the name of the Lord, I now shake from my shoulders the responsibility of bearing of the Kingdom of God to all the world, and here and now I place that responsibility with all the keys powers and privileges pertaining thereto upon the shoulders of you the Twelve Apostles, . . . I am henceforth free from this responsibility and I now shake my garments clear and free from the blood of this generation and of all men.'"

If Brigham ever had any thoughts of light-mindedness this event and many others of like nature-indicating that the Church was and would be his responsibility-drove them from his mind.

In his journal for the date of April 11, 1844, appears this short and pertinent entry: "Spent the day in the council of fifty, we had an interesting time and dosed the council with shouts of Hosannah."

Whatever the "interesting time" was which caused him thus to comment could have been only something of vital importance. Especially when the meeting was closed with the sacred shout of "Hosannah."
