S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

April-August 1844 [^1]

The 1844 April Conference, the fourteenth annual conference of the Church, was one of great significance and fervor. Among other things the Prophet expounded on the principle of Zion. Hitherto the people had conceived the idea that Zion was in Jackson County, Missouri, but now the Prophet declared that the whole of North and South America was the land of Zion. The City of Zion was to be in Missouri, but the two great continents were reserved by the Almighty for the refuge and settlements of the Saints. It was not clear, quite, how this would come about, but then by now the faithful knew that the Lord does His work in His own time and at His own pleasure, not man's. They would be willing to wait. These shores of America embraced Zion; that was enough for the present. Once more the Prophet had expanded their conceptions, enlarged their ideas, increased their outlook.

The conference was interrupted on the 7th by the funeral of Elder King Follett. Elder Follett had died from the effects of a cave-in while lining a well with stone. He had been a most loyal, devoted man, and his funeral was a testimony to that effect, for nearly everybody was there. The Prophet himself delivered the funeral sermon, and in it opened the eyes of the Saints and the world to the true nature and purposes of God.

The Prophet took more than two hours to deliver the discourse. Its effect on Brigham was profound. Here was truth unadulterated, unadorned, beautiful in its majesty. Not a play on words but a statement of truth so simple and so explanatory that Brigham must have felt as he came away that while he had heard the Prophet privately expound the doctrine, this discourse rounded it out into a simple, understandable whole. If he had been fed many times before, this was a supreme feast. Brigham delivered two sermons the next day, making practical application of the doctrine to the listeners' everyday lives, to the faster building of the temple; and he instructed the Elders who were going out to preach to be wise and humble, to keep pure and innocent, and then they would prosper.

The next few days were busy ones indeed. There was the assignment of areas for 344 elders who had volunteered to go out and advocate the Prophet Joseph as a candidate for President of the United States. There was the itinerary of the Twelve's visit to the eastern branches to arrange and confirm. Conferences were lined up on a tight- fast-moving schedule for all of the brethren of the Council. Considering their means of travel, they meant to proclaim as far afield as possible and in the shortest possible time the virtues of their Presidential candidate. Letters were sent to the branches of the Church calling on them to assemble the largest congregations possible. This was as fast-moving a campaign as had ever been planned in the history of the country. Considering their limited means of communication, it is surprising how well they managed to inform the nation about their candidate and his political beliefs.

Brigham kissed Mary Ann and the children goodbye on May 21st 1844 and boarded the steamer "Osprey." With him were his faithful friend Heber C. Kimball and Lyman Wight. They were joined in St. Louis by William Smith. Others had

gone on before. They made rapid progress for that era:

May 22 - St. Louis

May 26 - Cincinnati

May 27 - Pittsburg

June 1 - Elders Kimball and Wight went to Washington D. C. while Brigham and John C. Page preached in Pittsburg and the neighboring towns. Brigham ignored the fact that this was his 43rd birthday.

June 4 - Left for Kirtland on the Pennsylvania and Ohio Canal

June 5 - Akron, Ohio

June 6 - At Shalorville

June 7 - Mantua

June 8 - Kirtland

Here Brigham took time out to visit his brother John Young and his sister Nancy Kent. But when he preached in the Kirtland Temple he found the Saints unresponsive and their spirit dead.

June 12 - Fairport - Steamer to Buffalo

Now he took the "rail cars" to Albany, thus making note of the improvement in American transportation. On the 16th he was in Boston, by the indirect route of a river steamer from Albany to New York, and thence by ship.

June 18 - "I went to Salem and saw my daughter Vilate."

He loved this budding child, and his visit there must have been satisfying. What does a father do when he visits a daughter? Hs asks how she likes her new home; he inspects her living and sleeping quarters; he asks to see her books and she reads a little to him to show how well she progresses. She plays on the piano the simple "pieces" she has learned. And he takes her out on a sightseeing trip, purchasing some little thing to wear, and some candy to eat for her pleasure.

On the 22nd of June he was in Howell and after preaching there on the 23rd returned to Boston.

June 27, he wrote:

"Spent the day in Boston with Brother Woodruff, who accompanied me to the railway station as I was about to take cars for Salem. In the evening while sitting in the depot, waiting, I felt a heavy depression of spirit and so melancholy I

could not converse with any degree of pleasure. . . .I could not

assign any reasons for my peculiar feelings."

On July 1st he attended the state convention with his friends in the Melodeon Hall, Boston, for the nomination of General Joseph Smith for President of the United States, and appointed delegates to the Baltimore national Convention. This accomplished, he met with the Twelve, who divided themselves up to go to different parts of the vineyard to oversee several conferences.

July 9th at Salem Brigham heard rumors of the death of the Prophet, but he and Orson Pratt went to Lowell and on to Petersboro where a conference was scheduled. Apparently he thought what he heard was rumor.

July 16th - "While at Brother Bement's house in Petersboro, I heard a letter read which Brother Livingston had from Mr. Joseph Powers of Nauvoo giving particulars of the murder of Joseph and Hyrum. The first thing I thought of was, whether Joseph had taken the keys of the kingdom with him from the earth; Brother Pratt sat on my left; we were both leaning back in our chairs. Bringing my hand down on my knee I said 'the keys of the kingdom are right here with the Church.'"

That day a letter from Wilford Woodruff confirmed the story of the tragedy. Brigham started with Orson Pratt immediately for Boston, staying in Lowell all night. July 17th he arrived in Boston and found Brothers Kimball and Woodruff there. And there, for the first time, in the presence of his brethren Brigham gave way to his feelings and wept with uncontrollable grief over the loss of his leaders.

He and the brethren waited in Boston a week for Lyman Wight, holding meetings and comforting the Saints.

With the arrival of Lyman Wight they left for Nauvoo, picking up Orson Hyde at Albany. Now the party consisted of Brigham, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, Orson Hyde, and Lyman Wight. They left Albany on July 24, and traveled hard day and night by railroad, stage, and steamboat. They crossed from Albany to Buffalo, to Detroit, to Chicago, to Galena, to Nauvoo, arriving at Nauvoo at 8 p.m. on Tuesday, August 6-just in the nick of time.

The journey had not been without its excitement. Leaving Chicago, August 1st, they had found the road to Galena a succession of mud-holes and bad places. They had to pry the

stage out of mud-holes several times during the journey. At one place they carne upon a company of Norwegians who were travelling with ox teams drawing heavily loaded wagons, one of which was stuck fast in the mud, blocking the road. Several of the Norwegians were whipping the oxen and bawling at them in Norwegian, which seemed to confuse and frighten the oxen, with the result that the wagon stayed stuck.

"After sitting and looking at them a moment President Young got out of the coach and stepped up and took the whip out of the hands of one of the Norwegians, telling them to stand out of the way. He then talked to the oxen in a tongue which was not understood by Norwegians or Americans, and touching them lightly with the whip, they instantly pulled the wagon out of the mud, and continued on the journey much to the astonishment of the Norwegians and the surprise and amusement of the passengers on the stage."

When they arrived in Galena at 8 a.m. August 4, they had travelled 160 miles in 48 hours, stopping only to take meals and change horses.

The sorrow caused by Joseph's and Hyrum's deaths was increased when they arrived in Nauvoo for then they learned of the death of Samuel H. Smith, another of the Prophet's brothers, on August 1st. He had succumbed to disease brought on by exposure and exhaustion occasioned by mob action at the time of the martyrdom. He was a great soul; Brigham owed him much, for his first missionary journey, the first undertaken in the Restored Church, had ended with the introduction of the Book of Mormon to Phinehas Young and thence to Brigham.

This sermon as it was taken down in longhand and then reconstructed by several writers from their notes is not verbatim, but is accurate enough to give the gist of what was said. It will be found in the Documentary History of the Church, Volume 6, pp. 302-317. Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, Thomas Bullock and William Clayton were the collaborators in this report.

---
Notas:
[^1] Give up the leaders - "This you have done"
