S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

August 6-August 7, 1844

One pauses to survey the scenes of this epic drama and discovers that he cannot describe them. At best he can merely write the cold, hard, facts.

There is the intrigue of the murderous band of apostate liars and adulterers. There is the troupe of vacillators, themselves watching the intrigue unwind to its inevitable end, and seemingly powerless to desire to expose it; there is the group of officials, knowing its duty, but, politicians all, making decisions with an eye to the next election, blowing hot, blowing cold-swayed by the madmen of the moment; there is the valiant, last-ditch defense of two or three loyal friends, powerless before the insidious accusation of "coward" made by supposed friends.

Brigham and Heber alike had played their part on this stage. But in the final scene of tragedy they had been withdrawn, to play a counter scene in an attempt to influence a nation to a realization of its injustice to a people and of that people's constant right to protest the injustice.

And now after a hurried, whirlwind, superhuman effort to reach the scene before there was nothing left to save, and knowing in his heart that he held the key which would-and the only key which could-save the work thus far done, Brig-ham experienced the agony, frustration, the feeling of the futility of it all as John Taylor and Willard Richards unfolded to him the last action of the tragedy that day of August 7th.

And in his agonized declaration that if he had been there Joseph would not have turned back from his planned escape he summed up his desolation.

No, it cannot be adequately written.

After a good night's sleep, Brigham felt better. The long journey to Nauvoo which had ended the night previous had been exhausting, but now he felt refreshed and ready. Mary Ann had told him briefly what had been going on. She knew that Sidney Rigdon was in town attempting to gain the leadership of the Church, and that he was aided and abetted by William Marks, the President of the Nauvoo Stake. Cousin Willard Richards was exhausted from the long hours he had spent advising and counseling, and from circumventing Rigdon's efforts to force the issue. John Taylor was recovering but was still unable to leave his home. Mary Ann was immensely proud of four women who had gone to R. D. Foster and told him that they had endured his insults as long as they intended, and that unless he left town that day he would be visited by a stronger force the next day. Two of them were the wives of Hyrum Smith and John Taylor, who, goodness knows, had suffered most from the conspiracies of Foster against Joseph and Hyrum. The other two were the wives of Arthur Millikan and W. W. Phelps. Foster left that night, Mary Ann reported with some pride. Brigham gleaned from her what she knew of the death of the martyred brothers and the events leading to it. Then he slept the sleep of the exhausted.

The meeting of the members of the Twelve at the home of John Taylor the next morning was a memorable one. Brigham was now told of the efforts of Sidney Rigdon to gain the guardianship of the Church before the Twelve could arrive, and the measures taken by Willard Richards, Parley P. Pratt, and George A. Smith to counter his efforts. First they had invited him to meet them at eight o'clock "tomorrow morning" (Sunday), August 4. When the time came he had not shown up, giving an appointment with a lawyer as his excuse. But at 10 o'clock at the Sunday meeting at the stand, he had been there declaring that he had received a vision that he was the guardian of the Church. He had said he "was the identical one that the ancient prophets had sung about, wrote and rejoiced over, and that he had been sent to do the identical work that had been the theme of the prophets in every preceding generation."

At the conclusion of the meeting William Marks had given out the notice that a special meeting of the Church would be held the following Thursday for the purpose of choosing a guardian. Monday the 5th the brethren had waited on Elder Rigdon in the morning. He had agreed to meet them in council that afternoon. He had attended the council and had ranted somewhat about the confusion existing, had told them they lacked a great leader and that a guardian should be appointed. He had stated he did not expect a guardian to be appointed Thursday but rather that it would be in the nature of a prayer meeting where they might exchange thoughts and warm up each others hearts. So the account went.

Now people would be relieved that the Twelve were at last home to take charge of things. President Rigdon had not been convincing.

The brethren called a meeting for 4 p.m. that day, the 7th, of the Twelve, the High Council and the High Priests who were in town. President Rigdon was invited and came to the meeting. Brigham now called on Sidney Rigdon to make a statement concerning his message to the Saints and the vision and revelation he had received. The gist of his remarks were, "I have been called to be a spokesman unto Joseph-I propose to be a guardian to the people."

To which Brigham replied:

I do not care who leads the church, even though it were Ann Lee; but one thing I must know, and that is what God says about it. I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject.

I know there are those in our midst who will seek the lives of the Twelve as they did the lives of Joseph and Hyrum. We shall ordain others and give the fulness of the priesthood, so that if we are killed the fulness of the priesthood may remain.

Joseph conferred upon our heads all the keys and powers belonging to the Apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away, and no man or set of men can get between Joseph and the Twelve in this world or in the world to come.

How often has Joseph said to the Twelve, 'I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests.'

The Twelve, as a quorum, will not be permitted to tarry here long; they will go abroad and bear off the kingdom to the nations of the earth, and baptize the people faster than mobs can kill them off. I would like, were it my privilege, to take my valise and travel and preach till we had a people gathered who would be true.

My private feelings would be to let the affairs of men and women alone, only go and preach and baptize them into the kingdom of God; yet, whatever duty God places upon me, in his strength I intend to fulfill it.

I want to see this people, with the various quorums of the priesthood, assembled together in special conference on Thursday next at 10 a.m.

Those assembled sustained what he said by a unanimous vote.

One might ask why the Twelve did not stop Rigdon. The answer is, because they believed in free agency. They believed that God would point the way and that the agency of the people must have opportunity to make a choice-Rigdon or the Twelve.

So at 10 a.m. on that fateful August day Rigdon took his place in a wagon box 30 feet in front of the stand, and for an hour and a half harangued the Saints upon choosing a guardian. President William Marks presided, and at the conclusion of Sidney's remarks he dismissed the meeting. Before the people could leave, Brigham announced that there would be a meeting called by the Twelve at 2 p.m. Would everyone be there? Apparently everyone who could get there, came.

Seven of the Apostles were present, a majority of the Quorum. Under the direction of Brigham they first organized the several quorums in their proper order around the stand. Then Brigham arose.

The words he used stirred the people. And there were many there who testified later that his voice, bearing, and appearance, were veritably that of the Prophet Joseph. One such testimony will suffice, for all were nearly alike:

"President Brigham Young. Of Brigham Young as President of the Church, I will again bear as a faithful testimony that I do know and bear record that upon the head of Brigham Young as chief, with the Apostleship in full, was by the voice of the Prophet Joseph, in my hearing, laid the full responsibility of bearing of the kingdom of God to all the world. And I do further bear this as a testimony, faithful and true, to the Church and to all the world, that on a conference on the whole Church, at Nauvoo, subsequent to the Prophet's death and return of the absent Apostles, that I sat in the assembly near to President Rigdon, closely attentive to his appeal to the conference to recognize and sustain his claim as 'Guardian for the Church'. And I was, perhaps, to a degree, forgetful of what I knew to be the rights and duties of the apostleship, and as he closed his address and sat down, my back was partly turned to the seats occupied by Apostle Brigham Young and other Apostles, when suddenly, as from Heaven, I heard the voice of the Prophet Joseph that thrilled my whole being, and quickly turning around I saw in the transfiguration of Brigham Young, the tall, straight, and portly form of the Prophet Joseph Smith, clothed in a sheen of light, covering him to his feet; and I heard the real and perfect voice of the Prophet, even to the whistle, as in years past caused by the loss of a tooth said to have been broken out by the mob at Hiram. This view, or vision, although but for seconds, was to me as vivid and real as the glare of lightning or the voice of thunder from the heavens, and so deeply was I impressed with what I saw and heard in the transfiguration, that for years I dared not tell what was given me of the Lord to see. But when in later years I did publicly bear this testimony, I found that others had testified to having seen and heard the same. But to what proportion of the congregation that were present ,I could never know. But I do know that this, my testimony, is true.

"The Prophet's lost tooth, to which I allude, was, as generally understood, broken out by the mob at Hiram while trying to pry open his mouth to strangle him with acid, from which time, until replaced by a dentist neighbor, a year or two previous to his death, there had been a whistle-like sound to accompany all his public speaking which I again plainly heard at the time of which I write."

(From a letter by Benjamin F. Johnson.)

But what did Brigham say? He spoke for more than two hours, and, as nearly as the secretaries could take it down, this is the gist of what he told the people.

Attention all! This congregation makes me think of the days of King Benjamin, the multitude being so great that all could not hear. I request the brethren not to have any feelings for being convened this afternoon, for it is necessary; we want you all to be still and give attention, that all may hear. Let none complain because of the situation of the congregation, we will do the best we can.

For the first time in my life, for the first time in your lives, for the first time in the kingdom of God in the 19th century, without a Prophet at our head, do I step forth to act in my calling in connection with the Quorum of the Twelve, as Apostles of Jesus Christ unto this generation-Apostles whom God has called by revelation through the Prophet Joseph, who was ordained and anointed to bear off the keys of the kingdom of God in all the world.

This people have hitherto walked by sight and not by faith. You have had the Prophet in your midst. Do you all understand? You have walked by sight and without much pleading to the Lord to know whether things were right or not.

Heretofore you have had a Prophet as the mouth of the Lord to speak to you, but he has sealed his testimony with his blood, and now, for the first time, are you called to walk by faith, not by sight.

The first position I take in behalf of the Twelve and the people is, to ask a few questions. I ask the Latter-day Saints: do you, as individuals, at this time, want to choose a Prophet or a guardian? Inasmuch as our Prophet and Patriarch are taken from our midst, do you want some one to guard, to guide and lead you through this world into the kingdom of God, or not? All that want some person to be a guardian or a Prophet, a spokesman or something else, signify it by raising the right hand. (No votes).

When I came to this stand I had peculiar feelings and impressions. The faces of this people seem to say, we want a shepherd to guide and lead us through this world. All that want to draw away a party from the church after them, let them do it if they can, but they will not prosper.

If any man thinks he has influence among this people to lead away a party, let him try it, and he will find out that there is power with the Apostles which will carry them off victorious through all the world, and build up and defend the church and kingdom of God.

What do the people want? I feel as though I wanted the privilege to weep and mourn for thirty days at least, then rise up, shake myself, and tell the people what the Lord wants of them; although my heart is too full of mourning to launch forth into business transactions and the organization of the church, I feel compelled this day to step forth in the discharge of those duties God has placed upon me.

I now wish to speak of the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. If the church is organized, and you want to know how it is organized, I will tell you. I know your feelings-do you want me to tell your feelings?

Here is President Rigdon, who was counselor to Joseph. I ask, where are Joseph and Hyrum? They are gone beyond the veil, and if Elder Rigdon wants to act as his counselor, he must go beyond the veil where he is.

There has been much said about President Rigdon being President of the Church, and leading the people, being the head, etc. Brother Rigdon has come 1,600 miles to tell you what he wants to do for you. If the people want President Rigdon to lead them they may have him; but I say unto you that the Quorum of Twelve have the keys of the kingdom of God in all the world.

The Twelve are appointed by the finger of God. Here is Brigham, have his knees ever faltered? Have his lips ever quivered? Here is Heber and the rest of the Twelve, an independent body who have the keys of the priesthood-the keys of the kingdom of God to deliver to all the world: this is true, so help me God. They stand next to Joseph, and are as the First Presidency of the Church.

I do not know whether my enemies will take my life or not, and I do not care, for I want to be with the man I love.

You cannot fill the office of a prophet, seer and revelator: God must do this. You are like children without a father and sheep without a shepherd. You must not appoint any man at our head; if you should, the Twelve must ordain him. You cannot appoint a man at our head; but if you do want any other man or men to lead you, take them and we will go our way to build up the kingdom in all the world.

I know who are Joseph's friends, and who are his enemies. I know where the keys of the kingdom are, and where they will eternally be. You cannot call a man to be a prophet; you cannot take Elder Rigdon and place him above the Twelve; if so, he must be ordained by them.

I tell you there is an over anxiety to hurry matters here. You cannot take any man and put him at the head; you would scatter the saints to the four winds, you would sever the priesthood. So long as we remain as we are, the heavenly Head is in constant cooperation with us; and if you go out of that course, God will have nothing to do with you.

Again, perhaps some think that our beloved Brother Rigdon would not be honored, would not be looked to as a friend; but if he does right and remains faithful he will not act against our counsel nor we against his, but act together, and we shall be as one.

I again repeat, no man can stand at our head, except God reveals it from the heavens.

I have spared no pains to learn my lesson of the kingdom in this world and in the eternal worlds; and if it were not so, I could go and live in peace; but for the gospel and your sakes I shall stand in my place. We are liable to be killed all the day long. You have never lived by faith.

Brother Joseph, the Prophet, has laid the foundations for a great work, and we will build upon it; you have never seen the quorums built one upon another. There is an almighty foundation laid, and we can build a kingdom such as there never was in the world: we can build a kingdom faster than satan can kill the saints off.

What do you want? Do you want a patriarch for the whole church? To this we are perfectly willing. If Brother Samuel H. Smith had been living, it would have been his right and privilege; but he is dead, he is gone to Joseph and Hyrum, he is out of the reach of bullets and spears, and he can waft himself with his brothers, his friends and the saints.

Do you want a patriarch? Here is brother William [Smith] left; here is Uncle John Smith, uncle to the Prophet Joseph left; it is their right. The right of patriarchal blessings belongs to Joseph's family.

Do you want a Trustee-in-Trust? Has there been a bishop who has stood in his lot yet? What is his business? To take charge of the temporal affairs, so that the Twelve and the elders may go on their business. Joseph condescended to do their business for them. Joseph condescended to offer himself for president of the United States, and it was a great condescension.

Do you want a spokesman? Here are Elder Rigdon, Brother Amasa Lyman [whom Joseph expected to take as a counselor] and myself. Do you want the church properly organized, or do you want a spokesman to be chief cook and bottle-washer? Elder Rigdon claims to be spokesman to the Prophet. Very well, he was; but can he now act in that office? If he wants now to be a spokesman to the Prophet, he must go to the other side of the veil, for the Prophet is there, but Elder Rigdon is here. Why will Elder Rigdon be a fool? Who knows anything of the priesthood, or of the organization of the kingdom of God. I am plain.

Does this church want it as God organized it? Or do you want to clip the power of the priesthood, and let those who have the keys of the priesthood go and build up the kingdom in all the world, wherever the people will hear them?

If there is a spokesman, if he is a king and priest, let him go and build up a kingdom unto himself; that is his right and it is the right of many here, but the Twelve are at the head of it.

I want to live on the earth and spread truth through all the world. You saints of latter-days want things right. If 10,000 men rise up and say they have the Prophet Joseph Smith's shoes, I know they are imposters. In the priesthood you have a right to build up a kingdom, if you know how the church is organized.

Now, if you want Sidney Rigdon or William Law to lead you, or anybody else, you are welcome to them; but I tell you, in the name of the Lord that no man can put another between the Twelve and the Prophet Joseph. Why? Because Joseph was their file leader, and he has committed into their hands the keys of the kingdom in this last dispensation, for all the world; don't put a thread between the priesthood and God.

I will ask, who has stood next to Joseph and Hyrum? I have, and I will stand next to him. We have a head, and that head is the Apostleship, the spirit and power of Joseph, and we can now begin to see the necessity of that Apostleship.

Brother Rigdon was at his side-not above. No man has a right to counsel the Twelve but Joseph Smith. Think of these things. You cannot appoint a prophet; but if you let the Twelve remain and act in their place, the keys of the kingdom are with them and they can manage the affairs of the church and direct all things aright.

Now, all this does not lessen the character of President Rigdon; let him magnify his calling, and Joseph will want him beyond the veil-let him be careful what he does, lest that thread which binds us together is cut asunder. May God bless you all.

There was no hesitancy here. Can there be any doubt that the inspiration was upon him?

After Brigham finished, Sidney Rigdon called for W. W. Phelps to speak in his behalf, but instead of speaking for Sidney, Brother Phelps made a speech which was summarized by saying, "If you want to do right, uphold the Twelve."

Brigham then arose and said:

There is more business than can be done this afternoon, but we can accomplish all we want to have done without calling this convention of the whole church. I am going to present to you the leading items.

I do not ask you to take my counsel or advice alone, but every one of you act for yourselves; but if Brother Rigdon is the person you want to lead you, vote for him, but not unless you intend to follow him and support him as you did Joseph. Do not say so without you mean to take his counsel hereafter.

And I would say the same for the Twelve, don't make a covenant to support them unless you intend to abide by their counsel; and if they do not counsel you as you please, don't turn round and oppose them.

I want every man, before he enters into a covenant, to know what he is going to do; but we want to know if this people will support the priesthood in the name of Israel's God. If you say you will, do so.

We want men appointed to take charge of the business that did lay on the shoulders of Joseph. Let me say to you that this kingdom will spread more than ever.

The Twelve have the power now-the seventies, the elders and all of you can have power to go and build up the kingdom in the name of Israel's God. Nauvoo will not hold all the people that will come into the kingdom.

We want to build the Temple, so as to get our endowments; and if we do our best, and satan will not let us build it, we will go into the wilderness and we will receive the endowment, for we will receive an endowment anyhow.

Will you abide our counsel? I again say, my soul for any man's if they will abide our counsel, that they will go right into heaven. We have all the signs and tokens to give to the porter at the door, and he will let us in.

I will ask you as quorums, Do you want Brother Rigdon to stand forward as your leader, your guide, your spokesman. President Rigdon wants me to bring up the other question first, and that is, Does the church want, and is it their only desire to sustain the Twelve as the First Presidency of this people?

Here are the Apostles, the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants -they are written on the tablet of my heart. If the church want the Twelve to stand as the head, the First Presidency of the Church, and at the head of this kingdom in all the world, stand next to Joseph, walk up into their calling, and hold the keys of this kingdom, every man, every woman, every quorum is now put in order, and you are now the sole controllers of it.

All that are in favor of this, in all the congregation of the saints, manifest it by holding up the right hand. (There was a universal vote). If there are any of the contrary mind, every man and every woman who does not want the Twelve to preside, lift up your hands in like manner. (No hands up.) This supersedes the other question, and trying it by quorums.

The rest of what he said was detail of lesser decisions. In the vote Sidney Rigdon was repudiated, and the Twelve, with Brigham at their head, was sustained as the rightful authority.
