S. Dilworth Young, Here Is Brigham . . . Brigham Young: The Years to 1844 ( 1964)

August 1844

The stirring events thus described were as seen and heard by the eyes and ears of the witnesses. This is what they saw and heard; this is how they felt; this was history. But what was Brigham thinking, now that the burden of the Church and its future was laid on his back? Had he been conscious of the meeting of a man and his destiny at this fateful hour?

Let his words speak now, for his words in his diary reveal of his feeling than any analysis of his address to the people can reveal:

August the 8th 1844

"This day is long to be remembered by me, it is the first time have met with the Church at Nauvoo since Bro. Joseph and Hyrum were killed-and the occasion on which the church was called was somewhat painful to me, Br. Rigdon had come from Pittsburg to see the Brethren and find out if they would sustain him as the leader of the Saints, I perceived a spirit to hurry business, to get a trustee in trust and a presidency over the church, Priesthood or no Priesthood, right or wrong & this grieved my heart, now Joseph is gone it seemed as though many wanted to draw off a party and be leaders, but this cannot be. The church must be one or they are not the Lord's; the saints looked as though they had lost a friend that was able and willing to council them in all things; in this time of sorrow my heart was filled with compassion, after Br. Rigdon had made a long speech to the saints I should think 5 thousand), I arose and spoke to the people, my heart was swollen with compassion toward them and by the power of the Holy Ghost, even the spirit of the prophets I was enabled to comfort the hearts of the Saints. In the afternoon according to my request the people assembled by thousands. I laid before them the order of the church and the power of the Priesthood. After a long and laborous talk of about two hours in the open air with the wind blowing, the church was of one heart and one mind they wanted the Twelve to lead the church as Brother Joseph had done in his day. Br. Rigdon was called upon to make some remarks but refused to do so. I called upon the church to express their wishes by vote if they wanted Br. Rigdon for their President, on which which motion Br. Rigdon objected and wanted the vote called

Entry for August 8, 1844, in Brigham Young's diary.

to see if the church wanted the Twelve to preside and it was done, and the church with one heart and voice lifted up their hands for the Twelve to preside. In this meeting the quorums was organized the high council, high Priests, Seventies, Elders & etc. . . . ."

The crisis was met. The people recognized the voice of their shepherd. Here, indeed, was Brigham. Even as he asked the question, "Have his knees ever faltered?", they knew the answer. And the answer was in the sea of uplifted hands to sustain him and the Twelve.
