Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Preface

My original intent, as this opus and its companion volumes took form in my mind, was to write two volumes—one dealing with the Messianic prophecies and the First Coming of the Messiah; the other with the prophetic utterances and revealed realities relative to his Second Coming. I had not dared even to think of assuming the prerogative of writing an account of the life of the greatest Person ever to walk the dusty paths of planet Earth. After all, I reasoned, I already had in print a nearly nine-hundred-page doctrinal commentary on the four Gospels, which in the very nature of things dealt primarily with the doings and sayings of Him who is eternal as he dwelt among men in mortal guise.

I knew, of course, that no man has and no man can write a Life of Christ in the true sense of the word, for two very good and sufficient reasons:

It is not mere chance that the ancient inspired writers did not write a Life of Our Lord. Even they could not have done so; and if they had been so magnificently and gloriously endowed as to be able to record and analyze the infinitely complex character of an Infinite and Eternal Being, still none of us, their fellow dust-low creatures, would have been qualified to understand to the full what was written. Indeed, such is the spiritual degeneracy that is spread out over carnal and fallen man, that many things that might have been written about him would have had an adverse effect upon the minds of the doubting souls destined to dwell on earth after his day.

Just as the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon cannot be understood by men until they exercise faith like unto the brother of Jared, so the real Life of Our Lord cannot be written, and could not be understood if it were written, until men attain the spiritual stature to stand the effulgent brilliance that would shine forth from such a work if all things relative to him and his mortal doings were set forth in pristine perfection. All of this means that the true Life of Christ must be written by the spirit of revelation and of prophecy, and cannot come forth until that millennial day when men, like the brother of Jared, have a perfect knowledge that God can show them all things. Only then will they be able to believe and rejoice in the heavenly account.

For our day and time, and for this dispensation of grace, all we can do is write a study relative to his life. We can take those slivers of knowledge of him that have been preserved to us, add to them the revealed truths made manifest through latter-day revelation, use our best literary skill and organizational ability, sift out the speculative fabrications of uninspired authors, and come up with a near-biography which, hopefully, will do credit to his holy name. Our present study relative to the life of him who was perfect—a study based on the best light and knowledge now available—will be far from perfect. But any deficiencies will be those of the intellect and not of the heart, for in our heart we know he was divine, and we desire to present him in such a light as to please him and his Father.

In addition to all this, I have a deep and profound respect for Jesus the Christ, the scholarly work of Elder James E. Talmage, one of my most prominent predecessors. Why, I thought, should I step into the most difficult of all fields of gospel writing—that of composing something akin to a Life of Christ? But as I pondered and prayed and put into words, in the first volume of this series, the true meaning of the many Messianic messages, as I gained a working knowledge of what the makers of words and the coiners of phrases in Christendom had presumed to write about him of whom they know so little, and as I envisioned more fully the faithless and uninspired nature of almost everything that worldly men have recorded about the marvelous works and message of him who is known to us by revelation, there came into my heart an overpowering desire to put into words, as best I might, for all to read, what we believe and know about the greatest life ever lived.

Further, I knew, as do all who have studied the sources and toiled through the voluminous tomes of many authors, that my friend and colleague who gave us Jesus the Christ did not attempt to bring forth a near-biography that partakes of as many elements of a life of Christ as is possible. His work, like my Doctrinal New Testament Commentary—The Gospels, is in large measure a commentary about and an explanation of the teachings of the Master. It follows the pattern of his day, interweaving with well-chosen words a true and sound perspective of those things with which he was privileged to deal. His work is profound and sound and should be studied by every member of the true Church. But I think I hear his voice, vocal and penetrating above those of all others qualified to speak in the specialized field here involved, saying, "Now is the time to build on the foundations I laid some seventy years ago, using the added knowledge that has since come by research and revelation, and to pen a companion volume to the one I was privileged to write."

Such in any event is the labor I have undertaken in this work—The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary. As to its value, I say only that it is what it is, and it will stand or fall on its own merit; nor do I think what is here recorded is the beginning and the end. It too is but an opening door. Others who follow will find the errors and deficiencies that always and ever attend every mortal work, will correct them, and, building upon whatever foundations then exist, will write greater and better works on the same subject. But if perchance this work leads some soul—or, the Lord willing, many souls—to love and follow him of whom it speaks, it will have fulfilled the desires and hopes of the author, who himself knows and testifies of the divine Sonship and of the perfect ministry of the Mortal Messiah.

I am deeply indebted—more than I can express—to Velma Harvey, a most able and efficient secretary, for much wise counsel, for many thoughtful suggestions, and for handling the myriad matters presented in such a work as this.
