Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 1

"Come . . . Learn of Me"

Come drink of the waters of life; Come feast on the good word of God; Come eat of the manna from heav'n; Come bask in the light of the Lord. Come hear him speak peace to the storm; Come see him give sight to the blind; Come watch him heal legs that are lame; Come view him give life to the dead. Come feel of his Spirit anew; Come hear what he says to all men; Come walk in the way he commands; Come learn of the One who is God. —Bruce R. McConkie

The Father Commands: "Hear Ye Him!"

"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." (Matt. 17:5.)

The Shekinah, a visible manifestation of the Divine Presence, the bright and shining cloud—which rested upon Moses in the holy mount, and out of which a Voice spoke from between the cherubim in the Holy of Holies—this sacred covering that surrounded the Presence of Deity, once more was manifest in Israel. A bright cloud, sent from heaven, overshadowed the angelic visitants who ministered to their mortal Kinsman, and a voice spake, the same voice that had said of old, "Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee." (Ps. 2:7.) The glory and power and Spirit, shining forth from the divine cloud, had come again, and the command was: "Hear ye Him."

This was the day of the Son, the dispensation of crucifixion and martyrdom, the hour of atonement. This was the day when the bright and shining cloud that shielded the Personage from men was to be lifted, and all men were to see God in the person of his Son. After four thousand weary years, as promised by all the holy prophets since the world began, the ransom was to be paid by One without sin. The Promised Messiah now ministered as the Mortal Messiah, and his Father commanded all men: "Hear ye Him."

Ancient Israel followed the cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night. Enoch hearkened to the voice from heaven, "Get ye upon the mount Simeon." There he beheld the heavens open, was clothed upon with glory, and "saw the Lord." (Moses 7:1-4.) Moses spent forty days amid the thunders and lightnings and fires of Sinai. There he received the holy law, written by the finger of God on tables of stone. Moriancumer talked with the Lord for three hours, and the voice came out of the cloud. (Ether 2.) It had ever been thus anciently—the Shekinah rested where the Lord's chosen people were; the power, glory, and Spirit of the Almighty was shown forth among those whom God had chosen out of the world; the Voice spake from the cloud, declaring truth, testifying, pointing the way. And now the Son himself, introduced by the Voice out of the cloud, dwelt among men, and they were commanded: "Hear ye Him."

"God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets," so the Apostle announced, "hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son." (Heb. 1:1-2.) God spoke by and through the Son. The words of the Father fell from the lips of the Son. "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me," Jesus said. "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:16-17.) That God whom it is life eternal to know was revealing himself through his Son. "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John 14:9) was the divine pronouncement. Is it any wonder, then, when the Shekinah once again was seen on earth, that the Voice, speaking from the heavenly cloud of light surrounding the Divine Presence, proclaimed the heaven-sent message—Hear ye Him!

Who is this Jesus of whom the Father saith, "Hear ye him"? Whence came he, and of what import is his message?

Jesus our Lord—born in Bethlehem, crucified on Calvary—lived the only perfect life ever known on planet Earth, or, for that matter, on any of the worlds without number created by him and his Father.

He was and is the Firstborn, the first spirit child born to the Eternal Father. In that spirit realm of light and glory he advanced and progressed and became like the Father in power and might and dominion. He was and is the Great Jehovah. Under the Father he was and is the Creator of all things from the beginning, and he was chosen in the councils of eternity to be the Redeemer and Savior.

When the time came for him to gain his mortal body and undergo the probationary experiences of mortality, he was born on this earth. He came here to dwell as a mortal, subject to the testing experiences that are the common lot of all mankind. He lived and breathed as all men do; he ate and drank as his needs required; he wielded the carpenter's saw, toiled in the fields of grain, and slept on the barren Palestinian soil. His experiences were like those of his Israelite kinsmen. Upon him the rains fell; around him the snows swirled. He was hungry, cold, tired, sick, and afflicted, as all men are; and when he died, his eternal spirit left its tenement of clay, as is the case with all of Adam's race. He was a man, a mortal man, a son of Adam, and God his Father saw fit to let him live as other men live, experience as they experience, sorrow and suffer as they do, and overcome as they must, if they are ever to return to the Divine Presence where joy and peace and eternal glory abound.

But he came from God and was born as his Son, inheriting from his Father the power of immortality. He came with the talents and abilities and spiritual endowments that he possessed in that eternal world where the spirit children of a gracious Father await the day of their mortal probation. He came with the spiritual talent to attune his soul to the Infinite so that he could think and speak and act in complete harmony with the mind and will of him whose Son he was. There was more than just a spark of divinity in his dust-created body. He was God's Son, the Only Begotten in the flesh. His native capacity exceeded that of any other person who ever lived. Not only could he alone work out the infinite and eternal atonement, because he possessed the power of immortality, but he alone could also do the other things that he did while in mortality—all because of his own preeminent preexistent stature, because of the talents and abilities he there possessed, and which were still his as he walked among mortal men.

Jesus our Lord was both a mortal man and a Divine Son. All men were his brethren and he was like them in appearance. Their ills and ailments were as his. But he alone was the Offspring of God in the flesh, and he alone came to earth with talents and insights that exceeded those of Adam and Enoch and Noah and Abraham. Though he was mortal, he retained his Godship. He was the only perfect Being ever to grace this lowly orb.

This Jesus of whom we now speak, and of whose mortal experiences we shall write in this work, was the greatest man who ever lived. In addition to the fact that he is "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity," spoken of by King Benjamin (Mosiah 3:5), he is also the Suffering Servant of Isaiah (Isa. 53). Our challenge, as we attempt to paint a true picture of the Mortal Messiah, is to show him as a man; as a pilgrim far removed from his heavenly home; as the earthbound Christ, who lives and acts and is as other men—our challenge is to view him as a man, but with it all, a man of superlative talents and abilities, a man who reflected the light of heaven in every word and act.

"Though he were a Son," Paul tells us, as he confesses and certifies that our Lord is the Offspring of the Most High, "yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered." That is, though God was his Father, he nonetheless was a mortal who suffered and struggled and obeyed. "And being made perfect," Paul continues, "he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." (Heb. 5:8-9.) Thus, the Lord Jesus—having kept the whole law, having lived a perfect life, a life without sin—attained eternal perfection, a state of eternal glory like that of his Father. Because of his dual nature he became the Author (or, better, the Cause) of eternal salvation, meaning of both immortality and eternal life.

As to Jesus our Lord and the message he heralds to all who will hear, these things we know, and of them we are commanded to teach and testify:

These things we know, for the Holy Spirit of God has revealed them to the spirit within us. We are living witnesses of him whose we are and by whom salvation comes. And we feel impelled to speak out, boldly, of him and his laws, and all that he has done for us, and all that he expects of us. This decision was not left to us: it is his will, and we are simply acting as his agent in teaching and testifying to all men everywhere those things which we verily believe and know to be true.

The Son Invites: "Come, . . . Learn of Me"

Jesus said: "Come, . . . learn of me" (Matt. 11:28-30) [^1]—and learn we must, if we are ever to become like him and attain that kingdom where he and his Father dwell in celestial splendor.

"Learn of me!" Learn of the Lord Jesus Christ! Learn of him who is the Firstborn of the Father, the Great Jehovah, the Creator of worlds without number. Learn of him who is the God of Israel, the Promised Messiah, our Savior and Redeemer. Learn of him who dwelt in mortality for a scant thirty-four years; who set a perfect example for his brethren; who climaxed his earthly work in Gethsemane, at Golgotha, and before an open tomb.

Whence, then, comes our knowledge, and to what sources do we turn to learn truths about him whose name is Truth? As to his eternal existence and the things that he has done in ages past and will do in eons yet unborn, we have the Holy Scriptures and the inspired utterances of those whose Spirit-guided words come from the ultimate source of all truth. As to his ministry on planet earth, we have the four Gospels, the accounts in Third Nephi, sections 45 and 93 in the Doctrine and Covenants, and a few slivers of information in other parts of the Standard Works. As to all things connected with him, we should ponder and pray about that which is known, and then welcome the spirit of enlightenment and understanding that it is within our power to receive.

There is, of course, no such thing as a perfect biography of the Man Jesus, no such thing even as a sound and sane and proper biography. Neither I nor anyone else, with the knowledge presently available and with the literary craftsmanship with which writers of our generation have been blessed, could write such a work. Known facts about his mortal life are so fragmentary; the silence that broods over long periods of his earth life is so unbroken; what Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John chose to record was so selective and partial—that no one can even outline a chronological account of his life, or begin to show how his character and attributes became what they were. Recognized scholars have not so much as agreed upon a harmony of the four Gospels, nor can we expect them to do so with the data now available.

Biographies often reflect the feelings and sentiments, sometimes even the whims and idiosyncrasies, of those who write them. Authors are often prone to put their own proclivities and personality quirks into the pictures they paint of their subjects. Source materials, particularly for people long since departed to other realms, are often far from accurate. Tradition and speculation soon overshadow the fragments of reality that are known. How could a heavy tome on the life of Enoch or Ezra, on Melchizedek or Moriancumer, be other than a fictional accumulation of the fantasies of a fertile brain and a fluid pen? The known facts about any of these, and about Jethro and Joshua, about Joseph and Jeremiah, about Jesus himself, and about thousands of others who deserve an immortal remembrance in the hearts of succeeding generations, are so slight that any biography of the traditional sort must of necessity be largely imagination.

Unless and until more is known of Jesus and his life, it is not only unwise but impossible to write a reality-based biographical dissertation about him. This work, thus, is not a biography in the traditional sense; it is not a life of our Lord of the sort that sectarians write; it is not a volume that puts words in the divine mouth, or assumes thoughts that may have been in his mind, or records with sinaitic finality emotions with which he may have been filled on great occasions. Insofar as finite limitations allow, it does not interlace the facts preserved in Holy Writ with the traditions of the fathers; it does not weave into the account the words of uninspired literary craftsmen, whose joy has always been to speculate what they would have done and therefore what Jesus did, in the various events of which we have knowledge; it does not draw out of the ethereal blue those personal fantasies—all of which taken together bring to full gestation and untimely birth the various biographies now extant about the greatest life ever lived.

This work is more of a commentary than a biography, more of an analysis of known events in his life than an exposition of his feelings and personality. Such biographical data, and such logical assumptions as fit in with his known character, can scarcely be avoided, nor is there any attempt so to do. There cannot help but be in this work, or in any work about any man written by any person, some things that are speculation and opinion. No biography, near-biography, or biography-type writing can possibly avoid this, and those who read any such compositions should be acutely aware that such is the case. Such awareness should be particularly keen when a devout person reads any biographical assumptions or recitations that deal with him who is our Lord.

In my judgment, those scriptural writers who have preserved for us the verities we do, in fact, know about him have so written their accounts as to omit, deliberately and designedly, nearly all of the personal items that would enable later biographers to portray his personality and personal affairs to the full. He is the Son of God; some things he had in common with his fellow mortals; other characteristics and abilities were his only; none of the rest of us have them, nor can we envision completely what they were or how they developed. We may suppose that an all-wise Father designed it so, and that he has permitted us to have available only those things with which we can equate and which are an example and an encouragement to us. We are not dealing with a mortal man in the full and unrestricted sense of the word when we write of him who inherited the power of immortality from that Man of Holiness who is the Immortal One. As he neared the end of his own Gospel account, the Beloved John said, "Many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book: But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name." (John 20:30-31.) Our approach and purpose will be the same as that of our ancient colleague.

We shall, accordingly, in this work talk about known family relations; known personality traits; known locales of labor and routes of travel; known facts about the character, perfections, and attributes that Jesus possessed; and beyond these limitations, we shall seek not to go. Much that is written will, of course, be in the nature of commentary; it will be akin to commentary, not the pure doctrinal commentary found in my Doctrinal New Testament Commentary: The Gospels, but commentary that teaches doctrines in the unique settings in which the utterances were given. We shall not strive to portray a rounded picture relative to each doctrine presented, but simply to expound and understand the portions of eternal truth that Jesus gave to the particular peoples who were then and there the hearers of his gracious words.

Doctrines and principles are the same under all circumstances. Truth is eternal. The principles of the everlasting gospel do not vary; they are the same in all ages and among all people. The Lord does not walk in crooked paths, nor vary from that which he hath said, nor alter the course in which men must walk to return to that far-off home whence they came. All men, in all ages, in all parts of our planet, must believe and obey the same doctrines and ordinances to gain salvation.

But a knowledge of the circumstances and conditions under which Jesus expounded these principles of perfection to his fellow mortals will enable us more perfectly to perceive the profound nature of the truths themselves. What better setting is there for the proclamation, "I am the light of the world," than when the great golden lamp-stands in the temple are blazing forth their light as part of the Feast of Tabernacles? How better can he teach that he brings living water that quenches all thirst forever, and which is therefore a well springing up unto everlasting life, than when the woman of Samaria stoops to draw water for him from Jacob's Well? What teaching as to the nature and kind of bodies possessed by resurrected beings can equal that in the Upper Room, when he comes through the wall, eats food before his disciples, and permits them to feel the nail marks in his hands and feet and thrust their hands into the spear wound in his side? Truly a knowledge of the events in the life of Jesus enables us more fully to comprehend the doctrines he taught!

We have in our possession only a few brief words that fell from the lips of the Son of God while he dwelt in mortality. The time needed to read them is measured in minutes. And yet he spoke enough to fill libraries and to provide a lifetime of reading and more. We know from the Gospel accounts a few of the travels and troubles and trials of the Man who bore his Father's image and who did all things well. We know enough about him to envision what a perfect man should be and to have the hope of eternal life kindled in our souls. But "there are also many other things which Jesus did," says his intimate friend and confidant, the Beloved John, "the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written." (John 21:25.) Hyperbole? Perhaps. But regardless, what we have heard from His lips is but a stanza of a poetic gospel whose verses are without number; and what we have seen him do is but a glimpse of the acts and wonders that roll endlessly across the eternal screen where the acts of all beings are viewed.

To write a biography when only one-tenth of one percent of the background information is available would be foolhardy. To comment about and put into their perspective and relationship to us those choice and heaven-like gems that we do have is a work worthy of the mightiest pen, the keenest mind, and the deepest spiritual insight known to man. Someday a perfect biography will be forthcoming, written of course by the spirit of revelation. For the present we must content ourselves with what we have, and what we can envision, with the limited insight that is ours. Perhaps that in itself is a manifestation of the divine will. We have what we have, and we can comprehend what we can comprehend. If we knew more, it would be all to the good; yet, mayhap, we have all we are entitled to have and all we are capable of receiving.

We cannot but suppose that an Omnipotent wisdom has drawn a curtain of discreet silence over the childhood and youth of Mary's son; over the young manhood and growing experiences of him who was reared in Galilee and learned the carpenter's trade in Joseph's shop; over his family relationship and the endearing friendships that developing and maturing manhood so keenly cherishes; over the social and familial relationships that formed the basis of that Jewish culture in which an all-wise Father had sent him to dwell. Perhaps, after all, we have received all that we in our present state of spiritual maturity are prepared and qualified to receive. Perhaps, as we ponder what is recorded in this work, The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, we shall find enough to give us that guidance so devoutly desired and needed by those who love their Lord and who seek to impress his image upon their own countenances.

We do not have all gospel truths, but we do have the fulness of the everlasting gospel, meaning we have all of the laws, doctrines, principles and ordinances needed to save and exalt us with a fulness of eternal glory hereafter. Similarly, we do not know all things about the life of our Lord, of the sayings of this greatest of the seers, or of the mighty works that he did in Judea and Perea and Galilee. But we do know enough about him to bask in the eternal light that proceeds from his presence, to see divinity inscribed on every feature and manifest in every act, and to know that if we heed his call, "Follow thou me" (2 Ne. 31:10), we can become like him and go where he is. With this assurance we are prepared to launch boldly into the glorious study at hand.

As we seek to learn of our Lord, we need guidance. He said: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matt. 11:28-30.)

Learn of Him, whose roots sink deep as eternity! Learn what he was like while yet a spirit Son of an exalted Father. Learn of his valiance and progression in preexistence, of his creative enterprises, of the worlds without number that rolled into existence at his word. Learn of his power, might, and dominion in that day when he was chosen and became the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Learn of his foreordained ministry to redeem and to ransom and to save.

Learn of Him, of whom we know so little! Learn of the revelation of his holy gospel to the sons of men. Learn that all men everywhere, be they whosoever they are, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, black or white, all of the family of that Adam who begat us, all are to call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. Learn that beginning with Adam, righteous mortals, by the revelations of the Holy Spirit to the spirits within them, have known of his divine Sonship. Learn that all of these Messianic ministers who preceded him in life have testified of his coming, and that all who have come thereafter have had the testimony of Jesus interwoven into the very fibers and sinews of their souls. Learn that it is he who appeared to the patriarchs, who is the God of Abraham and Israel, and who is the source of truth and light among all of us lowly creatures who dwell here below.

Learn of Him—the Man nobody knows! Learn that he was born of Mary in the City of David which is called Bethlehem. Learn that he received not of the fulness at the first, but grew from grace to grace, experiencing, feeling, undergoing all the needed probations of mortality. Learn that he was in all points tempted, like as we are, yet remaining without sin. Learn of the wondrous works that he wrought, how he healed earth's sin-sick souls by the power of his everlasting word. Learn that he sweat great drops of blood from every pore, so great was his anguish and sorrow for the sins of his people. Learn that he was lifted up upon the cross, crucified on Calvary, that he might thereby lay down his life, preparatory to taking it up again in immortal glory. Learn that he gained the victory over the grave, redeemed the faithful from their spiritual fall, and has now ascended up on high, where he sits on the right hand of the Father, reigning with almighty power. Learn that he has come again in our day to men whom he has called to be prophets, as of old, that he has set up his kingdom anew, and that in a not far distant day he shall return in all the glory of his Father's kingdom, to reign personally among us mortals for a thousand years.

All this learning, this weight of wondrous wisdom, this knowledge of truths beyond carnal comprehension, all is available to those who will pay the scholar's price. True it is that gospel scholarship is seldom sought in today's world, and that even many of those few who do so seek have little knowledge of the available source material or of how to read those volumes whose contents are known and understood only by the power of the Spirit.

"Understandest thou what thou readest?" inquired Philip of the eunuch from the court of Candace. "How can I, except some man should guide me?" came the reply. (Acts 8:30-31.) Certain things men may learn for themselves, and that they are expected so to do by a divine providence, none can doubt. But after the alphabet has been learned, after fluency in reading has been acquired, after the source books have been identified by name and by title, still the seeker after spiritual truths must do his research subject to the eternal law which says, "The things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God," and that "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Cor. 2:11-14.)

Jesus Saith: "Come Unto Me"

Learn of Him! But do it in the way he has provided and by compliance with the laws that enable the desired knowledge to flow to the truth-seeking soul. How is this done, and whence comes that sure knowledge which is the testimony of him who is Lord of all?

"Come unto me," he says to all who labor in the libraries of the world. "Come unto me" is his invitation to all who are burdened with the weight of ignorance and intolerance. "Come unto me" and I will open the books; "Come unto me" and I will lift the gloom of darkness and uncertainty from your minds; "Come unto me" and I will remove the crushing weight of ignorance and doubt, and ye shall find rest to your souls.

"Come unto me" and "take my yoke upon you"—be as I am, join my Church, bear the burdens of my ministry, keep my commandments. "Come unto me" and the light of my everlasting word shall illumine your souls; "Come unto me" and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and he shall bear record to thee of the Father, and of me, and of all things that were and are and shall be, for he is a witness and a revealer of all truth.

"Come unto me" and receive my Spirit, and then shall ye have power to learn of me. This is the great and grand secret. This is the course that is provided for us and for all men, and it is provided in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things. This is the sole and only way to learn of Christ within the full sense and meaning of his tender and solicitous invitation. "No man can know that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." [^2] Little slivers of truth come to all who seek to know; occasional flashes of lightning give glimpses of the eternal realities that are hidden by the gloom and darkness of unbelief. But to learn and know those truths which reveal the Son of Man in his majesty and beauty and that prepare the truth seeker to be one with his Lord, such rays of the noonday sun shine forth only upon those who gain the enlightening companionship of the Holy Spirit.

It is with this understanding, then, that we open the eternal records and, having broken hearts and contrite spirits, begin to learn of our Lord. If we study, pray, ponder, and obey, as required by his eternal law, perchance it will then be with us as it was with Lehi: we shall see One descending out of the midst of heaven whose luster is above that of the sun at noonday. Perchance he will give us, as he gave Lehi, a book, bidding us also to read and learn the wonders of his ways. And then perchance, when we have read and seen for ourselves, we too will exclaim many great things unto him whose we are, such as:

"Great and marvelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty! Thy throne is high in the heavens, and thy power, and goodness, and mercy are over all the inhabitants of the earth: and, because thou art merciful, thou wilt not suffer those who come unto thee that they shall perish!" (1 Ne. 1:14.)

Jesus Saith: "Follow Thou Me"

We all need our heroes, our patterns and guides. If we choose evil exemplars, we become evil ourselves because we adopt their ways. Everyone imitates someone else; all of us learn what we know from other people. If all instruction and education ceased, if all patterns of living were taken away, civilization would cease in one generation, and all of earth's inhabitants would sink to a state of barbarism.

Providentially a gracious Father endows all his children with the Light of Christ, that righteous power and influence which proceeds forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. Part of this enlightening spirit is the universal gift of conscience; it causes unlearned and untaught people to do what is right by instinct. But a gracious Father has also sent noble spirits and good men among all peoples to teach that measure of truth which they are able to bear, and to set such an example as their fellow mortals are capable of following. These are the prophets and seers, the poets and philosophers, the sages and wise men, the leaders and influential persons found among all nations and kindreds. And a gracious Father sent one Supreme Pattern and guide to be a light and an example for all men of all ages; he sent his Son. Christ is our Pattern, our Exemplar, the great Prototype of all that is good and right and edifying.

"What manner of men ought ye to be?" So asked our great Exemplar of his Nephite disciples. His own answer: "Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.) Manifestly, if we emulate him so that his way of life becomes ours, we shall qualify for the same glory and exaltation that is his, for "when he shall appear, we shall be like him." (1 Jn. 3:2.)

In the final analysis, our purpose in learning of our Lord is to gain that knowledge, insight, and desire which will cause us to become like him—all in harmony with his divine promise: "Ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." (3 Ne. 28:10.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Father is an exalted Person. "Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood." These words of the poet Wordsworth, well known among Latter-day Saints because of their inspired recitation of the doctrine of preexistence, a doctrine soon to be revealed to a latter-day prophet, were, interestingly, written in 1805, the very year of the birth of Joseph Smith, the prophet through whom the pure knowledge of preexistence was to come.
[^2] Christ and all men are spirit children of the Father. This statement, as it fell from the lips of the seer of latter days, is found in the King Follett Discourse, the greatest sermon ever delivered by the Prophet Joseph Smith. The context is as follows: "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret, if the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,-I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form-like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another." (Teachings, p. 345.)
