Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 2

Before Bethlehem

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home. —William Wordsworth [^1]

Man—In the Beginning with God

Our blessed Lord, who as Mary's son dwelt among us for a short span, is truly the Man nobody knows. Those, in particular, whose knowledge of him is bounded by Bethlehem where he was born and Calvary where he died, have no intelligent way to put in a proper perspective even those slivers of light and knowledge which have been preserved for us by the Gospel authors. Before we even attempt to view and envision the events of his mortal life, we must have an acute awareness of certain eternal verities. These are:

It is a philosophical impossibility to believe that the Man Jesus is the Son of God in the literal and full sense of the word if we suppose that his Father is a spirit essence or power that fills the immensity of space and is everywhere and nowhere in particular present, and if we believe that God is an immaterial, uncreated Being without body, parts, or passions, as the creeds of Christendom recite. [^2] To know and understand Christ and his mission and ministry, we must know certain basic things about that Progenitor whence he sprang.

God himself is the First Man and the Father of all men. In the pure language, spoken by Adam, the name of the Father is Man of Holiness, which means he is a holy Man; and when the scriptures speak of Deity creating man in his own image, they are to be understood as literal renditions of that which in reality occurred. "God himself . . . is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens," the Prophet Joseph Smith said. [^3] "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's" (D&C 130:22) is the scriptural assertion. When Paul says the Son is the brightness of his Father's glory, "and the express image of his person" (Heb. 1:3), he is certifying that the Risen Lord—who ate and drank with the apostles after he rose from the dead, and into whose riven side they had thrust their hands—had a resurrected body of the same sort and kind possessed by the exalted Father.

God lives in the family unit. He is our Father in heaven—the literal and personal Father of the spirits of all men. He begat us; we are the offspring of Heavenly Parents; we have an Eternal Father and an Eternal Mother. We were born as spirits, and we dwelt in the presence of our Eternal Parents; we lived before our mortal birth. As spirits we were in all respects as we are now save only that we were not housed in mortal bodies as is the present circumstance. Christ was the Firstborn of all the heavenly host; Lucifer was a son of the morning; each of us came into being as conscious identities in our appointed order; and Christ is our Elder Brother.

In his infinite wisdom and goodness, the Eternal Father ordained laws by obedience to which his spirit children could advance and progress and eventually obtain the high reward of eternal life. These laws are the good news conveyed by God to his spirit progeny; they are the plan of salvation; they are the gospel of the Father. Paul called them "the gospel of God, . . . Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord." (Rom. 1:1-3.) With reference to them, Joseph Smith said: "God himself, finding he was in the midst of spirits and glory, because he was more intelligent, saw proper to institute laws whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himself." [^4]

Manifestly, there were no laws but God's laws in that eternal world; every law ordained and established by him was good; and obedience and conformity to any of his laws moved the obedient person (Christ included) along the path to glory and exaltation.

Similarly, failure to obey a given law denied such failing person the blessing and advancement that otherwise would have resulted, and disobedience imposed the penalties prescribed for such a rebellious course.

An all-wise Father endowed his spirit children with agency—the freedom and ability to choose good or evil—while they yet dwelt in his presence. Unless there are opposites—good and evil, virtue and vice, right and wrong—and unless intelligent beings are free to choose; free to obey or disobey; free to do good and work righteousness, or to walk in evil paths—unless this freedom exists, there can be no advancement and progression; no joy as contrasted with sorrow; no talents of one kind or another as contrasted with their absence; no eternal salvation as contrasted with eternal damnation. There can be no light unless there is darkness; no heat unless there is cold; no up unless there is down; no right unless there is left; no life unless there is death; and so on through all the realm of created and existent things. Opposites and agency are essential to existence and to progression. Without them there would be nothing. [^5]

Being subject to law, and having their agency, all the spirits of men, while yet in the Eternal Presence, developed aptitudes, talents, capacities, and abilities of every sort, kind, and degree. During the long expanse of life which then was, an infinite variety of talents and abilities came into being. As the ages rolled, no two spirits remained alike. Mozart became a musician; Einstein centered his interest in mathematics; Michelangelo turned his attention to painting. Cain, was a liar, a schemer, a rebel who maintained a close affinity to Lucifer. Abraham and Moses and all of the prophets sought and obtained the talent for spirituality. Mary and Eve were two of the greatest of all the spirit daughters of the Father. The whole house of Israel, known and segregated out from their fellows, was inclined toward spiritual things. And so it went through all the hosts of heaven, each individual developing such talents and abilities as his soul desired.

The Lord endowed us all with agency; he gave us laws that would enable us to advance and progress and become like him; and he counseled and exhorted us to pursue the course leading to glory and exaltation. He himself was the embodiment and personification of all good things. Every desirable characteristic and trait dwelt in him in its eternal fulness. All of his obedient children started to become like him in one way or another. There was as great a variety and degree of talent and ability among us there as there is among us here. Some excelled in one way, others in another. The Firstborn excelled all of us in all things.

We are members of the family of the Eternal Father. He is a glorified and exalted and eternal Being, having a resurrected body of flesh and bones. His name is God, and the kind of life he lives is God's life. His name is also Eternal, and the name of the kind of life he lives is eternal life. Eternal life is God's life, and God's life is eternal life. We are commanded to be perfect as he is perfect and to advance and progress until we become like him, or in other words, until we gain eternal life. Thus Joseph Smith said, "You have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power." (Teachings, pp. 346-47.) Christ our Lord has so obtained, thus enabling him to say to the faithful: "Ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father." (3 Ne. 28:10.)

According to the terms and conditions of the Father's plan, his spirit children must dwell on earth as mortals for two reasons:

a. To gain mortal bodies, bodies of flesh and bones, bodies subject to disease and death, bodies that could and would be raised in immortality, becoming bodies of flesh and bones, through an infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice;

b. To undergo a probationary, testing experience, one in which it would be determined whether each of the Father's spirit children would overcome the world, rise above carnal things, and love and serve that Being who made them, or whether they would live after the manner of the world, live as the generality of mankind do, and thus fail to gain eternal life.

Mortality paves the way for immortality, and eternal life is reserved for those who believe and obey. Is it any wonder, then, that when the great plan was presented to us in the councils of eternity, "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy"? (Job 38:7.) The morning stars were those who were noble and great in preexistence, the Lord Jesus himself being chief among them and bearing the title "the bright and morning star" (Rev. 22:16), which brings us to the realization that a mortal probation was as essential for the Firstborn as for all those subsequently born among heaven's hosts.

Birth and death are simply events that occur in the course of continuing life. We are born, which means the spirit passes from preexistence into a mortal body, there to dwell for a time and a season. We die, meaning the spirit steps out of its tenement of clay and enters a spirit world, there to await the day of the resurrection. Meanwhile the body returns to the dust whence it came, there to await that same day when mortality shall put on immortality and corruption shall put on incorruption.

When we die, our spirits continue to live. We take with us into the spirit realm every truth, every trait, every characteristic we enjoyed and possessed as mortals. And further: "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.)

Similarly, when we pass from preexistence to mortality, we bring with us the traits and talents there developed. True, we forget what went before because we are here being tested, but the capacities and abilities that then were ours are yet resident within us. Mozart is still a musician; Einstein retains his mathematical abilities; Michelangelo his artistic talent; Abraham, Moses, and the prophets their spiritual talents and abilities. Cain still lies and schemes. And all men with their infinitely varied talents and personalities pick up the course of progression where they left it off when they left the heavenly realms.

Michael the archangel, standing second only to Christ among the spirits destined to dwell on earth, came to Eden's vales with all the sense, wisdom, and judgment that he had gained in preexistence. He came as a son of God, into an Edenic state from which he soon fell, bringing with him the desires, inclinations, aptitudes, and talents developed during long years of obedience in the Divine Presence. He came endowed with every gift and grace that rightfully was his. His life on earth was but a projection and a continuation of that life which was his before the foundations of his future abode had even been laid.

And as with Adam, so with all men: all bring with them what was then theirs; all build in immortality upon the foundation laid in premortality. Abraham, who by obedience and devotion became one of the noble and great in preexistence, came into mortality with every talent and capacity that then was his. He was foreordained to be the father of the faithful. "I know him," the Lord said of Abraham, "that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him." (Gen. 18:19.)

Jeremiah was chosen before he was born; before he came forth out of the womb, the Lord ordained him, and sanctified him, and called him to be a prophet; before he drew a mortal breath his mission was known and prepared—all because of the special talents and powers he came to have while yet a spirit being. (Jer. 1:5.)

And Christ our Lord, Firstborn of the Father, mightiest of all the spirit host, a Man like unto his Father, was also chosen and foreordained and anointed to come into mortality and do the very work that he then accomplished. Before he took upon himself flesh and blood he was the Great Jehovah, the Eternal One, Great I AM. He stood next to the Father, and became, at the Father's fiat, the Creator of all things from the beginning. Worlds without number rolled into their orbits at his word. He was the Word of God's power, the Messenger of salvation, the One who executed the divine will in all immensity. When such a life is projected from its eternal home into our mortal sphere, can anyone suppose that it could be other than the greatest life ever lived?

Jesus—God Before the World Was

Mortal life does not stand alone. It can only be understood when it is related to the premortality that went before and the immortality that will come after. If we know who Abraham and Jeremiah were in preexistence, we can understand the spiritual stature that was theirs while they dwelt on earth, while they lived apart from their heavenly associates, and we can also see how it is that they have now entered into their exaltation and, sitting upon thrones, are not angels but gods. [^6]

And so it is with the greatest life ever lived. It was what it was because the Spirit housed in the body provided by Mary was the greatest of all the primeval hosts. Before Bethlehem, before the Holy Land, before the earth itself, before the universe and the whole sidereal heavens, before all things, was Christ our Lord. He who was to breath his first breath of mortal life in a little-known Judean village was the Eternal One whose goings forth had been from of old, from everlasting. Bethlehem was not the beginning. It was simply a way station along an eternal course. And he who found rest in a stable because there was no room in the inns was simply abiding with the animals for a moment as he rested from those creative enterprises by which he made the worlds and all things that in them are.

A Holy Being who was God yesterday remains as God today, and will continue in the same exalted state tomorrow. The course of the Gods is one eternal round; it does not vary. They are now as they were then, and they shall yet be as they have ever been. If it were not so they would not be exalted, for exaltation consists in being the same unchangeable being from everlasting to everlasting. Thus Paul said: "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever." (Heb. 13:8.) And Moroni, speaking of "the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; . . . that same God who created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are," taught the same truth. He said: "God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing." (Morm. 9:11, 9.) This unchanging, everlasting, eternal way of life—a way of life in which the same character, perfections, and attributes are always present—is the kind of life lived by both the Father and the Son, for they are one in powers and perfections.

Who, then, was Jesus before he was born of Mary to begin his mortal pilgrimage? Truly, he was God in the full sense of the word. He possessed all of the attributes of godliness in their fulness and perfection. He was perfect; he was like unto God. As the angelic visitant said to King Benjamin, he was "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity," concerning whom the eternal decree was: "The time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power" he "shall come down from heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay." (Mosiah 3:5.)

"I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn," he said to Joseph Smith. (D&C 93:21.) And of his high and exalted status—from the day of his birth as the First Son of his Father to the time he came forth in glorious immortality—Paul extols: He "is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell." (Col. 1:15-19.) He was truly "like unto God." (Abr. 3:24.)

To Abraham and the ancients he revealed himself by the exalted and ineffable name, Jehovah—the Great I AM, the I AM THAT I AM, the Eternal One. He was the God of Israel who performed all the mighty works among that chosen race. But the thing about him which, above all else, crystallizes in our minds his high and exalted status and the infinite powers he possessed is the fact that he was the Creator of all things—this earth, all worlds, the universe, the sidereal heavens, worlds without number. By all this it is perfectly clear that our Lord prepared for his mortal probation by performing infinitely great acts through an eternity of time.

How long did Adam and Abraham and Jeremiah (and all men!) spend in preparing to take the test of a mortal probation? What ages and eons and eternities passed away while Christ dwelt in the Eternal Presence and did the work then assigned him? How can we measure infinite duration in finite terms? To such questions we have no definitive answers. Suffice it to say, the passage of time was infinite from man's viewpoint. We have an authentic account, which can be accepted as true, that life has been going on in this system for almost 2,555,000,000 years. [^7] Presumably this system is the universe (or whatever scientific term is applicable) created by the Father through the instrumentality of the Son.

In attempting to give a concept of what is involved in the expression "worlds without number," the scripture says, "were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number" of the Lord's creations. (Moses 7:30.) In terms of time, as we speak of time, the duration involved in such creative enterprises is beyond finite comprehension. Preexistence lasted for a duration beyond our power to understand, and during all the time then involved, the Firstborn and all those who came after him were preparing to take the tests of this mortal probation. But in this case, he attained the status of God and exercised creative powers and was like his Father before he chose Bethlehem as the place of his birth.

These revealed truths about our Lord's premortal life have come to us so we will know and understand (among other things) that what He did in scarcely more than three decades of mortal life was not just chance. He was not an ordinary man. He was the great Creator housed in a tabernacle of clay. He was the Eternal Jehovah ministering among men. He was God's Almighty Son doing the things his Father sent him to do. He inherited from the Father of his mortal body the powers and characteristics of his Perfect Parent. He was placed in a position to excel all men. He was the God of Israel taking his place and receiving his lot and inheritance among that chosen people. He was the Only Begotten of the Father, the only Son born into mortality as the Offspring of an Immortal Being. He was both God and the Son of God. He was the Promised Messiah. No ordinary standards, no mortal measuring rods set forth his mortal stature and greatness. If we know and understand all these things we are in a position to learn of him as a mortal, as a Man among men, as a God housed in clay, as earth's Chief Citizen working out his own salvation, and as God's Son doing the things for his fellow men that no other could ever do.

Footnotes

Whosoever would be saved: needeth before all things to hold fast the Catholick Faith. Which Faith except a man keep whole and undefiled: without doubt he will perish eternally. Now the Catholick Faith is this: that we worship one God in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity Neither confusing the Persons: nor dividing the Substance. For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son: another of the Holy Ghost; But the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one: the glory equal, the majesty co-eternal. Such as the Father is, such is the Son: and such is the Holy Ghost; The Father uncreated, the Son uncreated: the Holy Ghost uncreated; The Father infinite, the Son infinite: the Holy Ghost infinite; The Father eternal, the Son eternal: the Holy Ghost eternal; And yet there are not three eternals: but one eternal; As also there are not three uncreated, nor three infinites: but one infinite, and one uncreated. So likewise the Father is almighty, the Son almighty: the Holy Ghost almighty; And yet there are not three almighties: but one almighty. So the Father is God, the Son God: the Holy Ghost God; And yet there are not three Gods: but one God. So the Father is Lord, the Son Lord: the Holy Ghost Lord; And yet there are not three Lords: but one Lord. For like as we are compelled by the Christian verity: to confess each Person by himself to be both God and Lord; So are we forbidden by the Catholick Religion: to speak of three Gods or three Lords. The Father is made of none: nor created, nor begotten. The Son is of the Father alone: not made, nor created, but begotten. The Holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son: not made nor begotten, but proceeding. There is therefore one Father, not three Fathers; one Son, not three Sons: one Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts. And in this Trinity there is no before or after: no greater or less; But all three Persons are co-eternal together: and coequal. So that in all ways, as is aforesaid: both the Trinity Is to be worshipped in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity. He therefore that would he saved: let him thus think of the Trinity. Furthermore it is necessary to eternal salvation: that he also believe faithfully the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now the right Faith is that we believe and confess: that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is both God and Man. He is God, of the Substance of the Father, begotten before the worlds: and he is Man, of the Substance of his Mother, born in the world; Perfect God: perfect Man, of reasoning soul and human flesh subsisting; Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead: less than the Father as touching his Manhood. Who although he be God and Man: yet he is not two, but is one Christ; One, however, not by conversion of Godhead into flesh: but by taking of Manhood into God; One altogether not by confusion of Substance, but by unity of Person. For as reasoning soul and flesh is one man: so God and Man is one Christ; Who suffered for our salvation: descended into hell, rose again from the dead; Ascended into heaven, sat down at the right hand of the Father: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. At whose coming all men must rise again with their bodies: and shall give account for their own deeds. And they that have done good will go into life eternal: they that have done evil into eternal fire. This is the Catholick Faith: which except a man do faithfully and steadfastly believe, he cannot be saved. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. (Ibid., pp. 68-71.)

It was of these creeds, and their kindred, as found in all the sects of Christendom and in one manner and form or another in all the churches of men, whether professing to be Christian or pagan, of which Jeremiah prophesied when he said that gathered Israel in the last days, having come again to know their God by revelation, would say: "Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit. Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods?" (Jer. 16: 1-21.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Who he was before the foundations of the earth were laid, and his position and standing in the eternal scheme of things; These Messianic words, as first spoken by David, are in a context that marvelously summarizes the nature of Messiah's ministry. Of the coming Christ the Psalmist said: "Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast thou opened: burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required. Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart. I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the great congregation. . . . Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: let such as love thy salvation say continually, The Lord be magnified." (Psalm 40:6-10, 16.) that these words foretold the Messiah's approach in presenting the message of his Father is perfectly clear. Their use by Paul in his theological discourse to the Hebrews dramatizes that the Messiah came to end sacrifices and center the attention of all true believers in the sacrifice he made of his own body. In showing how Israel's ancient sacrifices were "a shadow of good things to come" and would in due course be done away, Paul uses the Psalmic words here involved in this way: "When he [the Messiah] cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me: In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure. Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me,) to do thy will, O God." Paul then shows that the first sacrifices, those offered anciently, were done away when God established the second, the sacrifice of the body of his Son. Of the will and purpose of Deity in so ordaining, the inspired record says: "By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all." (Heb. 10:1-10.)
[^2] What he was destined to do as a mortal to put into full operation the terms and conditions of the Father's plan; and For twice as many years as the two thousand of the so-called Christian era, believing persons looked forward for salvation to the then future atonement of the Messiah. Even as we now look back with rejoicing to what has been done by Deity, our forebears looked forward in joyful anticipation to what he would do in the day of his mortality. To envision how he deals with men, it is of surpassing import to know the Messianic teachings and promises given the saints during the first four thousand years of the earth's temporal continuance. To summarize the truths in this field, as they were revealed to and known by those who lived before our Lord placed himself in the hands of men, is the purpose of The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ (Deseret Book, 1978).
[^3] Various circumstances and events that were to occur incident to and in the course of his mortal pilgrimage. One of the saddest examples of a misconceived and twisted knowledge of an otherwise glorious concept is the all-too-common heresy that there were two plans of salvation; that the Father (presumptively at a loss to know what to do) asked others for proposals; that Christ offered a plan involving agency and Lucifer proposed a plan denying agency; that the Father chose between them; and that Lucifer, his plan being rejected, rebelled, and then there was war in heaven. Even a cursory knowledge of the overall scheme of things reassures spiritually discerning persons that all things center in the Father; that the plan of salvation which he designed was to save his children, Christ included; and that neither Christ nor Lucifer could of themselves save anyone. As Jesus said: "The Son can do nothing of himself. . . . I can of mine own self do nothing." (John 5:19, 30.) There is, of course, a sense in which we may refer to Lucifer's proposed modifications of the Father's plan as Lucifer's plan, and Christ made the Father's plan his own by adoption. But what is basically important in this respect is to know that the power to save is vested in the Father, and that he originated, ordained, created, and established his own plan; that he announced it to his children; and that he then asked for a volunteer to be the Redeemer, the Deliverer, the Messiah, who would put the eternal plan of the Eternal Father into eternal operation.
[^4] Edersheim 1:78. Italics added. In another passage Edersheim says: "Perhaps the most valuable element in Rabbinic commentation on Messianic times is that in which, as so frequently, it is explained, that all the miracles and deliverances of Israel's past would be re-enacted, only in a much wider manner, in the days of the Messiah. . . . It is in this sense that we would understand the two sayings of the Talmud: 'All the prophets prophesied only of the days of the Messiah,' and 'The world was created only for the Messiah.'" (Edersheim 1:162-63.)
[^5] Spirits developed an infinite variety and degree of talents while yet in preexistence. 5. This concept that some of the children of our Father have aleady become gods is a sound doctrinal reality. In a measure and to a degree they have already become like Christ, who is the Prototype of all saved beings. As Paul expressed it, they have become "perfect" and have come "unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Eph. 4: 13.) This high status is now enjoyed by all of the prophets and righteous saints who were with Christ in his resurrection. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as examples and prototypes, whose attainments stand as a pattern of all others similarly situated, are specifically named by revelation as having already attained Godhood. (D&C 132:29-39.)
[^6] Spirit children have the capacity to become like their Eternal Father. 6. All of the prophets who have seen within the veil have known many things that were never preserved and passed on to their posterity and to the residue of men. Joseph Smith and the early brethren in this dispensation knew much that we do not know and will not know until we attain the same spiritual stature that was theirs. This matter of how long eternity has been going on in our portion of created things is one of these matters. The sliver of information that has been preserved for us is found in an epistle of W. W. Phelps, written on Christmas day, 1844, and published to the Church in the Times and Seasons. Brother Phelps speaks of "Jesus Christ, whose goings forth, as the prophets said, have been from of old, from eternity," in what is a clear allusion to Micah's prophecy that Bethlehem shall be the birthplace of our Lord. "Out of thee [Bethlehem Ephratah] shall come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting." the Lord said through that ancient prophet. (Micah 5:2.) Then, in an interpolative explanation of what is meant by "from eternity," or "from everlasting," Brother Phelps says, "And that eternity [the one during which Christ's doings have been known], agreeable to the records found in the catacombs of Egypt, has been going on in this system [not this world], almost two thousand five hundred and fifty-five millions of years." (Times and Seasons 5:758.) That is to say, the papyrus from which the Prophet Joseph translated the Book of Abraham, to whom the Lord gave a knowledge of his infinite creations, also contained this expression relative to what apparently is the universe in which we live, which universe has been created by the Father through the instrumentality of the Son. The time mentioned has no reference, as some have falsely supposed, to the period of this earth's existence.
[^7] Mortal life is an essential step leading to eternal life. Before Bethlehem (Chapter 2) footnote: False creeds make false churches. There is no salvation believing a lie. Every informed, inspired, and discerning person is revolted by the absurdities and scripture-defying pronouncements in the creeds of Christendom, whose chief function is to define and set forth the nature and kind of Being that God is. The same Lord Jesus who walked the dusty lanes of Palestine also appeared in glory, standing at the right hand of his Father, in a grove of trees in western New York, in the spring of 1820, to usher in the dispensation of the fulness of times. He then commanded his chief latter-day witness, Joseph Smith, to join none of the churches then upon the earth, because "they all were wrong," and "all their creeds were an abomination in his sight." (JS-H 1:17-19.) By way of illustration, let us note the following creedal concepts from the doctrinal foundation of the Church of England: (a) From the "Articles of Religion," article 1, entitled Of Faith in the Holy Trinity: "There is but one living and true God everlasting, without body, parts, or passions; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness; the Maker, and Preserver of all things both visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead there be three Persons, of one substance, power, and eternity; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost." (Book of Common Prayer, p. 685.) (b) In The Creed, which is said or sung each time Holy Communion (the Lord's Supper) is administered, we find such assertions as: "Jesus Christ, . . . God of God, Light of Light, Very God of very God, Begotten not made, Being of one substance with the Father, . . . was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary." And: "The Holy Ghost, The Lord and giver of life." (Ibid., pp. 291-92.) (c) In the Apostles Creed, which is said on thirty-nine Sundays each year, it is recited that "Jesus Christ . . . was conceived by the Holy Ghost." (Ibid., p.52.) (d) The Creed of Saint Athanasius, which is "sung or said . . . by the Minister and people standing," on Christmas, Easter, and a total of thirteen Sundays each year, and which is, if we may paraphrase Nephi's language, "most abominable above all other creeds" (1 Ne. 13:5), is here set forth in its entirety:
