Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 3

The Promised Messiah

Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart. (Ps. 40:7-8.) [^1]

True Messianic Concepts

Our Lord—blessed be his name—was the Messiah in ages past ("I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven," he said to Enoch [Moses 7:53]). Ministering among men as Mary's son, he continued to act in all the glory and dignity of his Messianic might; and he yet serves in that same office, as John the Baptist witnessed when he conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon mortals "in the name of Messiah." (D&C 13.)

I have written elsewhere, in The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ, about the Messianic prophecies. [^2] In a very real sense it is an introduction to this life of our Lord, The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary. Knowing who the Mortal Messiah once was; knowing what he did in ages past; knowing what he was destined to do in the days of his mortal probation; knowing his present state of reenthroned glory and omnipotence as he sits with his Father on the blazing throne of God—a vision of all this puts us in a position to understand what he actually did when he dwelt among us lowly mortals. True Messianic concepts may well be summarized under three headings:

As to his status, glory, and dominion in the midst of eternity, before the earth was made or mortal men were, we must come to know—

That there is a God in heaven who is infinite and eternal; who has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's, and who is in fact a resurrected, glorified, perfected, and exalted Man; who has all power, all might, and all dominion, and who knows all things; and who in the ultimate and full sense is the Creator, Upholder, and Preserver of all things, both this earth and all worlds, the sidereal heavens, and all things that in them are;

That the Great God, by whom all things are and for whom all things are created, is the personal and literal Father of the spirits of all men, of which number the Messiah was the Firstborn; and that our Primal Parent ordained and established the plan of salvation whereby all his spirit children, Christ included, had power to advance and progress and become like him;

That in the premortal sphere, by obedience to law, the Firstborn advanced and progressed and became like the Father in power and intelligence, and became, under the Father, the Creator of all things, meaning that he was the Executive Officer who brought to pass the Father's creative enterprises;

That the Messiah then was the Great Jehovah, the Eternal One, the Lord Omnipotent, and was God in his own right;

That when the Father presented his plan for the salvation of his children; when the nature and purpose of our mortal probation was set forth; when it was known that a Redeemer would be needed to ransom men from temporal and spiritual death; and when the cry went forth, "Whom shall I send," the future Messiah stepped forth and said, "Here am I, send me" (Abr. 3:24-27; Moses 4:1-4); [^3]

That he was then chosen and foreordained to be the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; that he was then selected to be the Son of God, the Only Begotten in the flesh, the One Person who would come into mortality with the power of immortality, thus having power to work out the infinite and eternal atonement;

That the gospel of salvation was then named for him and he became the Savior and Redeemer, the God of Israel, the Holy One of Israel, the Word of God, the great Judge, the Lawgiver, the Father of the righteous of all ages.

If we come to know all those things which appertain to the premortal life and being of the Messiah—his position in the eternal scheme of things—then his mortal ministry takes on an entirely different perspective. What he did and was, as God, before the world was, is the basis for what he did and was, as a mortal, far removed from the throne and glory that once was his.

As to the crowning purpose of the mortal ministry of the second member of the Eternal Godhead, the ancient believers were well instructed. From Adam, the first man, to John, the last legal administrator of the old order, to a greater or lesser degree, depending on their faith and righteousness, the ancient saints knew—

That Adam, attended by his lovely consort Eve, fell from that state of immortality in which they lived when first clothed with flesh and bones; that they thereby became mortal and brought temporal and spiritual death into the world, for themselves and their posterity; and that in their mortal state they were able to bear the souls of men, thus providing bodies for the spirit children of the Father, and thus themselves becoming the parents of the human race;

That a Deliverer, a Savior, a Redeemer—a Messiah!—(who is Christ) must come to ransom men from the temporal and spiritual death brought upon them by the fall of Adam; that the deliverance, the salvation, the redemption to be wrought by him would abolish death, bring immortality to all men, and make eternal life available to all the obedient;

That through this great redemption—this infinite and eternal atonement—the Messiah would reconcile fallen and sinful man to God; would mediate between man and his Maker; would intercede for the penitent before the Father's throne; would justify them, adopt them, free them from prison, and make them joint-heirs with himself of all the glory and dominion that are to be.

These realities relative to our status as the children of the Father; relative to the position of Christ in the eternal scheme of things; relative to the infinitely wondrous and eternally effective sacrifice he wrought—these realities are the heart and core of revealed religion. The Father created us and all things, and ordained and established his eternal plan, the gospel of God, so that we might become as he is. For this we worship and serve him with all our power. The Son redeemed us and put into operation the provisions of the Father's plan. And for this we worship and serve him also with all our hearts.

There are no concepts of revealed religion, no doctrines of the everlasting gospel, no views on any subject, that have ever entered the heart of man that compare, even in slight degree, with these Messiah-centered truths. These verities are the doctrine that salvation is in the Messiah; that by him redemption cometh; and that he is the resurrection and the life. His Father's name is Man of Holiness, and he was destined to be, and is, the Son of Man of Holiness, the great Deliverer, without whose atoning sacrifice the very purposes of creation would have vanished away.

As to the various circumstances and events of his mortal pilgrimage, which were foreknown and foretaught by the prophets who preceded him—as to these, their number and extent are sufficient to identify without question the One Life to which they apply. There have been, there are, and there will be other mortals of whose earthly missions small slivers of truth are manifest in advance. Joseph Smith and Moses were identified and foreknown by name centuries before they came to dwell on earth. Columbus and Cyrus had their work cut out for them long before their mortal probations, and because their labors were destined to affect the Lord's people, they were made known to prophets in advance. But the Man Jesus is the only one whose birth and life and ministry and death and resurrection were taught in such detail by the Messianic witnesses of old that it is almost as though his history was written in advance. Various of these Messianic utterances are analyzed in The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ, and those applicable to this present work will be considered in the pages that follow. However, so that our approach in studying the only perfect life ever lived will be what it should be, we shall here recite enough to indicate the detail, extent, and import of those Messianic prophecies which deal with our Lord's mortal experiences.

Inspired men, hundreds and thousands of years before his birth, speaking by the power of the Holy Ghost, telling what God had revealed to them, taught and prophesied such things as these:

A mighty prophet would prepare the way before him. As the voice of one crying in the wilderness of unbelief, this forerunner would cry repentance and administer baptism in water to believing souls; and as the crowning act of his life, this prophet would baptize the Son of God, see the Holy Ghost descend upon him like a dove, and bear witness that he was the Lamb of God who should save the world.

The Promised Messiah would be conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, God would be his Father, and his mother would be called Mary. She would be a virgin, pure, choice, favored above all womankind.

He would be born in Bethlehem. A new star and many other signs and wonders in heaven would herald the event, and it would occur six hundred years from the time Lehi left Jerusalem. He would be the seed of Eve, a descendant of Noah, the seed of Abraham, a branch of Israel, the Son of David.

He was to bear the names Emmanuel, Jesus, Christ, Messiah, King, Lord, and God. He was to be the Redeemer and Savior, and the Holy One of Israel, who would live without sin. He was to be known as Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning.

He was to flee into Egypt and be called back to his homeland. He was to dwell in Nazareth and be called a Nazarene. He was to be baptized to fulfill all righteousness, and the ordinance would take place in Bethabara beyond Jordan, at which time the Holy Ghost would descend upon him in the sign of a dove.

He was to come down from heaven, dwell in a tabernacle of clay, work mighty miracles, heal the sick, raise the dead, cause the lame to walk and the blind to see, cure all manner of diseases, and cast out devils. He was to suffer temptations and pain, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, and in his greatest ordeal he would bleed great drops of blood from every pore.

He was to teach the gospel, carry the lambs of his flock in his arms, speak in parables to the unbelieving, call twelve apostles and others, and send his message to the Gentiles. At a triumphal hour he was to ride into Jerusalem on an ass amid cries of "Hosanna to the Son of David."

He was to be persecuted for righteousness' sake; to bear the infirmities of the people; to be a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; to be rejected by his people; to be betrayed for thirty pieces of silver by his own familiar friend; to be judged of men, lifted up upon a cross, and crucified by wicked hands; to die, be with the wicked in his death, find interment in a tomb of a wealthy person, rise again the third day, and bring to pass the resurrection of all men. No bone of his body was to be broken, though his flesh was to be pierced and nails were to be driven into his hands and feet. And so on and so on and so on.

To persons unacquainted with the Messianic prophecies, it may seem as though these words are a recitation made after the events, a recitation of what we now know to have occurred. They are, in fact, a partial summary only of some of the things the prophets foretold concerning him. This concept that his birth and life and ministry were all foreknown, foreordained, and foretaught is essential to an understanding of the things he did. Truly, he did not act of himself alone, but guided by the Spirit, he did ever those things which his Father directed.

Jewish Messianic Concepts

What were the Jewish concepts concerning that promised Prophet, that prophet who would be raised up by the Lord and given Messianic power, and who would be like unto Moses?

They should have been, in every respect and detail, the same as those of the saints who preceded them; and they would have been exactly the same concepts held by their righteous forebears if it had not been for the wickedness, rebellion, apostasy, and spiritual darkness that was almost everywhere present in the meridian of time. The Jewish Hebrews then dwelling in Canaan had the scriptures—"and they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.)

It was a Jewish psalmist who prophesied that the Son would be begotten by God and worshipped by the people; that he would bear testimony of his Father in the congregation of the people; and that he would sit on his Father's right hand, as a priest forever, until all his enemies were overthrown. It was a Jewish prophet who said the Child, born of a virgin, would be the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, and that he would reign on David's throne. It was a Jewish prophet who proclaimed that the Lord Jehovah, in whom is everlasting strength, would live and die, and that his dead body would come forth from the grave. For that matter it was Moses, the man of God whom they revered, who set up the whole system of sacrificial offerings wherein the blood of animals—animals without spot or blemish—was shed in similitude of the coming sacrifice of the Lamb of God. It was a Jewish prophet who spoke of the Suffering Servant who would be despised and rejected; who would be a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with grief; who would bear our griefs, carry our sorrows, and be stricken, smitten, and afflicted by men; who would be wounded for our transgressions and bear the sins of many; who would heal us with his stripes; who would make his soul an offering for sin, and pour out his soul unto death; who would justify many, and make intercession for the transgressors; and so on and so on and so on.

All the Jewish prophets were Messianic prophets; many of their prophetic declarations were preserved in the scriptures then extant; and had that same Spirit which rested upon the prophets rested also upon the Jews of Jesus' day, then the people in that meridian period would have known the truth about their Messiah. They would have known that his kingdom was not of this world; that his mission was to bring life and immortality to light through the gospel; that he came to bring immortality and eternal life to men; that he was the resurrection and the life; and that his atoning sacrifice was the rock foundation upon which the house of salvation is built. That they did not know these things, and that such was not the case, brings us now to a consideration of what Jesus' contemporaries did in fact anticipate in the way of a Deliverer, and hence to an understanding of why they reacted to Jesus in the way the New Testament authors recite.

Israel became a kingdom when Samuel anointed Saul, in 1095 B.C., to rule and reign, in power and might, among and over the Lord's chosen people. Three decades later David received the same divine anointing. There then followed ten years of struggle and intrigue and war, culminating in the deaths of Saul and Jonathan. Thereupon, in 1055 B.C.—forty years after Saul had begun the process of imposing kingly designed burdens upon the people whose only previous King had been Jehovah himself—David ascended the throne of Judah; yet another seven years was to elapse before he became king and ruler of all Israel. But with the ascendancy of the son of Jesse, the Bethlehemite, to the throne of Israel, there was ushered in such a reign of power and might and dominion and supremacy as was scarcely known among the mighty nations of the day. Israel's enemies were defeated, slain, imprisoned, and made to serve their Hebrew masters. For forty years David's word was law and blood flowed when any dared oppose him. For another forty years Solomon, his son, reigned in such splendor and supremacy that for a thousand years the house of Jacob would look back with wonder and nationalistic pride at the kingdom and glory of their early rulers.

As king followed king and war and bloodshed prevailed everywhere; as one king caused Israel to worship Jehovah, and the next commanded them to bow before Baal; as prophets came and went, and were persecuted and slain for the witness borne in their Redeemer's name; as the kingdom of Israel, composed of ten of the tribes, went into Assyrian bondage in the days of Shalmanezer (about 721 B.C.); as the people of Judah, after Lehi left Jerusalem, were carried captive into Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar; as the Jews returned from Babylon under Zerubbabel in 536 B.C., and again under Ezra and Nehemiah nearly eighty years later; as all the wars and sorrows continued to sweep over Jewry, down to the days of Jesus; as all these things, and myriads more, came to pass during this long millennium of their history—yet the hope and expectancy of people always faced forward to a day of deliverance, to a Deliverer, to a Messiah.

In large measure and at many times, particularly from the day of Malachi, whose prophecies were forthcoming between 397 and 317 B.C., darkness prevailed in Israel. They had the scriptures; the priesthood retained; they kept the law of Moses to a degree; but their interests were upon the letter and not the spirit of the law. It comes, therefore, as no surprise to find that all Israel in the days of Jesus were looking for a temporal Deliverer, for a Messiah born in the lineage of Abraham and David, who, sitting on the throne of their greatest king, would free them from personal and national bondage and vanquish their enemies. They looked for a preeminent Judahite ruler—for the scepter was not to depart from David's Judah until Shiloh came—who would throw off the Roman yoke and scatter the legions of the Caesars as David had caused the Philistines to flee when one small pebble from his sling felled the mighty Goliath.

Such a Deliverer, such a Messiah, as they envisioned, would not only restore the kingdom to Israel, but would also return the dispersed of that great nation to their original inheritance in their promised Canaan. All Israel again would find residence on the soil that once was theirs. It would yet be as when Joshua drove out the cursed races who worshipped Baal, who burned their children in the fires of Molech, and who sacrificed to devils. This glorious concept of the gathering of Israel, proclaimed by all the prophets, cherished by the downcast and downtrodden of Jacob for generations, was truly part of their common Messianic hope. So ingrained was it, and so assured were the chosen people of its fulfillment in Messiah's day, that, as Edersheim observes, "Every devout Jew prayed, day by day: 'Proclaim by Thy loud trumpet our deliverance, and raise up a banner to gather our dispelled and gather us together from the four ends of the earth. Blessed be Thou, O Lord! Who gatherest the outcasts of Thy people Israel.' That prayer included in its generality also the lost ten tribes. So, for example, the prophecy was rendered: 'They hasten hither, like a bird out of Egypt,'—referring to Israel of old; 'and like a dove out of the land of Assyria'—referring to the ten tribes. And thus even these wanderers, so long lost, were to be reckoned in the field of the Good Shepherd." [^4]

This Jewish hope and full expectancy that their Messiah would "recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea"; that he would "assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth"; and that they should "fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines," as they came (Isa. 11), was more than a vaporous dream of the night. It was the nationalistic hope that had kept them alive as a distinct people in spite of century after century of enslavement and slaughter. So fully was it a part of their religion, their worship, and their way of life that even the apostles of the Lamb, after they knew with a perfect knowledge that their Risen Lord was indeed the Promised Messiah; after they knew that his kingdom was not of this world; after they knew full well that he had no intention of throwing off the Roman yoke and of doing all the things their Jewish fellows supposed the Messiah would do—after all this, as they stood with him on Olivet, outside Jerusalem's walls, they asked that which was yet uppermost in their minds, the one great concern that still weighed in upon them: "Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" His answer ended forever the Messianic hope that their era was the one appointed for the gathering of Israel, that the promised kingdom would be in their day. "It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power," he replied. Their work was to be worldwide; it was to be of a scope and nature that even they had not yet envisioned; they were to preach the gospel to every creature; and there would yet be a future day, a millennial day, when the Millennial Messiah—"this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven"—would come again to fulfill all that the prophets of old had promised. (Acts 1:6-11.)

Messiah's kingdom, in the full and complete sense of the word, was to be a millennial kingdom. Only then would the "living waters . . . go out from Jerusalem," according to the promise; only then would "the Lord" reign as "king over all the earth." (Zech. 14:8-9.) For their meridian-day Messiah was to be the Suffering Servant; the Teacher without peer; the Sinless One who would redeem and ransom and save; who would abolish death, and bring "life and immortality to light through the gospel" (2 Tim. 1:10); who would lay down his life, according to the flesh, and take it again, by the power of the Spirit, that all men might "be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe" (D&C 29:43).

He truly shall yet reign as King of kings and Lord of lords, and "the kingdoms of this world" shall "become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ." (Rev. 11:15.) But all the hopes of temporal rule, when he first came among men, were false and groundless. "My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight" (John 18:36), was his mortal proclamation. The day when he shall reign on the throne of David, slay the Goliaths of the world, and drive the Philistines from Israel's door is reserved for his second appearance. All the hopes of Jewish Israel that their Promised Messiah, like Moses and David, would free their lands, as it were, from the "modern" Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites were to fade away. Neither the wealth and wisdom of Solomon nor the might and glory of David were then to be restored, nor was Israel to gather in from her long dispersion to the standard he would then raise.

'What think ye of the Messiah,' Jesus asked certain Pharisees. "Whose son is he?" Their reply, using words that were but a summary of what was in the minds of the generality of the people, acclaimed: 'He is the son of David; he shall free us from our captors; he shall break the hated Gentile yoke; he shall gather in our dispersed brethren; we shall become a mighty nation again.' But Jesus spoke not of the millennial kingdom, which was millenniums away; their concern should have been centered in his meridian ministry, which brought salvation to them. "Whose son is he?" If the Mortal Messiah was to be a temporal ruler only, how then was he God's Son, as even David attested in proclaiming that one Lord said to another Lord, 'Sit thou on my right hand, until that future day when all things spoken by all the prophets concerning thee and all Israel shall be fulfilled.' Is it any wonder that "no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions"? (Matt. 22:41-46.)

And yet we must not generalize to the point of assuming there were none among the Jews who knew and understood the mission and ministry of the Anointed One who would deliver and redeem. Our Lord—called Christ in the Greek and Messiah or Messias in the Hebrew—was known and recognized and worshipped by many of his Jewish kinsmen while he yet dwelt among them. There is no doubt that "all the people"—chanting in a frenzy of hate and derision, "His blood be on us, and on our children" as Pilate sought to free the Prisoner (Matt. 27:24-26)—were representative of the thought and feeling of a nation. But within the nation, and among the diverse parties and sects, there were those who loved light more than darkness, and who sought blessings from him of whom the hate-filled mob cried, "Crucify him, crucify him." (Luke 23:21.)

There were those who had sufficient spiritual insight to know that the Messiah was the Great Jehovah, and that born of woman he would deliver fallen men from their corrupt and carnal state and make them fit candidates for eternal salvation. Elisabeth, the Levite wife, while her womb contained the Messiah's forerunner, acclaimed Mary as the mother of the Lord. (Luke 1:41-45.) Simeon, a just and devout Jew who waited for the Consolation of Israel, learned from the Holy Ghost that he should not see death until he had seen the Lord's Messiah; and it became his blessed privilege to take the Child Jesus in his arms and to bless him and to prophesy of his mission in Israel. (Luke 2:25-35.) Anna the Jewess, a prophetess mighty in faith and good works, also saw and believed and testified. (Luke 2:36-38.) John the Baptist, our Lord's Jewish forerunner, answering the priests and Levites who asked, "Who art thou," replied, "I am not the Christ"; and then of that Messiah whose shoe's latchet he felt unworthy to unloose, the Baptist testified, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." (John 1: 19-36.)

Andrew, a Jew, brother to Simon Peter, introduced Peter himself to the gospel with the salutation, "We have found the Messias." (John 1:37-41.) Jewish Philip bore a like witness, and Jewish Nathanael, speaking to the Messiah mouth to mouth, affirmed, "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel." (John 1:41-51.) Peter, Jewish to the hilt, as were all the Twelve, testified before his fellow apostles and to the Lord Jesus: 'Thou art the Messiah, the Son of the Living God,' after which witness Jesus began to show the disciples how he should suffer and die and rise again the third day. (Matt. 16:13-21.) Martha, as Jewish as mortal women can be, who with her sister Mary knew that had Jesus been present, their brother Lazarus would not have died, spoke for herself and her Jewish sister in saying: 'I believe that thou art the Messiah, the Son of God, which should come into the world.' (John 11:1-46.)

All these and many others are named as Messianic witnesses in Holy Writ. Such accounts are but samples and illustrations. Among the Jewish people there were many who understood the scriptures, who knew their true meanings, and who believed in him of whom they testify. Indeed, it was "a very great multitude" of Jewish believers, on the occasion of our Lord's triumphal entry into Jerusalem, who cried out to their Messiah, 'Save, we beseech thee,' "Hosanna to the Son of David," and whose witness was: "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest." (Matt. 21:1-11.) And it was Jewish converts who became living torches on Roman walls; whose flesh was torn by wild beasts in orgies of slaughter in Roman arenas; whose bodies were hewn and slashed with gladiatorial swords; who welcomed crucifixion and death rather than bring dishonor to the Messianic name that they as Christians chose to bear. Whatever we may say of the Messianic hopes and knowledge of the generality of the Jews, the basic reality remains unchanged that there were those who believed, and that all men had power to believe, and would have believed, had they not chosen darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These words, quoted from a source not now found in the Bible, were spoken by Jesus to the arch-tempter when that evil spirit sought the soul of him who "was in all points tempted like as we are, yet [who remained] without sin." (Heb. 4:15.) It is evident they were part of some text then extant, and it is even more evident that they constitute the perfect summary of the real and true meaning of the whole body of revealed writ. Man was created so that he might worship the Lord because by so doing fallen mortals become as their Eternal Progenitor.
[^2] Joseph Smith spoke at extended length, on numerous occasions, reasoning along the same lines as here set forth, to show that the Lord "set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever." (Teachings, p. 168.) One brief reference to these teachings will here suffice: "The gospel has always been the same; the ordinances to fulfill its requirements, the same, and the officers to officiate, the same; and the signs and fruits resulting from the promises, the same; therefore, as Noah was a preacher of righteousness he must have been baptized and ordained to the priesthood by the laying on of the hands, etc." (Teachings, p. 264.)
[^3] One of the high points in the ministerial and worshipful experiences of the ancient patriarchs occurred in 3077 B.C., three years before Adam's spirit took leave of its mortal tenement. On that occasion, Adam "called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. Lamech, who was born in 3130 B.C., certainly would have been included in the unnamed "posterity." It was on this occasion that "the Lord [Christ] appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel. And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever. And Adam stood up in the midst of the creation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation." (D&C 107:53-56.) This certainly was one of the crowning worship services of all history, a service in which the righteous saints assembled to pay their devotions; and the Lord Jesus Christ himself, more than three millenniums before his mortal birth, came to speak to the people and to bless the great head of the human race.
[^4] "This greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom," our revelation says. Also, This "priesthood continueth in the church of God in all generations." (D&C 84:17-19.) These statements, as their context shows, refer to the authority, organization, and doctrine found on earth from Adam to Moses. Thus, whenever the Melchizedek Priesthood is found among men, there also is the Church of Jesus Christ and the fulness of the gospel; and wherever the gospel and the Church are found there also is the priesthood. Any one of these is inseparable from each of the others. It is a knowledge of this and other similar truths that enables us to know, from the very sketchy and fragmentary accounts available to us, what the ancient saints actually possessed.
