Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 4

Four Millenniums of True Worship

Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. (Luke 4:8.) [^1]

True Worship Before the Flood

True and heaven-sent worship has been found on earth from the day of the first man to the present moment whenever and wherever men have been willing to hearken to their Maker. Christianity did not originate in the so-called Christian era. Our Lord did not bring it for the first time when he came to dwell on earth. Pure religion and approved worship have been with us from the beginning.

In the beginning that God who created man, male and female, in his own likeness and image; in the beginning the Eternal Father, by whom all things are, and who placed his son, Adam, and his daughter, Eve, in Eden; in the beginning the great Creator whose Beloved and Chosen Son was foreordained to be the Redeemer and Savior; in the beginning this Holy Being, as it was his right to do, commanded all men "that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they should worship." (D&C 20:18-19.)

The divine decree—"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy might, mind, and strength; and in the name of Jesus Christ thou shalt serve him" (D&C 59:5)—is as old as the human race. An angelic ministrant, speaking by the power of the Holy Ghost, delivered to Adam the heaven-sent word: "Thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." (Moses 5:8.) Line upon line and precept upon precept, our first father was counseled from on high until he gained the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which gospel is the good news, the glad tidings, that all men may be saved if they keep the commandments of the Lord.

True worship consists in obeying the laws and ordinances of the gospel. It consists in believing in Christ, in joining the true Church, in being born again, in keeping the commandments after baptism, in acquiring the attributes of godliness, in doing all the things that must he done to gain eternal life in our Father's kingdom. True worship consists in emulating the thoughts and words and deeds of the Holy Messiah, so that men, following him and becoming like him, may reign with him in everlasting glory. True worship is the chief and major concern of man. God speaks, revelations are forthcoming, apostles and prophets labor out their days, the gifts of the Spirit are poured out upon the faithful, miracles are wrought, and the hand of the Lord is seen in all things—all to the end that men may worship the Father in spirit and in truth.

True worship is always and everlastingly the same. Truth does not vary, and God does not change. We are saved today by obedience to the same eternal laws that have saved men in all ages past and that will save them in all ages future. [^2] The Author and Finisher of our faith is the same yesterday, today, and forever. In him there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Salvation always comes by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the everlasting gospel, the gospel that has existed with God from all eternity and that will continue to crown his unchangeable goodness toward his creatures forever.

Some have supposed that God dealt differently with the ancient patriarchs than he did with men in the Christian era, or that he requires more of us in this age of supposed enlightenment than he did of those in the early ages of man's life on earth. Nothing could be further from the truth. Some of the mightiest and noblest spirits of all the hosts of heaven were sent to earth in the early gospel dispensations. Michael, known in his mortal ministry as Adam, in preexistence stood next to the Lord Jehovah himself in power, might, dominion, and intelligence; and Gabriel, who dwelt among men as Noah, was but a hair's breadth behind the first man in possession of godly graces. We can scarcely conceive of the high spiritual endowments of Enoch and all his city, true saints who qualified to flee the bounds of this earth and dwell in an appointed heaven without tasting death.

Let us look at each of the great patriarchs who presided as high priests over the Lord's people during the 1656 years from the fall of Adam to the flood of Noah. These noble and great souls worshipped the Father in spirit and in truth and, with the hosts of faithful saints in each of their days, have long since gone on to glory and exaltation in the mansions that are prepared. For instance:

Adam, standing as the presiding high priest over all the earth for all ages, offered sacrifices of the firstlings of his flocks in similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father.

Seth, who was like unto Adam in all things and could only be distinguished from him by their differences in age, performed baptisms by immersion for the remission of sins.

Enos laid on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost and confirmed believing and obedient persons as members of the Church of Jesus Christ as it was then constituted.

Cainan conferred the holy priesthood upon his fellow mortals and ordained them to offices in that holy order which is without beginning of days or end of years.

Mahalaleel entered that order of the priesthood which is named the new and everlasting covenant of marriage and taught his children to go and do likewise.

Jared preached the gospel, prophesied of the coming Messiah, and testified that salvation was and is and is to come in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent.

Enoch received revelations and visions, saw the Lord, and kept the law of Christ so fully and completely that he and all his city were translated.

Methuselah saw the future, prophesied by the power of the Holy Ghost, and dwelt in righteousness on earth for more years than any of the descendants of Adam of whom we have record.

Lamech enjoyed the gifts of the Spirit and rejoiced in that testimony of Jesus which is the spirit of prophecy.

Noah, going forth as a legal administrator and holding the same priesthood possessed by Enoch and his forebears, taught faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism, and the receipt of the Holy Ghost, telling his wicked and adulterous generation that unless they accepted the gospel, the floods would come in upon them and misery would be their doom.

All these—and they comprise the patriarchal chain from Adam to Noah—and the saints over whom they presided in their days had the fulness of the everlasting gospel and dwelt in righteousness upon earth all the days of their appointed probation. [^3] Souls were just as precious in that day as in any day, and a gracious God gave his laws to all who would accept them.

True Worship from Noah to Moses

When father Noah entered the ark, he took the holy priesthood with him. When the rains descended and the floods came; when the fountains of the mighty deep broke forth, sweeping from the earth all living things save those that were in the ark; when the Lord cleansed and baptized the very earth itself, the man Noah was a mighty prophet, a preacher of righteousness, a legal administrator who represented his God. Noah entered the ark as a member of the Church of Jesus Christ, as a saint in the congregation of Zion, and when he stepped forth onto dry ground one year and seventeen days later, there was no change in his status. He was still the Lord's agent; he still held the priesthood; the gospel was still on earth. True worship continued.

One of Noah's first acts after the flood was to build an altar and offer sacrifices in similitude of the coming sacrifice of the Lamb of God. After his day the gospel continued as it had after Adam's day. Each was the father of all living in his day, and their faithful descendants hearkened to their words and continued to worship Him who is eternal. Thus, pure religion was preserved through the flood, and men continued to work out their salvation as they had before the wicked and ungodly were destroyed in earth's one great deluge.

Our knowledge of prophets and peoples who had the gospel between Noah and Moses is somewhat sketchy. According to the best chronologies, from the flood in 2348 B.C. to the exodus from Egypt in 1491 B.C., there were 857 intervening years. We do know that whenever any person or group of people possessed the higher priesthood, they had the fulness of the gospel and were therefore worshipping the Lord according to the approved pattern. [^4] We know that from the flood to the birth of Abraham was 352 years, during which time there were ten generations of men. These were: Noah, Shem, Arphaxad, Salah, Eber, Peleg, Reu, Serug, Nahor, Terah, and Abram (who became Abraham). How many of these remained true and faithful to the covenant of salvation made with their fathers we do not know. Terah, the father of Abraham, lived under apostate conditions and worshipped false gods. After Abraham came Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh, and the children of Israel in general, who as a nation were burdened by Egyptian bondage, and among whom Moses was born in 1571 B.C.

It would appear that the gospel continued to operate to some degree, perhaps only in a fragmentary form, among the enslaved descendants of Jacob, in spite of the enticements of Egypt and the cruel overlordship and persecutions imposed by their Egyptian rulers. It is true that Moses received his priesthood from a non-Israelite source, but when he came to deliver his nation from Pharaoh, the record speaks of others who were elders of Israel and who well may have been priesthood bearers. It describes a people who, though in bondage, had an effective organization of their own, and it tells how they demanded of Pharaoh the privilege of journeying into the wilderness so they might offer sacrifices to Jehovah. It would seem that they had preserved at least some of the teachings of their fathers, and that some degree of true worship continued among them. In any event there were those on earth among whom the priesthood and true worship had remained. Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, "who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah." (D&C 84:14.) [^5] Thus there is a direct priesthood line from Adam to Abraham without a break.

There were also in the days of Abraham other nations and peoples of whom we know nothing—except that they dwelt on earth and worshipped the true God—who also held the priesthood. Through these nations the priesthood descended to Jethro, who conferred it upon his son-in-law Moses. The revealed account speaks of one Esaias, of whose ministry we know nothing, except that he received the priesthood under the hand of God (meaning, apparently, by special dispensation); that he lived in the days of Abraham and was blessed by him; and that he conferred the priesthood upon Gad. From Gad it descended by successive and authoritative conferrals to Jeremy, Elihu, Caleb, and Jethro, and then to the great lawgiver, Moses. (D&C 84:6-15.)

From such inspired writings as have been preserved to us, we are led to believe that the high points of true worship from the assuaging of the flood to the ministry of Moses occurred under the leadership of Melchizedek and in the days of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph. This man Melchizedek, than whom none of the ancients were greater, reigned as king in Shiloam, which is Salem, and which we suppose was Jeru-Salem. His people had all gone astray, reveling in unrighteousness and every form of evil. By faith and mighty works Melchizedek reclaimed them, brought them back to the cause of Christ, established peace among them, and was called by them the prince of peace, the king of heaven, and the king of peace. When but a child he feared God, stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire. His people wrought righteousness and sought the blessing of translation and to find an inheritance in Enoch's city. He it was, as priest of the Most High God, who conferred the priesthood upon Abraham, who blessed the father of the faithful, and who received tithes from him. Because he was such a great high priest, the Church in ancient days, to avoid the too-frequent repetition of the name of the divine Son, called the priesthood itself in his name: The Melchizedek Priesthood. That there have been few high points in history to compare with the pinnacles of pure worship attained in the days of Melchizedek none can doubt. [^6]

Abraham is everywhere revered as the father of the faithful and the friend of God. Whatever patriarchal lines may have been for the first 2,008 years of man's life on this earth, with the advent of Abraham in 1996 B.C., the Lord centered all things in his friend from Ur. From that day onward as long as time should roll or the earth should stand, the decree was that faithful spirits (in the main), those who would believe God and work righteousness, would come to earth as Abraham's seed. Those not of his literal bloodline who accept the gospel are adopted into his family, become his seed, and rise up and bless him as their father. With Abraham, and then with Isaac, and then with Jacob, the Lord made the covenant that their seed would continue, both in the world and out of the world, as innumerable as the sand upon the seashore or as the stars in heaven for multitude. This is the promise of eternal increase that is made in connection with celestial marriage, and that has been restored in modern times. It was restored by Elias and Elijah: by Elias, "who committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham," under which commission all who enter into celestial marriage receive the promise that in them and in their seed after them shall all generations be blessed; and by Elijah, who brought back the sealing power so that once again legal administrators could seal on earth and have it bound eternally in the heavens. [^7]

These are in fact "the promises made to the fathers" that have been planted "in the hearts of the children." (D&C 2:1-3.) "I give unto thee a promise," Jehovah said to Abraham, that "in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abr. 2:11.) Eternal life grows out of celestial marriage, out of the continuation of the family unit in eternity, and out of the inheritance of eternal increase. And thus, of all those who enter this order of matrimony, our revelation says: "This promise"—the promise of eternal increase, the promise of exaltation, the promise made to Abraham, the promise that has been planted in the hearts of all faithful members of the Church in this day—"This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham." With reference to the promise, the Lord then says, "By this law is the continuation of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself," and then he adds this divine exhortation: "Go ye, therefore, and do the works of Abraham; enter ye into my law and ye shall be saved." (D&C 132:31-32.)

Joseph, the son of Jacob, who was sold by his envious and conniving brothers to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver (appropriately a lesser price than the thirty pieces of silver given Judas for betraying Jesus), was by them sold in Egypt to Potiphar, captain of Pharaoh's guard. This Joseph, who is described as being like his latter-day counterpart of the same name—Joseph Smith, Jr., who heads our dispensation—became one of the greatest prophets. His prophecies deal primarily with Moses, who was to deliver Israel from Egypt; with the Nephites and Lamanites, his descendants, who were to inhabit an American promised land; and with Joseph Smith and the restoration of the gospel in the latter days. (2 Ne. 3-4; JST Gen. 50.)

Thus, only one conclusion can be reached for the period from Noah to Moses: heaven-sent worship was on earth, and pure religion ruled in the hearts of the saints.

True Worship in Ancient Israel

True worship among the chosen people rose to the heights and dropped to the depths during the fifteen hundred years of Israelite history that preceded the ministry of the Mortal Messiah. There were times when the house of Jacob climbed Sinai and found God; times when they were conquered by the world in the valley of Megiddo; times when they wandered through the wilderness of Idumea in search of truth; times when, without living water to drink, they perished in the deserts of Edom.

Nor did all Israel always travel together in one course. Worship among them was as varied as life itself; all degrees and kinds of conduct were shown forth at one time or another. Some of our fathers worshipped the Lord with a pure heart and a contrite spirit; others bowed before Baal, burned their children in the fires of Molech, and found more pleasure in the deceptions of Jezebel than in the exhortations of Elijah. There were faithful maidens who could persuade a Naaman to dip seven times in Jordan and come up free from leprosy, according to the word of Elisha the man of God; and there were also selfish and grasping Gehazis who sought to enrich themselves by selling the gifts of God, and upon whom the leprosy of sin was permanently attached.

There were prophets and there were evil men among the Lord's people. Moses spoke with the Lord face to face, as a man speaketh with his friend, while Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, preferring the fleshpots of Egypt to the austerity of the gospel, led a rebellion against the great lawgiver. And there was opposition from without the fold as well as from within. Nehemiah rebuilt the walls of Jerusalem with a sword in one hand and a trowel in the other as Sanballat and the Arabians mocked and opposed at every turn. It was no easier to come off triumphant in the warfare of life in those days than it is in these; Israel's whole history was one of trial and testing. When they served the Lord, they prospered; when they rebelled, evil and desolation and death attended them.

Israel grew from a small group of some 70 souls into a great nation while sojourning in Egypt. When they came out of bondage there were 600,000, and more, men of war in age from twenty years old and upwards. Counting wives and children and others, the Israelites who went through the Red Sea—while the waters congealed as a wall on the right hand and on the left—numbered in the millions. We suppose they had retained fragments and portions of their ancient religion, portions of that which came down to them from the patriarchs, in spite of their enslavement by the Pharaohs. But it seems clear that the fulness of the gospel, at least in its beauty and perfection, came to them anew under the hands of Moses. Because Moses held the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood, he had the fulness of the gospel: he could thereby lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost and confer upon men the power to sanctify their souls; he could thereby perform celestial marriages, which open the door to eternal life; and he could thereby seal people up unto eternal life with callings and elections made sure, so that they had an absolute guarantee of arising in the resurrection in a state of glory and honor and immortality and eternal life.

When Israel, as a people and as a whole, failed to live in harmony with the law of Christ as contained in the fulness of his everlasting gospel, the Lord "in his wrath" withdrew the fulness of his law from them. Because "they hardened their hearts" and would not "enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory, . . . he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also." (D&C 84:19-28.) That is, he took the Melchizedek Priesthood, which administers the gospel, out of their midst in the sense that it did not continue and pass from one priesthood holder to another in the normal and usual sense of the word. The keys of the priesthood were taken away with Moses so that any future priesthood ordinations required special divine authorization. But in place of the higher priesthood the Lord gave a lesser order, and in place of the fulness of the gospel he gave a preparatory gospel—the law of carnal commandments, the law of Moses—to serve as a schoolmaster to bring them, after a long day of trial and testing, back to the law of Christ in its fulness. [^8] There is the fulness of the gospel, and there is the preparatory gospel. There is the full law of Christ, and there is a partial law of Christ. The Mosaic system was the partial law, a portion of the mind and will of Jehovah, a strict and severe testing arrangement that would qualify those who obeyed its terms and conditions to receive the eternal fulness when the Messiah came to deliver and to restore it.

Whenever any individual or any selected groups in Israel qualified for more light and greater blessings than were found in the law of Moses, the Lord gave them the law of Christ in its fulness. Such was the case among the Nephites for six hundred continuous years. They kept the law of Moses "because of the commandments," even though it had "become dead" unto them. But they also had the Melchizedek Priesthood and the fulness of the gospel. They believed in Christ and were "reconciled to God," and all things were theirs. (2 Ne. 25:23-27; Alma 13.) We know this same state of superior enlightenment existed at many other times and places in Israel. There were at many times, and may have been at all times, prophets and righteous men in Israel who held this higher order of priesthood. Joseph Smith said, "All the prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood and were ordained by God himself" (Teachings, p. 181), meaning they received that holy order by special dispensation. Elijah, for instance, was the very prophet chosen to bring back the keys of the sealing power in our day. (Teachings, pp. 172, 330, 335-41.)

With the advent of a lesser law in Israel, there came also a lesser priesthood to administer the inferior order. Aaron and his sons, and the Levites in general, received the Aaronic or Levitical order. By the power and authority of this preparatory priesthood—this priesthood of Elias which is a forerunner to prepare the way for the higher order—all of the ordinances and rites and performances of the Mosaic system were administered from the days of Aaron to the coming of John. It was the priesthood that governed Israel temporally whenever they were willing to submit to the rule of Deity, and the high priests who governed in their religious affairs were high priests of the Aaronic order.

Messiah's advent brought back again the Melchizedek Priesthood and placed it over the kingdom so that future direction and governance came from that source. With the restoration of the higher priesthood came the restoration of the higher law. Again men had the everlasting fulness. Again they could perfect their souls and enter into that rest which is the fulness of the glory of the Lord. As Paul stated to his Hebrew brethren, brethren who knew and practiced priesthood performances and understood the need for proper authority in all that they did: "If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?" He is here showing how Christ, who was "called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec," brought back the gospel to replace the law of Moses. "For the priesthood being changed," he continues, "there is made of necessity a change also of the law." (Heb. 5:10; 7:11-12.)

Our conclusion, then, is that during all her long, wearisome, wandering history, Israel (or at least portions of that chosen race) worshipped the Lord in the true and proper sense of the word, either as possessors of the fulness of the gospel or while in subjection to the inferior and lesser order, which nonetheless came from God and was founded upon as many true principles as the people were willing to accept.

True Worship Among the Jews

In evaluating both the presence and the practice of true worship among the Jews, we must walk lightly and tread in winding paths, paths that are poorly marked and difficult to discern, paths that crisscross in a maze of diverse and differing directions. Many of the Jews in that day followed the form of true worship. They had the revealed pattern before them, and they adhered to it rigidly, with a fixity of purpose seldom seen among any people. A few of them enjoyed also the true spirit that is appointed to be the companion of true worship. But among their leaders and spreading out among the generality of the people, their worship embraced only the form of godliness. They went through the rituals and performances; they overstepped the mark in many things, Sabbath observance being chief among them; and they perverted and twisted so many basic principles that the Spirit of the Lord could not find lodgment in their souls. But with it all, the light still burned in some quarters in Israel; sacrifices were still offered by legal administrators upon divinely consecrated altars; the temple was still the Father's house, however much they had made it a den of thieves; and there were those prepared to receive their Messiah when he came even though the clamoring crowds chanted their cries of crucifixion.

Our Lord's conversation with the woman of Samaria at Jacob's Well gives a clear insight into the quality and kind of worship then extant. The woman—who was living in adultery and devoid of the true spirit of inspiration, and who was concerned more with form than with substance, as was the case with that whole adulterous society of ritualistic worshippers, yet who perceived Jesus to be a prophet—said "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship."

Knowing that it is not where, but who and how we worship that counts; knowing that the whole Jerusalem-centered system of ritualistic performances would soon be fulfilled; knowing that his Jewish compatriots would soon be scattered to the four winds, Jesus replied: "Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father." These words began to put the subject back into perspective; it is the Father in whom true worship centers. Then came the prophetic words: "Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for salvation is of the Jews." (John 4:5-22.) The Samaritans had lost the knowledge of God, but it had been retained by the Jews. They knew that God was their Father, and the sweet incenses burned in their ordinances ascended to him.

If an inspired, modern-day Mormon, placed in a like situation, had been speaking today—not to a Samaritan but to a sectarian who believed the creeds of Christendom, creeds that convert the true God into a confused spirit nothingness that fills immensity—the forthcoming words might have been: 'Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for salvation is of the Latter-day Saints.'

"We know what we worship!" A true knowledge of God is the true foundation upon which true worship and true religion rest. Other peoples anciently worshipped gods of wood and stone fashioned by men's hands. The Greeks placed a stone Diana in a majestic temple, above Mars Hill, in their Athenian acropolis. Before this statue and in this pagan temple, itself one of the architectural marvels of the world, they performed such acts of worship and generated such feelings of adoration as one can develop for an inanimate work of art. [^9] In contrast the Jews knew their God was a personal being, a glorified and exalted Man, an Eternal Father.

Many modern Christians worship a Trinity defined as being three Gods in one; as a spirit essence that fills the immensity of space; as a power and influence that has neither body, parts, nor passions; and is in fact as impersonal as Diana and all her kindred images. No doubt they generate such feelings of reverence, awe, and adoration as one can for such an impersonal nothingness. In contrast, the Latter-day Saints worship the God of the Jews.

Having announced that the Jews knew what they worshipped, meaning they were operating within the framework of true worship, our Lord said: "Salvation is of the Jews." That is to say, the Jews knew God was their Father; they looked forward to a Jewish Messiah and Deliverer who would reign forever on the throne of Jewish David; they had the holy scriptures, the words of the prophets, the guideposts for the lives of men; and they followed the law of Moses, the highest revealed standards then had among men. Salvation was available only to those who lived by pure and perfect Jewish standards, the standards set forth by the prophets.

Then came the perfect counsel that was needed for that day and for ours: "But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him." And for an accurate rendition of the actual words then spoken, we now turn to the Joseph Smith Translation: "For unto such hath God promised his Spirit," the account says, "And they who worship him, must worship in spirit and in truth." (John 4:23; JST John 4:26.) And therein lay the problem. Though the door was open that would have enabled them to worship the Father in spirit and in truth, and to receive thereby the sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost in their lives, most of the Jews failed so to do. To them the Mortal Messiah—and no man could come unto the Father but by him—was a stumbling block. Because they rejected him and his mission, true worship ceased and the whole nation, scattered and peeled, meted out and trodden down, became a hiss and a byword wherever they sought to lay their heads.

But, for our present purposes, suffice it to say that true worship was found on earth during all of the first four millenniums of that mortality which began with Adam's fall. For four thousand years—nearly a million and a half days—the mind and will of the Lord had been manifest among men. Over two hundred thousand weekly Sabbaths had passed, each providing an occasion and an opportunity to deal more particularly with spiritual things. Prophets and preachers of righteousness had given as much of the mind and will of the Lord as men in their various days would receive. All things from the beginning had pointed to one supreme and transcendent event: the coming and mortal ministry of the Eternal Messiah.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] There are those whose consciences are seared with a hot iron, who rebel against light and decency, who revel in unrighteousness, and who seek to live and rule in outright wickedness. We must not lose sight of the high and exalted place of Moses in the divine program. He ranks with Adam and Enoch; he has the spiritual stature of Noah and Abraham; and he stands with Melchizedek and Moriancumer in faith and devotion. How fitting it is that the law that was to govern the Lord's people for one-fourth of the entire period from the fall of man to the Second Coming of the Messiah should come through this son of Amram and Jochebed. It is no wonder that Holy Writ speaks of him in words like these: "Moses was caught up onto an exceedingly high mountain, And he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence. And God spake unto Moses saying: Behold, . . . thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands. . . . And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:1-6.)
[^2] There are those who seek to do good and to live by standards of decency and integrity; who heed the voice of conscience; who believe that a man's word should be his bond; and who maintain that men should organize and govern themselves so as to better their social circumstances and assure to each person freedom of conscience and the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. The account in Exodus (Ex. 20:1-17) sets forth the Ten Commandments as part of the gospel. The account in Deuteronomy (Deut. 5:1-21), given later and written anew by the finger of God on a second set of tablets of stone, is the account that governed those under the law of Moses. It is of more than passing interest that the direction to Israel to keep the Sabbath in commemoration of the day of their deliverance from Egypt had the effect of changing the day of the week on which the Sabbath was kept each succeeding year. Christmas comes on a different day of the week each year for us, and so did the weekly Sabbaths in ancient Israel: A full consideration of this is found in Sunday - The True Sabbath of God by Samuel Walter Gamble, a Methodist minister.
[^3] Above these peoples and nations come those who have the preparatory gospel—the law of Moses!—the principles of revealed truth that put them in the course leading to eternal life in our Father's kingdom. The death of these priests for performing an unauthorized ordinances gives us insight into how the Lord deals with those of his people, at least, who do that which he has not authorized them to do. Certainly in principle, and to some degree the same condemnation, in a spiritual sense, rests upon all ministers who perform unauthorized ordinances.
[^4] Finally we come to those who have the fulness of the everlasting gospel; who have the law of Christ in all its beauty and perfection; who are the true saints, the saints of the living God; who hold the holy priesthood; who enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost; who have been born again and are in process of sanctifying their souls; who have the gifts of the Spirit; who receive revelations and see within the veil; who work miracles, open blind eyes, unstop deaf ears, and cause lame men to leap; and who have power to seal righteous souls up to eternal life in the everlasting realms of Him who is Eternal.
[^5] These words of scripture seem to say that there was more than one generation between Melchizedek and Noah, which means that the tradition from apocryphal sources that Melchizedek was Shem the son of Noah cannot be true.
[^6] Alma 13:14-19; D&C 84:13-14; 107:1-4; JST, Gen. 14:17-40; Heb. 7:1-4; 11:33-34; Teachings, pp. 322-23. Our King James Version of the Bible speaks of Melchizdek as being "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually" (Heb. 7:3-4.), as though he were some unique and mystical character apart from the races of men. The Joseph Smith Translation perfects the obviously imperfect King James passage in this way: "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. And all those who are ordained to this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually." (JST, Heb. 7:3.) In this connection it should be noted that the Joseph Smith Translation renditions in the fourteenth chapter of Genesis recite some of the greatest and most glorious concepts in any revelation relative to this "order of the Son of God," this Melchizedek Priesthood as we call it. (JST, Gen. 14:17-40.)
[^7] D&C 110:12-16; 132:29-32; Abr. 2:6-11; Gen 17:1-4; 23:15-18; 26:1-5; 28:10-15.
[^8] 8. Galatians 3. This chapter, contrary to the views that prevail in modern Christendom, shows how Abraham had the gospel, how in the day of Moses the lesser law "was added because of transgressions," how this law was to continue until the Messiah came, and how "the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ."
[^9] 9. It was of this temple and this statue, in all their artistry and magnificence, that Paul said to Epicurean and Stoic philosophers: "God that made the world and all things therein, seeing he is the Lord of the heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; Neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things" (Acts 17:24-25.) Would it be amiss to give a modern paraphrase of Paul's words, a paraphrase pointed not at those who worship Diana, but at those who suppose that "God is a spirit," as the King James Version erroneously says in the Jacob's Well passage? Would it be amiss if the passage said: "God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, is not a congeries of laws floating like a fog in the universe; he is not the unclothed, indivisible, uncreated, impersonal spirit essence defined in the creeds of Christendom; for what adoration and what true worship (including the essential element of emulation) can there be for impersonal laws, as though man should pray: O thou great law of gravity grant me this my petition"?
