Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 5

The Law of Moses

My servant Moses . . . who is faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold. . . . (Num. 12:7-8.)

And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face, In all signs and wonders, which the Lord sent him to do. (Deut. 34:10-11.) [^1]

Jesus Lived the Law of Moses

We cannot portray, with any degree of sense and wisdom, the deeds done by the Mortal Messiah, nor can we envision the true meaning of much that he taught, unless we know what was involved in the law and system that was given to men to prepare the way for his coming. That system was the law of Moses—the law, on the one hand, that for fifteen hundred burdensome years had been the whip and the scourge in the hands of the Almighty to bring recalcitrant Israel repeatedly back to their proper standards; the law, on the other hand, that had shown forth bright rays of divine light for that blessed millennium and a half during which men were privileged to live in harmony with its uplifting standards.

Jesus was born among a people and in a home where the law of Moses was the rule and standard by which all things were measured. During his young and maturing years he was taught its precepts; he learned all that appertained to it; and he conformed in every respect to its rituals and provisions. When he was eight days old he was circumcised, according to the law, so that the mark of Moses, the man of God, and of Abraham, the friend of God, might ever thereafter be found in his flesh. When the days of Mary's purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished, she and Joseph took the newborn baby to the temple to present him to the Lord. At the age of twelve he became a son of the law, attended the regular feasts, and began to assume the responsibilities of the maturing males of the chosen race. It was at that age, at the Feast of the Passover, that he confounded the wise men in the temple and made to Mary the famous statement "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business" (Luke 2:49), indicating that even then the divine truth had come to him that he was one set apart from his fellows because God was his Father.

We can rest assured that our Lord was present many times when the morning and evening sacrifices were offered; that he went up to Jerusalem to keep the Feast of Tabernacles and to worship in the holy convocations that were recurring times of rejoicing under the Mosaic system; that he rejoiced with his kindred on the Day of Atonement and made it an occasion to draw near to his Father; that he went many times to the temple, which he revered as his Father's house, to ponder and pray and worship. To the growing boy, the eager and inquiring youth, the maturing man, and the teaching Rabbi, the law that had so long been a light to the paths of his forebears was also a light to his.

We must gaze back to the day of Moses and of Aaron; we must look upon the performances and ordinances of the Levitical law, during the fifteen hundred years it was in force in Israel; we must hear the voices of the prophets and teachers who were subject to the Mosaic system; we must know what the ancients had and were—all this if we are to catch the true vision of what Jesus was; if we are to learn why he taught as he did; if we are to understand why he reacted as he did to both friend and foe. This we shall do as we lay the foundation for the study of his life.

The Divinity of the Law of Moses

It is axiomatic, an obvious truism, that all things have their opposites and that nothing can be understood or known except as it relates to other similar or diverse things. The beauties and blessings of one system of conduct or of one way of life can only be envisioned to the full when both compared and contrasted with other systems or ways in the same field. We must both compare and contrast the law of Moses with the gospel of Christ, and each of them with other lesser systems of worship, if we are to see how the Mosaic system fits into the eternal scheme of things.

To have the whole picture before us, we might well divide individuals, groups, races, and nations into four classes or types:

Such are the Gadianton robbers of the Nephites, the marauding bands of ancient Palestine, and the thieves and robbers of every society. Such are the Genghis Khans, the Caesars, and the war lords of China and other nations whose lives consist of plundering, ravaging, and destroying. Such are the ancient mystery religions, the sex-centered worship of Ashtoreth, and the witchcraft, necromancy, astrology, and outright Satan worship of both ancient and modern peoples. Such also are the empire-building nations of history—Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Barbarians, many of the kingdoms and empires of Europe and Asia, the anti-Christs among the Jaredites, and the degenerate Lamanites of Hebrew descent: all these are peoples and nations led by godless wretches whose aim is to enslave and rule their fellowmen. All these are without God in the world: their course is one of carnality and evil; they are not neutral in the warfare between good and evil; they affirmatively defy the good and espouse the evil. Their religion is the religion of Satan; they serve on his errand and further his purposes. They are purely and simply in opposition to all that is good and decent among men. To put them in perspective, theologically speaking, we might say that all these are the telestial mortals among us.

Such are the ideals at least of the great religions of the world—Christian, Jewish, Islam, Buddhism, Confucianism, Shintoism, or what have you—all seek to better and uplift man; all seek to assure him of whatever they conceive salvation to be. Such are the temperance societies, the welfare organizations, the freedom foundations, the schools and universities among free peoples. Such also are the benevolent dictatorships, the kindly monarchies, and the republics of both the Old and New Worlds.

None of these is pure religion; none embraces within its fold true worship; but all are founded, in general, on right principles; all operate for the betterment and uplift of fallen man.

Theologically speaking, these might be said to be terrestrial in nature. They are good for man; they advance him in the scale of progression; they help the downtrodden and better the status of those in need. But they can neither save nor exalt a human soul; they neither embrace nor follow a course of pure and perfect worship.

Such was the righteous portion of the house of Israel from the day of Moses to the coming of John; such was the righteous or Nephite portion of father Lehi's seed on the American continent. Be it known that not all Israel kept the law of Moses. There were clusters and groups and whole tribes and nations that for generations at a time wallowed in dire and awful apostasy and denied themselves the blessings that might have been theirs. And be it known that not all of father Lehi's children walked in the path charted for them by their noble parent. Laman and Lemuel and their seed (with some notable exceptions) sought that which was evil and kept not the law of Moses.

But what we must have clearly before us is that the law of Moses as such was a higher and more perfect order of worship than any system of worship other than the fullness of the everlasting gospel. That is to say, the law of Moses was a higher and better and more nearly perfect system of worship than modern Catholic and sectarian Christianity, to say nothing of the fact that it surpassed Mohammedanism, Buddhism, and all other forms of worship. This is so because those who lived the law of Moses had revelation, were led by prophets, held the priesthood, and did the things that started them in the direction of the celestial kingdom. This superiority of the law of Moses will become apparent as we set forth the principles and practices upon which it was based. Theologically speaking, those who received and lived the law of Moses might be said to have been walking in a celestial course, to have been taking some of the initial steps leading to eternal life, to have been preparing themselves for that eternal fulness out of which eternal life comes.

Such are the citizens of the true kingdom, in whatever age is involved; such are members of the only true and living church on earth, in whatever age is involved; such are the faithful among the Latter-day Saints. Theologically speaking, those who believe and obey the everlasting fulness of saving truth might be said to be earth's celestial souls, souls who will receive back again in the resurrection the same body that was a natural body, which perfected body will be able to stand the glory of a celestial kingdom.

Moses and Christ—Their Laws Compared

We shall now compare the law of Moses with the fulness of the gospel. In doing so we must be aware that both of them come from God and are the laws of Christ.

We say, and our scriptures so certify, that there are two gospels, two laws, two revealed systems that Jehovah has given his people. One gospel is called the everlasting gospel, the fulness of the gospel, the gospel of Christ. It is the plan of salvation, by conformity to which man can gain the fulness of reward in that kingdom which is everlasting. The other gospel is the preparatory gospel, the partial gospel, the lesser gospel. It is the law of Moses by conformity to which men qualify, either in this life or the next, to receive that eternal fulness out of which eternal life grows. Both gospels are good news from God (as the very word gospel signifies), but one is greater than the other: one contains sufficient power and knowledge to save and exalt here and now, while the other prepares men to receive that future fulness which alone gives the guarantee of salvation.

We say, and our scriptures also so certify, that there are two priesthoods, two systems that authorize man to represent his Maker and to act in his place and stead in ministering salvation to mortals. One priesthood is the priesthood after the order of the Son of God; it is the Melchizedek Priesthood, the higher or greater priesthood, the holy order, the priesthood that administers the fulness of the gospel and has power to seal men up unto eternal life. The other priesthood is the Aaronic Priesthood, the Levitical Priesthood, the lower or lesser priesthood, the priesthood that administers the law of Moses.

Joseph Smith was asked, "Was the Priesthood of Melchizedek taken away when Moses died?" He replied: "All Priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained." (Teachings, pp. 180-81.) In other words, there is only one priesthood, but it comes in degrees; it is given partially or it is conferred in its fulness; it comes as the order of Aaron or as the order of Melchizedek. In this same sense, there is only one gospel, one law, one system of salvation, and it comes in degrees. It is all the law of Christ. Salvation comes from no other source. He gives to men as much of his law as they are able to bear. If they can only bear up under the burdens of the lesser system, the schooling system, the preparatory gospel, that is all they receive. Men are given according to their desires and their deeds.

Even today with the fulness of the gospel we have not received all of the light and knowledge that Enoch and many of the ancients possessed. We do, of course, have all the keys and powers ever had by any peoples and hence are able to assure worthy people of the fulness of reward in our Father's kingdom. Historically, the fulness of the gospel and the fulness of the priesthood came first; the law of Moses and the partial priesthood came second. The law of Moses was added to the gospel and the lesser priesthood was added to the greater. There are restrictions and limitations in the lesser system that are not present in the gospel itself. All of the saints from Adam to Moses had the fulness of the priesthood and the fulness of the law of Christ. Those from Moses to John had the lesser orders, the lesser priesthood and the lesser gospel, except of course when groups and portions of the people (such as the Nephites) qualified for the higher law and power.

To gain the celestial kingdom, the Lord says: Ye must be "sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ," which law is the fulness of the gospel. The revealed word specifies that those who "abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom" shall obtain a terrestrial glory, and that those who "abide the law of a telestial kingdom" shall obtain a telestial glory. No such requirement is set forth for gaining a celestial glory. Instead, the revelation says that those who so obtain must be "able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom." (D&C 88:21-24.) In other words, salvation in the celestial kingdom will come to all who are able to live the full law of Christ, even though they did not have opportunity so to do in the course of a mortal probation. Thus, all those who kept the law of Moses, who lived the law of the preparatory gospel to the full, thus establishing that they were able to live the Lord's law, will in due course gain a celestial inheritance. All of the great and eternal truths found in the law of Moses are also part and portion of the fulness of the gospel, in the same sense that all of the powers of the Aaronic Priesthood are embraced within the Melchizedek Priesthood.

It should come as no surprise to learn that the law of Moses includes such basic and eternal verities as these:

Under the law, the people had "the first and great commandment," which is, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind"; they had also the second great commandment, which is "like unto" the first: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." So spake Jesus in answer to the query, "Which is the great commandment in the law?" And having so stated, our Lord added, "On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. 22:35-40.) That is to say, all of the gospel of salvation, all of the ancient law given to Moses, all of the prophetic counsel of all the inspired men of all the ages—all of it is anchored and grounded upon these two eternal verities: love of the true God and love of one's fellowmen.

The words used to codify these laws did not originate with the Lord Jesus during his mortal ministry. The two commandments were not an outpouring of his superior wisdom; they were not a new and superlative summary of the mind and will of the Lord; they were, rather, a direct quotation from the law of Moses. Moses said them and Jesus quoted them. It was Moses who said: "Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord: And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might"; and having so said, it was Moses who commanded Israel to teach these words diligently unto their children, to talk of them as they sat in their houses and as they walked by the way, when they lay down and when they rose up, and also that they should bind them for a sign upon their hands, let them be continually before their eyes, and write them upon the posts of their houses and the gates to their dwelling places. (Deut. 6:4-9.) And it was Moses who said, in the Lord's name, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Lev. 19:18.) It is indeed difficult to conceive how a greater emphasis could have been put on these basic truths than was placed upon them by Moses, the man of God.

We have stated that those who kept the law of Moses were heirs of eternal life, an eternal verity that Jesus confirmed in this conversation. Our Lord was asked, "Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" He responded: "What is written in the law? how readest thou?" which is tantamount to saying, 'If you want eternal life, keep the law of Moses.' His interrogator replied: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself." If there was anything that all Israel knew about the law of Moses and the teachings of all the prophets, it was that to gain salvation, they must love their God and their fellowmen. And so Jesus affirmed: "Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live." 'Keep these commandments which came through Moses, and thou shalt have eternal life.' It was at this point that our Lord's tempter, desiring to justify himself, asked, "Who is my neighbour?" and the Master Teacher replied with the parable of the good Samaritan. (Luke 10:25-37.)

Upon the foundation of the first and second commandments, we place the Ten Commandments, that Israelite code of revealed law that is so highly esteemed that it has become the basic legal code for nearly all those who accept the Christian way of life. The Lord revealed the Ten Commandments to Moses twice, the first time as part of the gospel, the second time as part of the law of Moses, with the only substantive difference between the two revealed accounts being the reason for keeping the Sabbath day holy. Under the gospel the Sabbath day commemorated the creation; under the Mosaic system, the deliverance from Egypt with a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm.

The Ten Commandments—decreeing as they do that the saints shall have no gods before the Lord; that they shall neither make nor worship any graven images; that they shall not take the name of God in vain; that they shall keep holy the Sabbath; that they shall honor their father and mother; that they shall not kill, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor bear false witness, nor covet—all of these are part of the law of Moses as they are part of the gospel. [^2] And it was to these commandments that Jesus turned to give answer to the query, "Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?" Having replied, "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments," and then being asked, "Which?" Jesus particularized by saying: "Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Honour thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matt. 19:16-19.) And thus again the witness is born that by keeping the law of Moses men go forward on the charted course toward eternal life.

As an integral part of the whole law of Moses; as an essential part of every rite and performance of the Mosaic system; as a spoken or implied part of every commandment given to Israel; as a unifying thread woven into the whole tapestry of their society; as a divine decree, echoing and reechoing like the thunders of Sinai—stands the great Mosaic message: Keep the commandments. Keep the commandments and be blessed; disobey and be cursed. The repetitively stated Nephite declaration—"Inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land; but inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from my presence" (2 Ne. 1:20)—was but an echo of what Moses and the prophets had been telling Israel for generations.

"And now, Israel," Moses proclaimed, "what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, To keep the commandments of the Lord, and his statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?" Thereupon Moses acclaims the might and glory of the Lord, recounts some of his wondrous works, and says: "Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway." The blessings to accrue by obedience and the curses to befall from disobedience are then enumerated in graphic detail. (Deut. 10:12-22; 11; 27; 28.)

Perhaps nothing shows the divine approval enjoyed by ancient Israel—and therefore the divine nature of their law, by obedience to which they gained such great things—than the endless miracles and wonders wrought among them by the power of God. The Lord by his angel went before the camps of Israel in a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night, that they might know he was near and had a personal interest in preserving them. (Ex. 13:20-22; 14:19-24; 23:20-25; Deut. 1:33.) Lest they perish in the wilderness for want of food, the Lord, for forty years, rained bread from heaven upon them. This manna—by which no other people before or since has ever been fed, coming as it did by the opening of the heavens—certified to all who tasted its delicious flavor that as man doth not live by bread alone, even so his spiritual life depends upon receiving every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Temporal food and spiritual food come from the same source, and both are essential to the full and complete life of the soul. (Ex. 16:1-36; Deut. 8:1-4.)

What indicates divine approval more than the receipt of personal and continuing revelation? Under the Mosaic system, direct revelation was given; the voice of a living, personal, speaking God was heard; angels ministered to men. God was not, as he is in Christendom today, an unknown spirit essence; he was a living reality. Many of these revelations came to the high priest of the Aaronic order, by means of the Urim and Thummim, which he carried in the breastplate of judgment when he went in before the Lord. (Ex. 28:30.)

As a result of the sacrificial offerings of Aaron and his sons and the consequent devotion and worship of the people, the Lord Jehovah promised to dwell among the children of Israel and to be their God, thus leading to that close personal relationship which existed between the Lord and his people when he dwelt personally in Zion. (Ex. 29:38-46; Moses 7:16.)

All of this—and much more that could be set forth—shows the greatness and dignity of the law of Moses. This law was no mean or low system, either of theology or of ethics. That it exceeded what is had among sectarian Christians today is shown by the fact that the Lord wrought miracles and poured out wonders upon its faithful adherents. What Moses had was ennobling and uplifting. It was part of the law of Christ. Its essence and tenor is summed up perfectly in the words of Micah: "What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:8.)

Moses and Christ—Their Laws Contrasted

By obedience to his law, by heeding his voice, by keeping his gospel covenant, Israel had power to become "a peculiar treasure" unto the Lord above all people, to become "a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." (Ex. 19:5-6; Deut. 7:6; 14:1-2.) This they failed to do. The gospel offered to them was not "mixed with faith in them that heard it." (Heb. 4:2.) In its place came the law of Moses, a law that was "added because of transgressions." (Gal. 3:19.) As Abinadi expresses it, "They were a stiffnecked people, quick to do iniquity, and slow to remember the Lord their God; Therefore there was a law given them, yea, a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him." (Mosiah 13:29-30.)

As we have seen, many of the great and eternal truths of the gospel remained and were the rock foundation upon which the law was built. Men were still to worship and serve the Lord; they were still to love their neighbors as themselves; and the Ten Commandments retained their efficacy, virtue, and force; but under the law of Moses severe penalties were added for disobedience. The element of fear as well as of love became a dominant incentive in doing the things that must be done if salvation is to be won. Under the law of the gospel men are commanded to honor the Sabbath day and keep it holy. If they keep this commandment, they are blessed; if they heed it not, the promised blessings pass them by. But under the law of Moses a penalty was added for dishonoring the Sabbath, and that penalty was death. Extreme? Severe? So it would seem to us, but the Lord was taking a nation of bondsmen and slaves and turning them into kings and priests. It required strict obedience to his laws, and the sooner the rebels were sloughed off the sooner the whole nation would walk in paths of righteousness.

There are, in fact, a great host of offenses, set forth primarily in Exodus and Leviticus, for which the law decreed either excommunication or death as the penalty. Israelites were excommunicated, for instance, for eating any manner of fat from oxen, sheep, or goats, or for eating the blood of birds or beasts. The death penalty was imposed for murder, adultery, and various sexual perversions; it was decreed for blasphemy, witchcraft, and sacrificing to false gods; even those who either cursed or smote father or mother, and the sons of Aaron who drank wine or strong drink before entering the tabernacle of the congregation, were to be put to death. The whole tone and tenor of the Mosaic system may be summed up in the decree: "Thou shalt give life for life, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe." (Ex. 21:23-25.) An illustration of the severity with which the divine decrees were applied anciently is seen in the slaying of Nadab and Abihu by the Lord. "There went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them," the account says, because they offered "strange fire" upon the altar; that is, these sons of Aaron performed a sacrificial ordinance of their own devising. (Lev. 10:1-2.) [^3]

The contrast between the benevolent influence exerted by Christianity and the severe near-compulsion of the law of Moses is nowhere better illustrated than in the sayings of Jesus. Coming as he did to lift Israel from the level of the law to the high standard of the gospel, it was our Lord's wont to say: "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time," such and such, "But I say unto you," this and this. In this way he extended the ancient definition of adultery to include looking upon a woman in lust; he condemned the ancient practice of giving "a writing of divorcement," and set forth a marital standard that is higher than the one even now required in the Church, a standard that labels as adultery and fornication the marrying of certain divorced persons. He revoked the power to swear oaths and in place of the ancient law, "An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth," he counseled, "That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." And the Mosaic standard, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy" became "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." (Matt. 5.)

Our conclusion, then, is: 1. That the law of Moses is superior to every law except the gospel; 2. That those who lived its terms and conditions thereby charted a course leading to eternal life; 3. That it prepares men for the fulness of revealed truth; and 4. That the gospel itself is far greater than the ancient law of Moses.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Great King is the Lord - the Lord Jehovah, the Lord Jesus.
[^2] These word usages, which so closely parallel divine terminology where Zion itself is concerned, are set forth in the article on Jerusalem in The New Bible Dictionary, p. 615.
[^3] The valley of Hinnom was the scene of some of the most horrifying and abominable practices ever to defile Israel. It was here that Solomon built places for the worship of Molech; it was here that infant sacrifices were sponsored by those wicked kings, Ahaz and Manasseh; it was here that Josiah spread human bones and other corruptions; it was here (in Jesus' day) that garbage, dead animals and human corpses were burned. This valley was both the cesspool of Jerusalem and the place where continuing fires burned the refuse of the city, giving rise to the use of the term Ge Hinnom or Gehenna, or land of Hinnom, as the symbol for the eternal fires of hell.
