Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 6

Jerusalem—The Holy City

Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, . . . the city of the great King. God is known in her palaces. . . . Jerusalem . . . the city of the great King. (Ps. 48:2-3; Matt. 5:35.) [^1]

Enoch's Zion—The City of Holiness

Holy cities, sacred sites, dwelling places set apart—symbols of celestial rest—such are the capital cities of the saints in all ages. Always the Lord has a Zion, a Jerusalem, a City of Holiness, a place from which his word and his law can go forth; a place to which all men can look to receive guidance from on high; a place where apostles and prophets give counsel to their fellowmen; a place where living oracles commune with the Infinite and speak forth his mind and announce his will. In every age the Lord gathers his people; in every age the saints come together to worship the Father in the name of the Son; in every age there is a capital city, a city of refuge, a City of Holiness, a Zion of God—a sacred site from which he can send forth his word and govern his people. Such is Jerusalem—Old Jerusalem, New Jerusalem, Jerusalem of the ages.

Up to now, through all of earth's long years, there has been one time, one time only, when the Lord's system of capital cities has worked perfectly. Such was in the day of Enoch, the seventh from Adam. In that holy day, so faithful were the saints that the Lord, the Great Jehovah, "came and dwelt with his people," even as he will in the millennial era that is to be. In that holy day, the saints "dwelt in righteousness," even as they shall when the Lord comes again to dwell among mortals. "And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there were no poor among them. And Enoch . . . built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even Zion. . . . And Enoch and all his people walked with God, and he dwelt in the midst of Zion; and it came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, ZION IS FLED." (Moses 7:16-21, 69.)

Zion is taken up into heaven! And "this is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART," and the pure in heart shall see God. (D&C 97:16-21.) The Lord's people—and it is the people who were named Zion—went where he was; the inhabitants of the City of Holiness ascended up on high; their purity and perfection prepared them for the divine presence.

Thereafter, from the time when the people whose name was Zion were translated until the day of the great deluge, the converted saints had no earthly city to which they could gather. And so, as the divine record recites, for "generation upon generation" the faithful saints were translated and taken up into heaven to associate with others of like spiritual caliber in that Zion which God had taken into his own bosom. "The Holy Ghost fell on many," the account says, "and they were caught up by the powers of heaven into Zion." (Moses 7:24-27.)

Righteous men, after the flood—knowing what had happened to their faithful counterparts before the flood; knowing that those who held the holy priesthood had "power, by faith, . . . to stand in the presence of God"; knowing that if God had gathered some into a translated realm, he might be prevailed upon to gather others also—"men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven." (JST Gen. 14:25-32.)

Melchizedek Creates His Zion—Ancient Jerusalem

Righteous men, after the flood, not only sought an inheritance in Enoch's Zion, but also began the process of building their own City of Holiness on earth; and this brings us to the first scriptural mention of Salem, of Jeru-Salem, of Jerusalem. In reciting what Enoch and his people had gained through faith and by the power of the priesthood, the scripture says: "And now, Melchizedek was a priest of this order; therefore he obtained peace in Salem, and was called the Prince of peace. And his people wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, separating it from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter days, or the end of the world. . . . And this Melchizedek, having thus established righteousness, was called the king of heaven by his people, or, in other words, the King of peace." (JST Gen. 14:33-36.)

Abraham, who received his priesthood from Melchizedek, was one of those who sought for the heavenly city. "He looked for a city," Paul says, "which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God." Isaac and Jacob, heirs of the promises made to Abraham, also sought an inheritance in the heavenly city. But it was not their privilege so to obtain.

Theirs was a different mortal mission; and though they declared "plainly" that they sought such a reward, yet they knew it was not to be, and "confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth." Their reward was postponed to a future day, for God "hath prepared for them a city," as he has for all those who serve him with like faith and zeal. (Heb. 11:8-16.)

In the true and full sense of the word Zion and Jerusalem are probably synonymous terms. Enoch built Zion, a City of Holiness, and Melchizedek, reigning as king and ministering as priest of the Most High God, sought to make Jerusalem, his capital city, into another Zion. As we have seen, Melchizedek himself was called by his people the Prince of peace, the King of peace, and the King of heaven, for Jerusalem had become a heaven to them. And interestingly, according to the linguistic scholars and specialists, Salem means peace, and Jerusalem means city of peace, or sacred Salem, and Isaiah's designation of Jerusalem as the holy city is said to mean, literally translated, the city of holiness. [^2]

That Jerusalem came nearer in Melchizedek's day to becoming in truth and in fact a Zion of God than it has in any of its long and tumultuous history is perfectly clear. Indeed, after Melchizedek's day we lose track of what transpired in and relative to this sacred spot, which had started out to be an abode for the righteous, and we know little more of its history until Israelite times. Joshua found the city in the hands of the Jebusites, and he and others who followed made war upon its inhabitants, but it was not until David's day that it became an Israelite city. David made it his capital; Solomon built the temple in it; the ark of God rested there; the Shekinah rested in the Holy of Holies; the whole system of Levitical sacrifices centered in its hallowed areas; and it was called Zion, or Mount Zion. Isaiah called it the Holy City, and the Psalmist proclaimed: "In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel. In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion." (Ps. 76:1-2.) Jerusalem had become and ever thereafter would remain the center of Israelite and Jewish worship. Truly, as it is written: "The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. . . . And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish her. The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there." (Ps. 87.)

The Jewish Jerusalem of Jesus' Day

Out of all this there arose a general concept and feeling, both in ancient Israel and in Jewish Israel, that the place of worship was almost as important as the very God to whom reverential adoration was given. The chosen people came to feel that the place where the great altar was built, the land whereon the temple stood, and the city wherein these sacred structures were found were as essential to true worship as the very manner and form in which they paid their devotions to the Most High. Jacob's descendants were almost as concerned about where they worshipped as with who received their devotions and how they were extended. Jehovah was the God of Jerusalem; Jerusalem, with its temple, was the focal point of all their religious devotions; it was Jehovah himself who had so decreed; and whenever Israel, either those of old or the Jews of Jesus' day, were in line of their duty, they turned to their capital city for spiritual refreshment.

It was no idle expression when, near Sychar at Jacob's Well, the woman of Samaria, recognizing Jesus as the Jew that he was, said: "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship." Nor was the reply of the Incarnate Jehovah—who once centered the worship of his people in the Holy City, but who would soon fulfill his ancient law and command all men to worship the Father in spirit and in truth in all places—nor was his reply anything short of an endorsement of the existing practice and a prophetic pronouncement as to the future, when he said: "Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father." (John 4:5-25.)

This city where the Jews worshipped in the day of Jesus, and from which holy place true worship was soon to go forth to all cities in all lands, is not an unknown quantity. We know what life was like within its precincts. Our knowledge comes from reliable sources, both secular and profane. Written accounts and archeological unearthings are numerous and authentic. We may not be able to paint as complete and detailed a picture as we can of, say, Korea's Seoul, or Thailand's Bangkok, or Indonesia's Djakarta—all cities that are far removed and socially distinct from our western civilization—but we have no trouble piecing enough together to envision with a certainty that borders on complete knowledge the way people lived in that day, both in Jerusalem and in all Palestine.

We know their way of worship and system of religious rites; their governmental structure and the names and duties of their legislative, executive, and judicial officers; their social structure, including their customs, practices, mores, legends, and folklore. We know their business practices, their commercial customs, their monetary system, the trades they plied, the crops they grew. We know the kind of houses they lived in, the sources of their water, the way they disposed of their garbage and refuse, and the degree of sanitation that prevailed among them. We know about their architectural abilities, their palaces and public buildings, the walls that surrounded their cities, and the gates by which they came and went. We know enough about the roads they built so that we can imagine ourselves traveling on them; enough about their beasts of burden and modes of transportation so that we could duplicate them; enough about their weapons and system of warfare to depict them in paintings and replay them in dramas. We know the diseases with which they were afflicted, the state of the state of their healing arts, their quarantine regulations, the general status of their health, and how they buried their dead. We know what foods they ate, what beverages they drank, how they cooked, the clothes they wore, and the jewelry with which they adorned themselves. We know the language they spoke, the degree of their literary craftsmanship, the educational standards of all classics, and the effect upon them of Greek and Roman and other Gentile cultures. These and a host of related matters all were preserved in the records of the past and have been set forth for us by competent and able historians. They will be considered by us as occasions require.

Blessed Canaan, sacred spot, land of the ancient saints, has as its capital city Jerusalem, the city of Jewish delight; the Holy Land is crowned with the Holy City. Stretched out as a garden of choice land, this Canaan of old, this Palestine of the Hebrews, provided the trade routes between the great nations of antiquity. Toward the south and west lay Egypt and the fertile valley of the Nile; to the north and east lay the rich stretches of Mesopotamia and the Tigris and Euphrates rivers—the Nile pouring its life-giving fluids into the Mediterranean Sea, and the great rivers of Mesopotamia joining hands to feed the Persian Gulf. Palestine was anchored, as it were, to all the wealth of Egypt and her Pharaohs, on the one hand, and to the kingdoms that held sway, from time to time, in Syria, Assyria, and Babylonia, on the other hand. It was to be expected—nay, it was inevitable, greed and conquest being what they are—that the armies of these lands and kingdoms would invade the places where Moses had placed the house of Jacob.

Palestine was truly a land flowing with milk and honey. It had been such in the days of Abraham and Melchizedek; its wealth had been tapped by the Amorites and Hittites and assorted Gentile tribes in the pre-Israelite days; and it was still to be found in abundance when Joshua and Caleb and their fellow spies crossed over Jordan to survey the land. During all of Israel's long history, ten thousand shepherds led their sheep beside still waters in fruitful valleys, while their cattle browsed and fattened on a thousand hills. And it was through these same valleys and over these same hills that the armies of Assyria, of Babylon, and of Egypt ravaged and pillaged from generation to generation as envious Gentiles coveted the wealth and crops of Jehovah's people.

It was a land sanctified by a sacrificial struggle on Mount Moriah; by a bush that burned and was not consumed; by a voice that commanded, "Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground" (Ex. 3:5); by the faith of a widow in Zarapath whose son rose from the dead because she hearkened to the words of a Tishbite prophet. It was a land choice and favored, a promised land, a land selected and saved as a habitation for Israel. And Jerusalem was its crowning jewel.

Jerusalem itself is a mountain city, a city founded amid and upon the Judean hills, a city built upon the mountains. When, in due course, the true saints build the promised temple there, then the scripture will be fulfilled that says that Judah shall "flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house." (D&C 133:13.) It was founded upon land awarded by lot to Benjamin, although adjacent Bethlehem was part of the inheritance of Judah.

Deep ravines on three sides made it easy to defend in olden times. On the east is the valley of Kidron, or valley of Jehoshaphat. Over the brook Kidron are the Garden of Gethsemane, the Mount of Olives, and the road to Bethany and Jericho. There also was the ancient village of Siloam. On the south is the valley of Hinnom, one of the most evil spots in a land that should have been holy. [^3] Another ravine, the Tyropoeon Valley, is on the west. Mount Zion is probably the hill just south of the southwest corner of the city wall. [^4] And the place of greatest interest within those sacred walls was the Temple of Herod.

In the days of Jesus, the walled portion of the city encompassed some three hundred acres of houses and streets and markets and shops. Perhaps 200,000 to 250,000 Palestinians dwelt within its walls and immediate environs. Tacitus speaks of a population of 600,000; at the time of the Passover this number rose to between 2,000,000 and 3,000,000. Ecclesiastically speaking, persons living outside the walls were counted as inhabitants of the city, and at Passover time great numbers of Jews camped outside the city proper, but within the limits of a Sabbath day's journey. Josephus says that 1,100,000 men perished in Jerusalem when Titus and the legions from Rome wrought vengeance upon the nation that crucified their King. But whatever the actual number of its inhabitants, Jerusalem of the Jews, in Jesus' day, was truly a city of greatness and magnificence.

Among its citizens were artisans of every kind. In its shops and at its bazaars could be purchased goods from every nation. Its palaces, academies, and synagogues were places of renown, and the learned and mighty of all nations could tread its streets with the same satisfaction found in Rome or any of the great metropolises of the day. But in addition to all that was had elsewhere, Jerusalem was the center of such true religion and heaven-approved worship as was then found on earth.

Contrasting its then state with that which prevailed a millennium before, when David and Solomon had first made it an Israelite capital, Edersheim says: "If the dust of ten centuries could have been wiped from the eyelids of those sleepers, and one of them who thronged Jerusalem in the highday of its glory, during the reign of King Solomon, had returned to its streets, he would scarcely have recognized the once familiar city. Then, as now, a Jewish king reigned, who bore undivided rule over the whole land; then, as now, the city was filled with riches and adorned with palaces and architectural monument; then, as now, Jerusalem was crowded with strangers from all lands. Solomon and Herod were each the last Jewish king over the Land of Promise; Solomon and Herod, each, built the Temple. But with the son of David began, and with the Idumean ended, 'the kingdom'; or rather, having fulfilled its mission, it gave place to the spiritual world-kingdom of 'David's greater Son.' The sceptre departed from Judah to where the nations were to gather under its sway. And the Temple which Solomon built was the first. In it the Shekhinah dwelt visibly. The Temple which Herod reared was the last. The ruins of its burning, which the torch of the Romans had kindled, were never to be restored. Herod was not the antitype, he was the Barabbas, of David's Royal Son." (Edersheim 1:111.)

However, our chief concerns are not in the social, governmental, and cultural conditions of Jewish life in the meridian of time, important as these are to an understanding of the Life we are to consider. It is not the palaces and markets, not the kings and soldiers, not the schools and pedagogy that will set the stage for Messiah's ministry. His work will deal with the things of the Spirit. Our chief interest, then, is in the spiritual state of the people, their religious life, their understanding of the Messianic message delivered to them by the ancient prophets, and—above all!—their personal spiritual stature and their degree to which they kept the commandments and were in a condition to receive the guidance of the Holy Spirit.

That they were dull of hearing and slow to perceive the truth was proclaimed by the Lord Jesus as he spoke in irony and in sorrow of the city where he came to reign as King but was rejected by his own. "It cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem," he said. "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate." (Luke 13:31-35.)

And again: "He beheld the city, and wept over it, Saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another: because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation." (Luke 19:41-45.)

The depths to which Jerusalem had sunk are seen in the words of the Beloved John, who, identifying it as "the great city, . . . where also our Lord was crucified," said that "spiritually [it] is called Sodom and Egypt." (Rev. 11:8.)

The Jerusalem of the Future

"Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles," Jesus said, "until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (Luke 21:24.) [^5] Jerusalem—glorious and perfect in the days of Abraham and Melchizedek; Jerusalem—like Enoch's Zion for a time and a season some four thousand years ago; Jerusalem—then lost to our sight for a millennium, and until David took it from the Jebusites; Jerusalem—in Israelite hands for another millennium; Jerusalem—where kings reigned and prophets preached for a thousand Israelite years; Jerusalem—where our Lord ministered, was rejected by his own, and found death upon the cross; Jerusalem—a city of saints and a city of devils: this Jerusalem, Jesus says, "shall be trodden down of the Gentiles!"

And so for two millenniums the Gentiles have held sway in Jehovah's Jerusalem. Completely destroyed by Titus in A.D. 70, it was restored by Hadrian in A.D. 135 and became a Roman colony. He erected a temple to Jupiter Capitolinus on the very site where once the temple to Jehovah had stood. Two centuries later, in 336, wicked Constantine, an evil emperor who made apostasy and false worship reputable, erected a so-called Christian church on the supposed site of the holy sepulchre. Thereafter the sacred soil passed from the hands of apostate Christians into the hands of apostate pagans; it was retaken by the Crusaders in 1099, retaken by "nonbelievers" in 1187, and passed back and forth among various groups of them until 1917, when it was taken by British troops under General Allenby. The modern walls were built in 1542; on the site of Solomon's Temple now stands the Muslim temple known as the Dome of the Rock. Christians, Mohammedans, and Jews now dwell together under a tenuous and oft-interrupted peace, and the Holy City continues to be trodden down of the Gentiles. And, be it noted, even Jews are Gentiles when they believe not the truth.

But it shall not ever be thus. Darkness flees before light. A new day is dawning. Already, in the language of Isaiah of old, the cry is going forth: "Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city." What does it mean for Zion to put on her strength, and to what people was Isaiah making reference? Joseph Smith answers: "He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost." And when that day comes, again in Isaiah's language, "there shall no more come into [Jerusalem] the uncircumcised and the unclean," for it will be a day of righteousness, a day when men shall be cleansed in the waters of baptism.

Addressing himself further to the city he loved, Isaiah says: "Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion." Question: "What are we to understand by Zion loosing herself from the bands of her neck?" The Prophet's answer: "We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. . . . The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles."

As to what shall transpire relative to Israel and Jerusalem in the promised day of restoration, Isaiah says in the Lord's name: "My people shall know my name; therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I." Jehovah shall be known again. Revelation shall commence anew. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth! Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion. Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem: for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem." (Isa. 52:1-10; D&C 113:7-10.)

In the great day of restoration—a day that has commenced, but in which many things yet remain to be restored—there will finally be two world capitals, both called Zion, both called Jerusalem. One shall be the seat of government, the other the spiritual capital of the world, for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:1-5.) That is to say, Jerusalem of old shall be restored, built up anew in glory and beauty, according to the promises, and also, another Jerusalem, a New Jerusalem, shall be established. Moroni tells us "of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven," and of "the holy sanctuary of the Lord." He says that Ether wrote both of this New Jerusalem, which should be upon the American continent, and of the restoration of the Jerusalem in the Old World, the one whence Lehi came. "And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth," the account says; "and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new. And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb. . . . And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old; and the inhabitants thereof, blessed are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham." (Ether 13:1-12; 3 Ne. 20:22; 21:23-24.)

That the New Jerusalem, the latter-day Zion, the Zion to which Enoch and his city shall return, shall be in Jackson County, Missouri, has been set forth plainly in latter-day revelation. (D&C 84:1-4.) Of this millennial Zion, the New Testament apostle says: "And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away." (Rev. 21:1-4.)

To complete our vision of the concept of holy cities, as the New Testament account records, there will also be a day a celestial day, when this earth becomes a heaven in the full, complete and eternal sense, when the celestial New Jerusalem shall be with men. It was John, also, who saw this "holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, Having the glory of God." This is the city having twelve gates and twelve foundations, "and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb." This is the city with streets of pure gold, "as it were transparent glass." Of it John says: "And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it. And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there shall be no night there. And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's book of life." (Rev. 21:10-27.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] When the Lord comes-be it in time's meridian, at his Second Coming, or whensoever-he always comes to his temple, for temples are his dwelling places on earth. Accordingly, Malachi's Messianic utterance, though part of a recitation of what is to be in latter days, when only those who are prepared shall "abide the day of his coming," has application also, in principle, to his mortal ministry. The Lord Jehovah came to his temple in Jerusalem; came to cleanse and purify it, at least to the extent of casting out the moneychangers and evil men who were making merchandise therein; even as he shall come to cleanse the earth and destroy the wicked when he comes again to his temple to usher in the millennial era.
[^2] The episode here recited is, of course, the calling of the Seventy, and their responsibility, then as now "was to act in the name of the Lord," under proper direction, "building up the church and regulating all the affairs of the same." (D&C 107:34.)
[^3] There was no baptism for the dead until after the visit of the slain Messiah to the spirits in prison and his proclamation of liberty to the captives there imprisoned. Baptism for the living, as is becoming increasingly clear even in apostate Christendom, has prevailed among mortals in all ages, including those which antedated the ministry of John the Baptist.
[^4] There will also be, of course, a latter-day temple in the New Jerusalem on the American continent. (D&C 84:1-5.)
[^5] The times of the Gentiles is that time or era, that expanse of time or years, during which the gospel goes to the Gentiles on a preferential basis. In Jesus' day the gospel was offered first to his Jewish kinsmen; only later was it preached in Gentile ears. In our day it has been restored to the Gentiles, meaning to the non-Jewish people - people, however, who are of the house of Israel. It is now being taught on a preferential basis to Gentiles or non-Jewish people, for, as Paul said, "blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in." (Rom. 11:25.) The restoration of the gospel foreshadows the end of the Gentile era and the ushering in of the Jewish era. Our revelations say that after the remnant of Jerusalem's Jews have been scattered in all nations, an event that has long since occurred, "they shall be gathered again." They are, however, to remain in their scattered state "until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. . . . And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel. But they [the generality of the scattered Jews] receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men. And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (D&C 45:24-29.) That the Jews, a few of them, are now beginning to believe the restored gospel and are returning to their true Messiah is well known. The times of the Gentiles shall soon be fulfilled, and the times of the Jews once again shall come into being.
