Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 7

Jehovah's Holy Houses

The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple. (Mal. 3:1.) [^1]

The Law of Temple Worship

What is a temple? It is a house of the Lord; a house for Deity that is built on earth; a house prepared by the saints as a dwelling place for the Most High, in the most literal sense of the word; a house where a personal God personally comes. It is a holy sanctuary, set apart from the world, wherein the saints of God prepare to meet their Lord; where the pure in heart shall see God, according to the promises; where those teachings are given and those ordinances performed which prepare the saints for that eternal life which consists of dwelling with the Father and being like him and his Son. The teachings and ordinances here involved embrace the mysteries of the kingdom and are not now and never have been heralded to the world, nor can they be understood except by those who worship the Father in spirit and in truth, and who have attained that spiritual stature which enables men to know God and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent.

When the Lord comes from heaven to the earth, as he does more frequently than is supposed, where does he make his visitations? Those whom he visits know the answer; he comes to one of his houses. Whenever the Great Jehovah visits his people, he comes, suddenly as it were, to his temple. If he has occasion to come when he has no house on earth, his visit is made on a mountain, in a grove, in a wilderness area, or at some location apart from the tumults and contentions of carnal men; and in that event the place of his appearance becomes a temporary temple, a site used by him in place of the house his people would normally have prepared.

Why have temples? They are built by the tithing and sacrifice of the Lord's people; they are dedicated and given to him; they become his earthly houses; in them the mysteries of the kingdom are revealed; in them the pure in heart see God; in them men are sealed up unto eternal life—all to the end that man may become as his Maker, and live and reign forever in the heavenly Jerusalem, as part of the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn, where God and Christ are the judge of all. Of temples the Lord says: "Therein are the keys of the holy priesthood ordained, that you may receive honor and glory." In them, he says, his saints shall receive washings, anointings, baptisms, revelations, oracles, conversations, statutes, judgments, endowments, and sealings. In them are held solemn assemblies. In them the fulness of the priesthood is received and the patriarchal order conferred upon men. In them the family unit is made eternal. Because of them life eternal is available. With temples men can be exalted; without them there is no exaltation. (D&C 124:28-40; 131:1-4; 132:1-33.)

When and where have there been temples on earth? We know the answer to this question in principle, but we do not know the specific times and places. Our revelation on temples tells us that the blessings conferred through their use are essential to the "foundation of Zion," that is, to the setting up of congregations of saints who shall be pure in heart; that through their use, "glory, honor, and endowment" shall be conferred upon all the inhabitants Zion; and that these blessings are to come only "by the ordinance of my holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name." (D&C 124:39. Italics added.) That is to say, whenever the Lord has had a people on earth from the days of Adam to the present moment, he has always commanded them to build temples so that they could be taught how to gain eternal life, and so that all of the ordinances of salvation and exaltation could be performed for and on their behalf.

Temples constructed before the flood of Noah were obviously destroyed in that great deluge; those built by the Jaredites and Nephites are buried in the jungles and lost in the wildernesses of the Americas; apostate versions of true temples are being uncovered by archaeologists in many places, including perhaps the pyramids of Egypt and the Americas; but such slivers of truth about ancient temples as the world now has are found in the accounts relative to Israel's tabernacle and the subsequent houses of the Lord built in Jerusalem. It is of them we shall now speak more particularly.

Temples in Ancient Israel

One of the first things Israel did when freed from Egyptian bondage was to set up a tent or tabernacle as a house or place where Moses and Aaron and the elders of the people could commune with Jehovah. This tabernacle—in reality a portable temple—became more elaborate as rapidly as the seed of Jacob gained the means and had the time to perfect its construction. Detailed directions came to Moses by revelation as to the materials to be used, the ornamentation for its curtains and parts, and the manner and form of worship attending its use.

The tabernacle complex consisted of a large rectangular court in the western part of which stood a small building or tabernacle. In the eastern part of the court were an altar for the offering of sacrifices and a laver for priestly washings. All Israel had access to the court wherein these burnt offerings were made. The tabernacle proper was divided into two parts, the holy place and the most holy place, or Holy of Holies; and the Holy of Holies was separated from the holy place by the veil of the temple. A curtain or screen also hung at the entrance to the holy place. The tabernacle proper was made of delicate tapestries decorated with cherubim and spread on wooden frames covered with gold. In the holy place there was the altar of incense, the golden candlestick, and the table of shewbread. In the Holy of Holies was placed the ark of the covenant with its mercy seat and with the two golden-winged cherubim at the sides.

All that was part of, or placed in, or performed in the tabernacle was symbolical of Christ and his atoning sacrifice. The sacrifices on the great altar in the court were performed in similitude of the coming sacrifice of the Lamb of God, and each detailed step in their performance bore record in one way or another of something concerning the infinite sacrifice of Israel's Promised Messiah. Light from the seven candles on the golden candlestick shone forth as a reminder of him who is the Light of the world; clouds of odors rising from the altar of incense were as the prayers of the saints before the throne of God ("golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the saints," John says in Rev. 5:8); and the shewbread, the bread on display, the bread of the Presence, bore record that there in the temple was found the Presence of God. These loaves of bread, twelve in number, one for each of the tribes of Israel, spread out on "the table of the bread of the Presence," were both an acknowledgment that Jehovah gave life and nourishment to Israel and a witness that Israel was grateful for the goodness of their God to them.

But it was in the Holy of Holies that the most perfect symbolism was found. There was placed the ark of the covenant, a chest of acacia wood in which rested the stone tablets on which were written the Ten Commandments. The presence of these sacred stones, the commandments having been written by the finger of God, was a constant reminder to Israel of their covenant to worship and serve him who had delivered them from bondage, and that they should have no God before him. On top of the ark rested the mercy seat, a cover of pure gold, symbolizing to the mind that because of the atonement yet to be wrought, repentant souls would find mercy before the eternal throne. The mercy seat, serving as it were as the throne of God, was a symbol of his forgiveness and of his goodness and grace in providing mercy through his atonement. Once each year on the Day of Atonement, the high priest entered the Holy of Holies, thus testifying anew to all the people that mercy might be theirs through the great propitiatory sacrifice that was to be. And the two cherubim—overshadowing the mercy seat with their wings—bore record that the ark itself was the very throne of God set up among his people and that Jehovah did in fact dwell in his house and was among them.

Once the tabernacle was prepared according to the divine plan; once this sacred sanctuary was set up as a house of the Lord; once a holy temple was again available in Israel—then Jehovah honored his word and used the sacred building and the holy place and the Holy of Holies as his own earthly house. To this place he came down to commune with Moses and give commandments to his people. When Moses, for instance, complained, saying, "I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me," the Lord replied: "Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee. And I will come down and talk with thee there; and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone." As was his wont, Moses hearkened to the voice of his Lord. He "went out, and told the people the words of the Lord, and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle. And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease." (Num. 11.) [^2]

Truly, in that day, the Shekinah rested in the Holy of Holies, and God was with his people.

As far as we know, all temples in Israel from Moses to Solomon were of the portable-tabernacle type. But after David had secured and established the temporal kingdom, with all the power and prestige of an oriental court, he collected the materials so that his son Solomon could build a house to Jehovah. That house—Solomon's Temple—patterned after the tabernacle of the congregation and used for the same purposes, was one of the earth's then most magnificent and costly buildings. The courtyard contained the sacrificial altar, thirty feet square and fifteen feet high, and the molten sea, a bronze basin, fifteen feet in diameter and seven and a half feet in height, resting on the backs of twelve oxen, one for each tribe, as is the case also in all modern temples. That this sea was a baptismal font for the living is perfectly clear, even as its modern counterparts are fonts or seas wherein baptisms are performed for the dead. [^3] The holy place and the Holy of Holies contained the same items that once were found in the same sacred places in the tabernacle, except that Solomon's Temple had ten golden candlesticks rather than the one in the Temple of Moses. The Urim and Thummim was kept in the Holy of Holies in Solomon's Temple, which may also have been the case in the older and less ornate building after which it was patterned. And, of course, the divine presence, the Shekinah, yet rested where it had of old, insomuch that "fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the Lord filled the house," and the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream. (2 Chron. 7.)

Solomon's Temple was destroyed by the Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar, shortly after Lehi left Jerusalem. It was rebuilt some seventy years later by Zerubbabel and was dedicated in 516 B.C. However, there never again was that same rich and plenteous outpouring of Divine grace that once had set Israel apart from all peoples. Zerubbabel's Temple did not contain the ark of the covenant and the tablets of the Decalogue; the mercy seat was no more; and the cherubim no longer bore visible testimony that the throne of God was in the midst of his people. All these things had been lost; and the Urim and Thummim, the ultimate symbol of divine grace—for by it revelations came—had been taken away. The spirit of prophecy the fire from heaven, the cloud surrounding the Divine Presence were seldom seen in those and later days.

Ordinances of the House of the Lord

We do not have a complete knowledge of what ordinances were performed in ancient temples, and if we did it would not be our privilege to delineate the doings of our brethren of old with any degree of particularity. Nor, for that matter, can we set forth the things that transpire in modern temples. Ordinances performed in the Lord's sanctuaries, though not secret, are of such a sacred nature as to be reserved for the eyes and ears and hearts of those only whose attained spiritual maturity prepares them to receive the mysteries of the kingdom. Temple ordinances, whether ancient or modern, are not published to the world; their sacred nature witnesses that they should not be bandied about by brutish persons; that which is spiritual and sacred must not be held up to mockery, or be made the object of raillery by carnal men.

We can, however, speak in general terms of what is done in temples; we can name the ordinances and tell their purpose and intent; and we can quote from the scriptures such passages as speak in guarded and reserved terms of those things which are reserved for the faithful only. And based on what has been revealed and is preserved to us and on what we know about the purpose and use of latter-day temples, we can reach some reasonable conclusions as to what was involved in their ancient usage.

We know that Mosaic temples were used for the offering of sacrifices and various related performances of the law of carnal commandments. It is clear that the molten sea was for baptisms and that the laver was for ritualistic washings. In commanding his saints of latter days to build him a house, the Lord asked: "How shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which ye have built to my name?" Then he said: "For, for this cause [that Israel's washings might be acceptable] I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and [for the same reason] to build a house in the land of promise." Then the Lord speaks of anointings, endowments, and other temple ordinances—all in a context that shows that what we now have is patterned after the rites and ceremonies of our ancestors. (D&C 124:37-41.)

Isaiah's call to ancient Israel—"Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; Learn to do well"—was an invitation to partake of and implement the cleansing ordinances of the temple. (Isa. 1:16-17.) The Lord's promise to gathered Israel in the latter days—"Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you"—has reference to the same things as do the words of revelation that say: "Cleanse your hands and your feet before me, that I may make you clean; That I may testify unto your Father, and your God, and my God, that you are clean from the blood of this wicked generation." (Ezek. 36:25; D&C 88:74-75.)

Joseph Smith tells us that "all things" pertaining to our dispensation "should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding dispensations," and that the Lord "set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever." He says the same ordinances are revealed anew in one dispensation after another. (Teachings, p. 168.) We know that celestial marriage is the crowning ordinance of the house of the Lord today and assume it must have been so also in days gone by. For instance, "David's wives and concubines were given unto him of me, by the hand of Nathan, my servant, and others of the prophets who had the keys of this power," the Lord says. (D&C 132:39.) This same thing would have been true relative to the marriage discipline among all the faithful of Israel. We cannot, therefore, escape the conclusion that then, as now, temples were the places where those higher ordinances were performed which lead to glory and honor everlasting.

Herod's Temple

This is the temple Jesus knew. It is the one in which Gabriel and Zacharias conversed relative to him who should prepare the way before the Lord. It is the one in which Jesus was taken as an infant. Here at the age of twelve he confounded the wise men. From it he drove the moneychangers, and in its courts his voice was raised day after day as he acclaimed in word and by deed his own divine Sonship. It was of this house that he spoke when he said that not one stone should be left upon another. It was an integral part of his life and played a major role in his death. False witnesses swore he had said he would destroy the temple and raise it again in three days. It was the seat of the Great Sanhedrin that condemned him to death, and its veil, separating the holy place from the Holy of Holies, was the one rent from top to bottom when he voluntarily gave up the ghost and went to preach to the spirits in prison. And to it, after his demise, Peter and John resorted when they commanded the man, lame from his mother's womb, to rise up and walk; and when he found he could do so, he leaped for joy, praising God.

This temple—the last divinely approved sanctuary of the Jewish dispensation—was refurbished by Herod the Great commencing in 20 B.C. It had been built in the days of Ezra, and was defiled and cleansed again in the days of the Maccabees, and was raised to new heights of grandeur. Its construction was still going forward when Jesus blessed its courts with his presence, and it was not completed in every respect until A.D. 64, just six years before its destruction. Built on a larger and grander scale than anything of the past, as far as the building itself was concerned, it yet never gained a fraction of the spiritual preeminence of its predecessors. The Shekinah—the visible manifestation of the presence of the Lord—never filled its Holy of Holies and the divine cloud never overshadowed its courts. Angels did minister before its altars, visions were seen by some of its priests and the spirit of prophecy rested upon some who worshipped within its portals. But the great divine outpouring of grace and goodness and miracles that so filled the houses of Moses and Solomon, and to a lesser extent that of Zerubbabel, were absent. Jesus himself foretold its destruction, and his words were made a living reality by the flames and venom of Rome in A.D. 70—thus ending Jewish sacrifices and their form of temple worship forever.

Herod's Temple [^4]—built by as evil and corrupt a tyrant as ever wore a crown—was an enlargement and a perfection of those houses of the Lord after which it was patterned. Solomon's Temple, though magnificent and costly, was small in comparison; and the Temple of Zerubbabel, larger but less elaborate than that of Solomon, was far from the magnificent masterpiece built by the Jewish Idumean who bore the title "king of the Jews." In its construction, which had gone on for forty-six years by the time of Jesus' ministry, a thousand vehicles transported the stone, a thousand priests supervised the work, and ten thousand skilled laborers wrought wonders with the costly materials. Built of marble and gold, the house of worship itself probably surpassed any of the architectural marvels of that or any day. Certainly Rome and Greece and Egypt had nothing to compare with it. And a Jewish proverb kept alive their tradition: "He that has not seen the Temple of Herod, has never known what beauty is."

To all of this there attaches a certain fitness of things as well as a touch of irony. This was the temple where the Son of God ministered—and what is more fitting than for temple building to reach its pinnacle in the day when his voice was heard within its walls? But this was also a temple built by an evil ruler—a Jew, yes, but an Idumean Jew, one who was half Idumean and half Samaritan, one whose lineage was impure, one who was apparently a descendant of Edom who is Esau—whose interest was not to serve Jehovah and see true rites performed but to court popularity with the people and to satisfy an almost lustful desire to build monuments of splendor and renown. And yet, perhaps, there is even a certain fitness about this, for the very temple that he built in wickedness and that was turned into a den of thieves by those who used it was in its final destruction, when not one stone was left upon another, left to serve as a symbol of the destruction of all the evils of those who crucified their Lord.

Temples, of course, whether made by righteous or evil hands, do not of themselves establish the truth or falsity of the religious systems under which they flourish. The Parthenon—the chief temple of Athena on the Acropolis at Athens, where her gold and ivory statue sat anciently—was also one of the architectural marvels of the ages. But it was the very building of which Paul spoke, having reference to the pagan idol housed therein, when on Mars' Hill he said: "God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; Neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things." (Acts 17:22-31.) Temples as such do not prove the divinity of a system of religion, but without them there is no true order of worship. When built among those who have the priesthood and who enjoy the spirit of revelation, they are in fact the Lord's houses, and when such peoples are true and faithful—and such was not the case among the Jews of Jesus' day—the Divine Presence rests upon and the Person of the Lord is seen within these holy houses.

Herod's Temple was a true temple. It bore the stamp of divine approval, and true ordinances, performed by legal administrators who had been called of God as was Aaron, were performed in its courts, on its altars, and in the Holy of Holies itself. The priests who ministered in this house of the Lord held the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and on occasional instances, as when Gabriel visited Zacharias, they saw within the veil. The problem of worship among the Jews was not the lack of a temple; it was not that they had departed from the true ordinances; it was not that baptism and sacrifices were unknown among them. They had the form and knew the manner in which they should worship. Their problem was one of substance: they had the form of godliness, but they denied the power thereof; they were wading through ritualistic performances whose true meanings they no longer comprehended. That faith, hope, charity, and love which prepares men for the acceptance of revealed truth no longer was found in sufficient measure to enable them to see in Jesus their true Messiah, in spite of the fact that all the ordinances of Herod's Temple bore record of this Man from Galilee.

But the temple itself, the foundations, walls, and courts, the altars, fires, and veils—all these were as they should be. The ark of the covenant with its mercy seat, the stone tablets whereon the Decalogue was written, the Urim and Thummim, and the cherubim overshadowing the throne of God, as it were—all these were absent. But so had they been in the divinely approved Temple of Zerubbabel. If there was a brazen sea, or its equivalent, for baptisms, we do not know it. Probably there was not, as witness the need for the son of Zacharias to baptize in Jordan near Bethabara. Yet the sacrificial ordinances could and did go forward, as properly they should have done; the holy incense still ascended to the Lord; and the holy lights still shone forth from the candles in the holy place.

Drawings of the temple, based on recorded accounts and archeological unearthings, agree in general as to the arrangements of the walls, gates, porches, courts, and altars. However, all independent researchers have come up with differing views on many points, and all are faced with problems they cannot solve. No doubt this is as it should be, and there is no reason to suppose that the things of God—the washings, anointings, endowments, sealings, marriages, "conversations," and the like, which our revelations tell us were performed in the temples of old—shall ever be discovered by the wisdom of men.

According to the best data available, the wall surrounding the temple grounds—and the wall and everything therein, in the full sense of the word, is accounted to be the temple—was 5,085 feet long, just 195 feet short of a full mile. Some stones in these walls measured from 20 to 40 feet in length and weighed more than a hundred tons each. Within the nearly and approximately rectangular space so enclosed, scores and hundreds of thousands of worshippers at a time could easily and conveniently assemble. The number 210,000 is given as the attendance figure for those assembling to worship in the great court at one time. The four principal gates to the temple area were in the west wall, where the Tyropoeon Valley lies. There was also one gate on the north, and another on the east, where the Kidron Valley runs, and there were two on the south.

Just inside the four walls were porches, that is, cloisters or halls. Over this porch area was a flat roof, supported by three rows of Corinthian pillars, each pillar being cut from a single block of marble, and each being 37Â½ feet high. The Royal Porch on the south was supported by 160 pillars arranged in four rows of 40 pillars each. Solomon's Porch was on the east. In all of the porches it was the custom for the people to meet and have gospel discussions, and there may even have been benches or seats in them. In one of them the young Jesus, when but twelve years of age, was found by Joseph and Mary disputing with the doctors and wise men; in all of them our Lord taught his doctrine from time to time; and Solomon's Porch is singled out by name as the place, during the Feast of Dedication, where he affirmed in plainness the doctrine of the divine Sonship, saying, "I and my Father are one." (John 10:30.) It was in these sacred porches—cloisters or halls, if you will—where the early saints met, "continuing daily with one accord in the temple, . . . Praising God," and seeking to learn and do his will. (Acts 2:46-47.) The porches themselves, architecturally speaking, were among the finest features of the temple, and spiritually speaking, were the centers—for the true significance of the sacrificial ordinances was in large part lost—where most of the temple-truth came forth that was taught in Jesus' day.

Within the walls and their porches was the court of the Gentiles, an area, paved with marble, to which all people were welcome, both Jew and Gentile. Proper reverence and decorum were expected of all, and there were signs, in Greek and Latin, warning Gentiles not to enter the temple building itself on pain of death. It was in this public court that oxen, sheep, and doves were sold for sacrificial purposes, and from it our Lord, in anger, drove those who he said had turned his Father's house into a den of thieves.

As to the temple building proper, it contained the court of women with its chests for charitable contributions, in which place Jesus probably made his comments about the widow's mite. It contained the court of Israel and of the priests, in which stood the great altar of unhewn stones, which was 48 feet square at the bottom and 36 feet at the top, and which rose 15 feet in height. In the temple also was the holy place, containing the table of the shewbread, the golden candlestick, and the altar of incense. And finally, with a veil separating it from the holy place, in it stood the Holy of Holies, a sanctuary 30 feet square, a sanctuary now empty except for a large stone—occupying the place where the ark, the mercy seat, and the cherubim should have been—and on which stone the high priest sprinkled the blood each year on the Day of Atonement. In overall dimensions the temple proper, including the steps and a "porch" on each side, was 150 feet square. Its foundations rested on immense blocks of white marble covered with gold each block being, according to Josephus, 67Â½ by 9 feet. The abbreviated recitations here given, though sufficient for our purposes, cannot begin to set forth the grandeur and magnificence and the architectural perfections of this holy house, a house that was truly one of the greatest buildings of any age and that also was truly a house of the Lord.

It is one thing to have a temple building of grandeur and architectural perfection, one built of all the costly materials that the wealth of kingdoms can produce, and quite another to have one in which the Spirit of God dwells in full measure. Though both may be houses of and for the Almighty, one far exceeds the other in eternal worth and glory as Edersheim so aptly says: "To the devout and earnest Jew the second Temple must, 'in comparison of' 'the house in her first glory,' have indeed appeared 'as nothing.' True, in architectural splendour the second, as restored by Herod, far surpassed the first Temple. But, unless faith had recognized in Jesus of Nazareth 'the Desire of all nations,' who should 'fill this house with glory,' it would have been difficult to draw other than sad comparisons. Confessedly, the real elements of Temple-glory no longer existed. The Holy of Holies was quite empty, the ark of the covenant, with the cherubim, the tables of the law, the book of the covenant, Aaron's rod that budded, and the pot of manna, were no longer in the sanctuary. The fire that had descended from heaven upon the altar was extinct. What was far more solemn, the visible presence of God in the Shechinah was wanting. Nor could the will of God be now ascertained through the Urim and Thummim, nor even the high-priest be anointed with the holy oil, its very composition being unknown." (Temple, pp. 61-62.) And thus is it ever when the Lord's people fail to walk faithfully in the light they have received. Though they continue to enjoy all their lessened spiritual capacity permits, that which once was theirs and which might still rest in power upon them is withheld.

For fifteen hundred years—while wandering in the wilderness near the borders of their promised land; while walking in the course set by their inspired judges; while wearing the yoke forged upon them by their despotic kings; while faced with Assyrian overlordship or led captive into Babylon; while freed from bondage and returned to Jerusalem's hills; while faced with the tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes, or suffering through the era of the Maccabees; while plundered by Rome or ruled by Antipater, the Idumean, and all the Herods that sprang from him; and even while the very Son of God ministered among them—for all those long years the temple was the center of Jewish religion.

To the temple every devout person turned for spiritual refreshment, and from it streams of living water flowed. To it the hosts of Israel came to celebrate their great religious feasts. In its courts sacrifices were made, sins were forgiven, and souls were sanctified. Within its porches the truths of salvation were taught; and within its walls the faithful assembled to renew their covenants and offer their vows and sacraments to the Most High. On its altars legal administrators burned the offerings that were slain in similitude of the sacrifice of the Son of God. Behind its veil and in its Holy of Holies, once each year, the high priest made atonement for the sins of the people, and on occasion fire descended from heaven to consume the offerings on its altars, and the Divine Presence, the Shekinah, dwelt visibly between the cherubim. There is no way of overstating or overdramatizing the place and power of the temple in the lives of the Jewish people.

"Wherever a Roman, a Greek, or an Asiatic might wander, he could take his gods with him, or find rites kindred to his own. It was far otherwise with the Jew. He had only one Temple, that in Jerusalem; only one God, Him who had once throned there between the Cherubim, and Who was still King over Zion. That Temple was the only place where a God-appointed, pure priesthood could offer acceptable sacrifices, whether for forgiveness of sin, or for fellowship with God. Here, in the impenetrable gloom of the innermost sanctuary, which the High-Priest alone might enter once a year for most solemn expiation, had stood the Ark, the leader of the people into the Land of Promise, and the footstool on which the Shechinah had rested. From that golden altar rose the sweet cloud of incense, symbol of Israel's accepted prayers; that seven-branched candlestick shed its perpetual light, indicative of the brightness of God's Covenant Presence; on that table, as it were before the face of Jehovah, was laid, week by week, 'the Bread of the Face,' a constant sacrificial meal which Israel offered unto God, and wherewith God in turn fed His chosen priesthood. On the great blood-sprinkled altar of sacrifice smoked the daily and festive burnt-offerings, brought by all Israel, and for all Israel, wherever scattered; while the vast courts of the Temple were thronged not only by native Palestinians, but literally by 'Jews out of every nation under heaven.' Around this Temple gathered the sacred memories of the past; to it clung the yet brighter hopes of the future. The history of Israel and all their prospects were intertwined with their religion; so that it may be said that without their religion they had no history, and without their history no religion. Thus, history, patriotism, religion, and hope alike pointed to Jerusalem and the Temple as the centre of Israel's unity." (Edersheim 1:3-4.)

But all this was soon to end. True sacrificial ordinances could be performed only in similitude of the Eternal Sacrifice which was to be. When the Lamb of God—the Eternal Paschal Lamb—permitted himself to be sacrificed for the sins of the world, the need for sacrificial similitudes pointing to and pre-figuring his atoning sacrifice were no longer needed. And when the need for sacrifices ceased, the need for sacrificial altars and sacrificial sites ceased also. All the temples of all the ages up to then had been constructed as sanctuaries in which burnt offerings should be made. They were the true centers of worship for the ancient saints, but their purposes were now accomplished and their usefulness as sacrificial sanctuaries was at an end. The temples of the future, the houses of the Lord which were yet to be, the holy sanctuaries to which the saints of the future would turn, these would be constructed according to the needs of the new dispensation.

And so it was that Herod's Temple died—not in peace and serenity surrounded by children and loved ones; not with the calmness and assurance that attends the passing of the faithful; not with the hope of a better life that lives in the hearts of the saints—but Herod's Temple died in agony; died of internal corruption and pain; died with a sword at its throat and while ravaged by wild beasts; died with the burning conscience that foresees the sulfurous fires of gehenna; died in terror under the hand of Titus. And it was even denied a decent burial: in its expiring agonies its sanctuaries were looted, its gold and treasures became the booty of war, and, according to the promises, not one stone was left upon another. If a stele of stone had been placed on the once sacred ground—the ground where the struggle for life brought only death—it would have borne some such inscription as this: "Slain in A.D. 70—Along with 1,100,000 of the men of Israel, whose worship center it was—By Roman Gentiles—As befits a heavenly house that had been desecrated and turned into a den of thieves by those in whose custody it had been placed."

Jewish Temples of the Future

The Jewish Temple—named for hated Herod, an Idumean Jew, one of the most dissolute and evil rulers ever to work iniquity among the chosen people—was utterly destroyed, as well it should have been, in that day when Jerusalem began to be trodden down of the Gentiles. But when the fulness of the Gentiles is come in, and the Jews once again believe in the true Messiah and worship the Father in his name, there will once again be a temple in Jerusalem—a temple named for their beloved Lord. Jesus of Nazareth, a Galilean Jew, the only perfect Man of all the chosen race.

Herod's Temple became dust because the Jewish nation, whose house of worship it was, rejected their Messiah and chose to walk in their own wayward course. A house of the Lord—the Lord Jesus Christ, the Messiah of the Jews—shall rise again in Jerusalem, perhaps on the very site where the ancient holy house stood, because the remnants of Judah shall accept their King, believe his gospel, and walk in his paths. A holy temple, the house of the Lord—a sacred sanctuary with its Holy of Holies where the Divine Presence, the Shekinah of old, shall once more be manifest to Israel—shall be built in Old Jerusalem. It shall be built by the Jews: Jews who believe in Christ; Jews who are converted to the truth; Jews who are members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; Jews who hold again the powers and priesthoods possessed by their ancestors. The keys and powers whereby temples are built vest in the President of the Church, the presiding high priest among the Lord's latter-day people. These keys, first conferred by angelic ministrants—Moses, Elijah, Elias, and others—upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, have come down in direct succession and rest upon and are exercised by the prophet of God on earth, the one who, as it were, wears the mantle of Joseph Smith. And so it is that the Jews shall build their temple, and the Jews who do it will be Mormons; they will be Jews who are the converted and baptized saints of the latter days.

In a discourse on the Second Coming of Christ, given April 6, 1843, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance." (Teachings, p. 286.) In a revelation to Joseph Smith, given November 3, 1831, the Lord said: "Let them . . . who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion," which was then being established in America. "And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house." (D&C 133:12-13.) That is to say, let the Jews gather in their own Jerusalem, a city built upon four hills or mountains, a city in whose mountains they shall build the house of the Lord in due course. [^5]

These modern prophetic words, about the return of Judah and the building of a temple in Jerusalem, make allusion to other ancient prophetic words that set forth with great clarity that the Jews shall yet build such a house in Old Jerusalem. We shall now note what three of the prophets of Judah—Malachi, Zechariah, and Ezekiel—have said in this respect.

Malachi, in speaking of the Second Coming of the Messiah, asks: "Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth?" Of that glorious day this ancient prophet then says of the Lord: "He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years." (Mal. 3:1-6.) Shall the sons of Levi, those ancient Levitical ministers, offer sacrifices again, at the Second Coming, "as in the days of old, and as in former years"? We shall speak more particularly of this in the next chapter as we analyze the Mosaic system of sacrifices that was to operate in the day of Jesus. For our present purposes we need only observe that when John the Baptist conferred the Aaronic Priesthood again upon mortals, he alluded to these very words of Malachi by saying that this newly restored Aaronic order "shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." (D&C 13:1.)

Zechariah, also speaking of our Lord's return in power and great glory—"the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee"—said: "And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them toward the former [eastern] sea, and half of them toward the hinder [western] sea: in summer and in winter shall it be. And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one." This is the millennial day when the Lord reigns personally upon the earth, and when, as the Prophet said, "water" shall "come out from under the temple." Zechariah continues: "And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem [most of the people will have been destroyed in the wars and desolations incident to the Second Coming] shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles," which feast, anciently, was centered in and around the temple and its ceremonies. Also, Zechariah says—and here we have mention both of the temple and of sacrifices—"In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; and the pots in the Lord's house [the temple] shall be like the bowls before the altar. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah [he is speaking of Old Jerusalem and the land of Judah, not the American New Jerusalem] shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts: and all they that sacrifice [are not these the sons of Levi?] shall come and take of them, and seethe therein: and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts." (Zech. 14.) With reference to this last restriction as to who may enter the house of the Lord, it should be remembered that anciently anyone was free to enter the court of the Gentiles, a permission that will be revoked in that millennial day when all are converted to the truth.

Ezekiel has much more to say about Judah's latter-day house than either of his fellow prophets, or perhaps than all of Israel's other prophets combined. Twelve of the forty-eight chapters in the book of Ezekiel deal with the general subject here involved. In chapter 37 is the glorious vision of the resurrection in which Israel's dry bones come out of their graves; breath enters each person; sinews and flesh and skin take on a newness of life; the whole house of Israel lives again; they arise, stand upon their feet, and march as a very great army; and then—in resurrected glory—they inherit the land promised to Abraham and his seed forever. Associated with this is the coming forth of the Stick of Joseph—the Book of Mormon—in the hands of latter-day Ephraim, to join with the Stick of Judah—the Bible—the two volumes of holy scripture being destined to take the message of salvation to all Israel.

Then, as Ezekiel records, the Lord says: "Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land." They shall return to their ancient Palestine, the very land where the feet of their fathers were planted.

"And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all." Rehoboam shall not reign in Judah and Jeroboam in Ephraim. They shall have one King, the Lord of hosts, who reigns personally upon the earth; the day of the divided kingdom, of two nations of the chosen people, shall cease. Israel shall be one.

"Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my people, and I will be their God." At long last, after worshipping false gods, the gods of the creeds; after following the evil and detestable practices of carnal men; after being in an apostate and degenerate state for centuries—their ancient Lord will save them. They will be cleansed by baptism; once again they will be the Lord's people, and he will be their God.

"And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them. And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever." What shall happen to Israel, both Judah and Ephraim? They shall be one nation and have one King, even David, who is Christ, and he shall reign over them forever. He is the one Lord and the one Shepherd over all the earth. They shall walk in his statutes and in his judgments; they shall keep his commandments and live his gospel precepts. And where shall they dwell? In the land given unto Jacob, old Canaan, the Jewish Palestine, the Holy Land where also our Lord lived during mortality. And how long shall they abide there? They and their children, and their children's children, shall dwell there forever. The meek shall inherit the earth. This is not to say that there are not other lands of promise, and that the American land of Joseph shall not become the inheritance of Nephites and that portion of latter-day Israel, in the main, which is now in the restored kingdom; but it is to say that the Israel of Ezekiel's day, which was Jewish, shall dwell in the land of old Jerusalem, where their temple will be built.

"Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore." The covenant of peace, the everlasting covenant, is the gospel—the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, the gospel restored through Joseph Smith and his associates. It contains that plan of salvation which requires the building of temples so that all the ordinances of salvation and exaltation may be performed for the living and the dead. In the very nature of things the Lord's sanctuary, his temple, will stand in the midst of his congregations; otherwise they would not be his people. We have, then, an express prophecy of the building of the Lord's sanctuary, not alone in Jackson County where the New Jerusalem will be built, but in Old Jerusalem, in the land of Judah, among and for the people who descended from those who worshipped there in Solomon's Temple, in Zerubbabel's Temple, and in Herod's Temple.

Having laid this foundation relative to the conversion and glory of latter-day Israel, with particular emphasis upon the Jewish portion of that people, Ezekiel, in chapters 38 and 39, tells of the wars and desolations incident to the Second Coming. Then in chapters 40 through 48 he devoted himself to the details, and they are most specific, of what has come to be called Ezekiel's Temple. Worldly scholars, not knowing the purposes of the Lord where his people are concerned; not understanding the doctrine of the gathering of Israel in the last days; not being aware that the gospel was to be restored in the latter days; not knowing that temples are essential to the salvation of men no matter what age they live in—worldly scholars have assumed that Ezekiel's Temple was not and will not be built. The truth is that its construction lies ahead. No doubt some of the recitations relative to it are figurative, though it is clear that some sacrificial ordinances are yet to be performed.

It is clear that Ezekiel's Temple, to be built by the Jews in Jerusalem, is destined for millennial use. In chapter 43, for instance, the Lord calls it, specifically, "the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever." That is to say, it will be the place of his throne during the Millennium when he dwells among the house of Israel, and it was the place where the soles of his feet trod when he dwelt on earth as a mortal. In this same chapter he says his house shall be built "upon the top of the mountain." In chapter 47 we find the statements to which the Prophet alluded when he said the water would "come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed." Ezekiel's language is: "Waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward. . . . These waters issue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed." Ezekiel's concluding expression, relative to Old Jerusalem where the temple shall stand, is: "And the name of the city from that day shall be, The Lord is there."

Footnotes

Jehovah's Holy Houses (Chapter 7) footnote: The part played by Herod's Temple in the social, cultural, and religious life of the Jews of Jerusalem, those of Palestine, and those scattered abroad is seen in these words of Edersheim: "The Temple itself," he says, "which, from a small building, little larger than an ordinary church, in the time of Solomon, had become that great and glorious House which excited the admiration of the foreigner, and kindled the enthusiasm of every son of Israel. At the time of Christ it had been already forty-six years in building, and workmen were still, and for a long time, engaged on it. But what heterogeneous crowd thronged its porches and courts! Hellenists; scattered wanderers from the most distant parts of the earth-east, west, north, and south; Galileans, quick of temper and uncouth of Jewish speech; Judeans and Jerusalemites; white-robed Priests and Levites; Temple officials; broad-phylacteried, wide-fringed Pharisees, and courtly, ironical Sadducees; and, in the outer court, curious Gentiles! Some had come to worship; others to pay vows, or bring offerings, or to seek purification; some to meet friends, and discourse on religious subjects in those colonnaded porches, which ran round the Sanctuary; or else to have their questions answered, or their causes heard and decided, by the smaller Sanhedrin of twenty-three, that sat in the entering of the gate or by the Great Sanhedrin. The latter no longer occupied the Hall of Hewn Stones, Gazith, but met in some chamber attached to those 'shops' or booths, on the Temple Mount, which belonged to the High-Priestly family of Ananias, and where such profitable trade was driven by those who, in their cupidity and covetousness, were worthy successors of the sons of Eli. In the Court of the Gentiles (or in its porches) sat the official money-changers, who for a fixed discount changed all foreign coins into those of the Sanctuary. Here also was that great mart for sacrificial animals, and all that was requisite for offerings. How the simple, earnest country people, who came to pay vows, or bring offerings for purifying, must have wondered, and felt oppressed in that atmosphere of strangely blended religious rigorism and utter worldliness, and how they must have been taxed, impose upon, and treated with utmost curtness, nay, rudeness, by those who laughed at their boorishness, and despised them as cursed, ignorant country people, little better than heathens, or, for that matter brute beasts. Here also there lay about a crowd of noisy beggars, unsightly from disease, and clamorous for help. And close by passed the luxurious scion of the High-Priestly families; the proud, intensely self-conscious Teacher of the Law, respectfully followed by disciples, and the quick-witted, subtle Scribe. These were men who, on Sabbaths and feast-days, would come out on the Temple-terrace to teach the people, or condescend to answer their questions; who in the Synagogues would hold their puzzled hearers spell-bound by their traditional lore and subtle argumentation, or tickle the fancy of the entranced multitude, that thronged every available space, by their ingenious frivolities, their marvelous legends, or their clever sayings; but who would, if occasion required, quell an opponent by well-poised questions, or crush him beneath the sheer weight of authority. Yet others were there who, despite the utterly lowering influence which the frivolities of the prevalent religion, and the elaborate trifling of its endless observances, must have exercised on the moral and religious feelings of all-perhaps, because of them-turned aside, and looked back with loving gaze to the spiritual promises of the past, and forward with longing expectancy to the near 'consolation of Israel,' waiting for it in prayerful fellowship, and with bright, heaven-granted gleams of its dawning lift amidst the encircling gloom." (Edersheim 1:114-15.)

---
Notas:
[^1] The burnt offering. In speaking of the restoration of all things, as promised by all the holy prophets since the world began, and after quoting Malachi's promise that the Lord, at his Second Coming, would purify the sons of Levi so that once again they could and would offer anew unto him their ancient sacrifices, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "It is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice [i.e.,] the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in [the] future; but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the Priesthood, or with the Prophets." The authority of the priesthood here referred to is the thing that John the Baptist brought back on May 15, 1829, and the knowledge of what the prophets have left us includes, among other things, the teachings of Malachi, Zechariah, and Ezekiel as these are set forth in chapter 7 herein. Joseph Smith continues: "The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have made mention of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings." The frequent references to sacrifices performed by Melchizedek authority include those of Adam, Abraham and the patriarchs, and all those performed among the American Hebrews known as Nephites, for among them there were no Levites and the detailed performances of the law of Moses, such as the daily sacrifice, were not undertaken. The restoration of the priesthood to perform, once again, the type of ordinances that were part of the ancient gospel dispensations has reference to the revelation of all things incident to these holy performances, which restoration is still future. "These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the Holy Prophets are brought to pass. It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the prophets; but those things existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued. "It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance, baptism, and faith existed prior the days Christ, what necessity for them since that time?" (Teachings, pp. 172-73.))
[^2] The sin offering. The public sacrifices were "the daily sacrifices; the additional for the Sabbath; for the New Moon; the Passover sacrifices; the lamb when the sheaf was waved; the Pentecostal sacrifices; those brought with the two first loaves; New Year's; Atonement Day sacrifices; those on the first day of, and those on the octave of 'Tabernacles.' Private sacrifices they classify as those on account of sins by word or deed; those on account of what concerned the body (such as various defilements); those on account of property (firstlings, tithes); those on account of festive seasons; and those on account of vows or promises." (Temple, p. 111.)
[^3] The trespass offering. It should be noted that all who receive the gospel are called by Abraham's name and are accounted his seed.
[^4] The peace offering.
[^5] The times of the Gentiles is that time or era, that expanse of time or years, during which the gospel goes to the Gentiles on a preferential basis. In Jesus' day the gospel was offered first to his Jewish kinsmen; only later was it preached in Gentile ears. In our day it has been restored to the Gentiles, meaning to the non-Jewish people - people, however, who are of the house of Israel. It is now being taught on a preferential basis to Gentiles or non-Jewish people, for, as Paul said, "blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in." (Rom. 11:25.) The restoration of the gospel foreshadows the end of the Gentile era and the ushering in of the Jewish era. Our revelations say that after the remnant of Jerusalem's Jews have been scattered in all nations, an event that has long since occurred, "they shall be gathered again." They are, however, to remain in their scattered state "until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. . . . And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel. But they [the generality of the scattered Jews] receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men. And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (D&C 45:24-29.) That the Jews, a few of them, are now beginning to believe the restored gospel and are returning to their true Messiah is well known. The times of the Gentiles shall soon be fulfilled, and the times of the Jews once again shall come into being.
