Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 8

Mosaic Sacrifices in Jesus' Day

Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? (Moses 5:6.)

Gospel Sacrifices—Past and Future

All things bear record of Christ—things which are in heaven above, and in the earth beneath, and in the waters under the earth—all bear record of the Lord; of his creative power; of his redeeming grace; of his goodness and mercy unto us. From the dead dust of the deserts to the living light of the heavenly luminaries; from the amoeba in its primordial ooze to the sons of God who reign in immortal glory; from the lowest to the highest, and from the least unto the greatest—things, both animate and inanimate, bear record of Him whose we are and by whom we have life and breath and all things.

All gospel ordinances, all the religious rites revealed from heaven, all of the performances and formalisms of the law of Moses—all bear witness of Christ, all are ordained in such a way, all are performed in such a manner as to symbolize something about him and his ministry. And those ordinances and performances which teach the truths relative to his infinite and eternal atonement are the most important and perfect of them all. The three ordinances that excel in this respect are baptism, the sacrament, and sacrifice, with the sacrificial rites setting forth the best similitudes of the three.

Baptisms, in all ages, are performed by immersion in water in similitude of the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ. When baptized persons are buried with Christ in baptism, they die as to the carnal things of this world. When they come forth from their watery grave, it is with a newness of life; they are, as it were, "resurrected" to a continuing mortal life of righteousness. The elements of water, blood, and spirit, which were present in the atonement, are also the elements that are present in every baptism. Thus, every baptismal ordinance centers attention in the atonement, in the very atonement by virtue of which the ordinance of baptism gains efficacy, virtue, and force.

The sacramental emblems, the bread and wine or water, are administered by Aaronic authority in similitude of and in remembrance of the broken flesh and spilt blood of our Redeemer. By this sacred ordinance the saints of God renew the covenant previously made in the waters of baptism; by it they covenant anew to keep the commandments and are promised, in return, the companionship of the Holy Spirit in this life and eternal life in the realms ahead. And, similarly, when proper sacrifices were made—and throughout Israelite history these were also performed by Aaronic authority and were in similitude of the atoning sacrifice of the Son—they also were occasions for renewing the covenant of salvation that had been made in the waters of baptism. Sacrifices before the coming of the Messiah and the sacramental ordinance thereafter each served the same purpose in the great and eternal scheme of things.

Sacrifices were first performed as gospel ordinances. They antedated Moses and his law; they were administered by Melchizedek authority; and Adam was the first legal administrator to use the similitudes involved. He and Eve were commanded by the Lord "that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord." Manifestly this commandment contained the divine instructions as to how and in what manner the newly revealed ordinances should be performed; and when Adam, acting pursuant to revelation, conformed to the divine will, an angel descended and asked: "Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord?" Adam replied: "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." Thereupon the angel revealed the great underlying principle that pertains to all true sacrificial ordinances: "This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." (Moses 5:5-8.)

From that Adamic day until our Lord shed his own blood in sacrifice for the sins of the world, the sacrificial system remained in force among his people. Whenever and wherever there were legal administrators who had the truth, sacrifices were offered that prefigured the coming sacrifice of the Lamb of God. So fundamental and basic were these ordinances to the true system of worship, and so ingrained were they in every devout person, that they continued among apostate groups. Even though men changed the ordinances and broke the everlasting covenant, most of them still retained sacrifices and burnt offerings in one form or another. Not knowing that the true sacrificial system was first revealed to the first man; not knowing that it continued without variation among faithful people; and not knowing that it was then imitated in one perverted form or another among apostate peoples, it has been assumed, falsely, that it is a performance that each evolving nation has developed for itself. Edersheim, interestingly, is not far from the truth when he sets forth the view that sacrificial performances came by instinct to Adam's seed. "We might argue from their universality," he says, "that, along with the acknowledgment of a Divine power, the dim remembrance of a happy past, and the hope of a happier future, sacrifices belonged to the primeval traditions which mankind inherited from Paradise. To sacrifice seems as 'natural' to man as to pray; the one indicates what he feels about himself, the other what he feels about God. The one means a felt need of propitiation; the other a felt sense of dependence." (Temple, pp. 106-7.)

But the fact is that sacrificial offerings were revealed gospel ordinances. For over twenty-five hundred years, from Adam to Moses, all those who had the gospel also offered sacrifices. When the Mosaic law was added to the gospel system, then for nearly fifteen hundred years these ordinances—changed, expanded upon, and set forth in meticulous detail—were performed as part of the Mosaic system.

When the Lamb of God, in Gethsemane and at Golgotha, worked out the infinite and eternal atonement and permitted himself to be slain for the sins of the world, it was intended that the sacrificial ordinances prefiguring that most transcendent of all events should cease. No one has set forth why this was destined to be with the clarity and plainness found in the words of the prophet Amulek. "According to the great plan of the Eternal God," he said, "there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish. . . . It is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice. . . . and then shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away. And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal." (Alma 34:9-14.)

Appearing in resurrected glory to his Nephite kinsmen, our Lord affirmed the end of the old order and announced the beginning of the new one. "By me redemption cometh," he said, "and in me is the law of Moses fulfilled. . . . And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood." It is the Lord Jesus who is the Lord Jehovah who is speaking, which means that the sacrifices of old were offered to Christ. "Yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings. And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit." (3 Ne. 9:17-20.)

It was during this American ministry that our Lord instituted in the New World, as he had done in Jerusalem and the Old World, the sacramental ordinance in which broken bread was eaten in remembrance of his body, and wine was drunk in remembrance of his blood. From that blessed day onward the sacrament replaced sacrifices except that as part of the restitution of all things—and then on a limited basis only—blood sacrifices will be offered again. It was of these future sacrificial ordinances that Malachi prophesied, in a setting descriptive of the Second Coming of the Son of Man, that the returning Lord would "purify the sons of Levi, . . . that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." Of this offering, to be made in "Judah and Jerusalem," the prophecy says it shall be "pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years." (Mal. 3:1-5.) It was to these sacrifices that Ezekiel alluded when he set forth the nature and use of the temple yet to be built in Jerusalem. And so that they might be performed by Levites who once again were legal administrators, John the Baptist, a Levite whose right it was to offer sacrifices anciently, and who was in fact the last Levitical priest to hold the keys of the ministry brought back the ancient order of Aaron, saying to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, as he did so, that "this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." (D&C 13.) [^1]

The Sacrifices in Herod's Temple

In this our day—which we, in our self-conceived conceit, are pleased to designate as an age of enlightenment and intellectual achievement—we look with some revulsion upon religious rites that call for the slaying of lambs and fowl and the sprinkling of their blood in a particular and specified way. In our modern sophistication we suppose we have risen above the seeming barbarism of those sacrificial ordinances which called for the slaying of oxen and sheep and red heifers; which called for a scapegoat to carry the sins of the people into a wilderness area; and which imposed the stench and dung and filth of dying beasts upon those who sought to commune with Deity in holy places. We are pleased to replace the daily sacrifices with the weekly sacramental ordinances; to partake of the emblems of his broken flesh and spilt blood rather than to burn the firstlings of our flocks upon altars of stone; to renew the covenant made in the waters of baptism by partaking of bread and water in the quiet of a chapel rather than by burning the flesh of animals amid the death noises and bleating that accompanied sacrificial ordinances.

But whatever our oversophisticated sensitivities lead us to assume, the facts remain that sacrifices were instituted by the mild and merciful Jesus; that they were set forth, in a manner and in a form, to bear witness of his atoning sacrifice; that they were as essential to the salvation of men anciently as the sacrament is to ours today; and that they were performed with divine authority, by legal administrators, for the whole of that four thousand years which extended from the day the first man was cast out of his garden home to the day when our Lord's forerunner baptized in Jordan near Bethabara. In contrast there have been only two or three hundred years during which legal administrators, empowered from on high, have performed sacramental ordinances that were in fact binding on earth and sealed in the heavens.

Unless we have more than a superficial knowledge of what was involved in the sacrificial ordinances; unless we know why and how the Lord dealt with his people through this type of formalism; unless we catch the vision of the similitudes of sacrifice—and in many respects they are better than those found in the sacrament—we can never understand the life and ministry of the Man Jesus as fully as we should. And we are now speaking not just of a dim and general awareness that sacrifices are performed in similitude of the sacrifice of the Son of God, who is full of grace and truth, but of an awareness of enough of the details and rituals to envision how and in what manner they bore testimony of him whose life we study.

We need not extract from the writings of Moses, the man of God, all that is set forth relative to sacrificial performances. Volumes might be written in exposition of what the ancient lawgiver recorded, to say nothing of the manner in which his counsel was followed or perverted, as the case may be, both in Israel and among those who knew not the Mosaic system. We shall, rather, turn to the sacrificial offerings that the Jews made on the great altar in the holy temple in Jerusalem at the time of Jesus. These are the ordinances Jesus learned as he grew up in his Jewish home. They are the ones that should have introduced his Jewish brethren to their Lord and King. Unfortunately for most of his brethren, however, they had lost the true and correct understanding of the sacred rites. Though they performed by rote and to the best of their ability what had come down to them from their fathers; though they were strict and vigilant in conforming to the divine will as they understood it—and the ordinances themselves were virtually identical with those of former days—the unfortunate reality was that they had only the form and not the substance. They had a form of godliness, but were far removed from the eternal power that should have been present; the true meaning and intent of the rites did not register in their sin-filled hearts.

There are, of course, many commentaries, plus shelves of dry tomes, that deal with the sacrificial systems of old. We shall limit our quotations, however, to one author, Alfred Edersheim, a sectarian of faith and understanding who wrote a century ago and who had the sense and insight to recognize Jesus as the Messiah and to seek to extol him for what he in fact was, God's own Son. In his scholarly work The Temple—Its Ministry and Services as They Were at the Time of Christ, he exhibits a remarkably sound view of the principles and doctrines underlying the law of sacrifice, a view that is especially commendable since he did not have the Book of Mormon and latter-day revelation to keep him on the true course. As to the procedures and intricate mechanics of the ritualistic performances themselves, they can be deciphered by any competent scholar who will dredge his way through the surprisingly voluminous Jewish source material.

We shall now speak, in an abbreviated and digested way, of both the doctrine and the performances; of the law of sacrifice itself and the sacrificial rites based thereon; of the principles that are eternal and of the procedures that change with the variant circumstances. As to the procedures, those mentioned are the ones operative in Herod's Temple in Jesus' day. With deliberate intent we shall not record a hundredth—nay, not a thousandth—part of the unbelievably complex rituals and formalisms.

First we will note the order and meaning of those Mosaic rites that are sacrificial in nature. One basic principle is set out in these words: "The sacrifices of the Old Testament were symbolic and typical. An outward observance without any real inward meaning is only a ceremony. But a rite which has a present spiritual meaning is a symbol; and if, besides, it also points to a future reality, conveying at the same time, by anticipation, the blessing that is yet to appear, it is a type. Thus the Old Testament sacrifices were not only symbols, nor yet merely predictions by fact (as prophecy is a prediction by words), but they already conveyed to the believing Israelite the blessing that was to flow from the future reality to which they pointed." (Temple, p. 106. Italics added.) That is to say, believing Israel then knew, and believing Israel of old had always known, that in the symbolical and typical ordinances performed by their authorized priests there was immediate forgiveness, mediation, and that at-one-ment with God which is part of atonement.

Another basic concept is given thus: "The fundamental idea of sacrifice in the Old Testament is that of substitution, which again seems to imply everything else—atonement and redemption, vicarious punishment and forgiveness." (Temple, p. 107.) Sacrificial ordinances were performed by "a mediatorial priesthood," a conclusion that accords with the revealed word to Joseph Smith that Moses "was ordained by the hand of angels to be a mediator of this first covenant, (the law.)" (JST Gal. 3:19-20.) "All this was symbolical (of man's need, God's mercy, and his covenant), and typical, till He should come to whom it all pointed, and who had all along given reality to it; He whose Priesthood was perfect, and who on a perfect altar brought a perfect sacrifice, once for all—a perfect Substitute, and a perfect Mediator." (Temple, p. 108.)

One other basic concept must be set forth. When Israel became the Lord's people, it was by covenant. The Lord revealed his mind and his will to Moses. "And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the Lord hath said will we do." Then Moses wrote all the words in a book, built an altar and offered sacrifices, took the blood of the oxen, and sprinkled half of it on the altar and half on the people. Then he said: "Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words." (Ex. 24.) Israel was thus in fellowship with their God; they had attained at-one-ment. The sacrificial system then became the arrangement whereby this covenant could be renewed and the chosen people could reinstate themselves in grace whenever they fell therefrom. "On the ground of this covenant-sacrifice all others rested. These were, then, either sacrifices of communion with God, or else intended to restore that communion when it had been disturbed or dimmed through sin and trespass: sacrifices in communion, or for communion with God. To the former class belong the burnt- and the peace-offerings; to the latter, the sin- and trespass-offerings." (Temple, p. 108.)

Sacrifices were of two kinds—bloody and unbloody, the latter group including meat and drink offerings, the first sheaf at the Passover, the two loaves at Pentecost, and the shewbread. Bloody sacrifices were made with oxen, sheep, goats, turtledoves, and young pigeons. There were eleven occasions for public sacrifices and five for private sacrifices;" [^2] some were said to be most holy, others less holy. Always they were made with something that belonged to the offerer. All animal sacrifices were to be free of blemishes, and salt was always added as a symbol of incorruption. The sacrificial animals were always slain by the priests, and "the death of the sacrifice was only a means towards an end, that end being the shedding and sprinkling of the blood, by which the atonement was really made."

When men offered private sacrifices the formalities included, in most instances, the laying on of hands on the animal while sins were confessed and a prayer offered. Words of the prayer were to this effect: "I entreat, O Jehovah: I have sinned, I have done perversely, I have rebelled, I have committed (naming the sin, trespass, or, in the case of a burnt-offering, the breach of positive or negative command); but I return in repentance, and let this be for my atonement." (Temple, pp. 109-15.)

Did the Jewish worshippers in the day of Jesus know that their sacrificial ordinances were part of an atoning process? That the blood of animals was being shed so they could gain forgiveness of sins? That the animal or fowl—slain for the sins of men, as it were—was but a substitute, a symbol, a type of him who should bear the sins of all men? The answers are in the affirmative. Contrary to what is found in some sweeping and superficial pronouncements, the fact is that they did know and they did understand; at least the knowledge was had by many of them, for Jewry, as is the case with Christendom, was fragmented and there were many divergent views on all basic doctrines. However, the Messianic problem in Jesus' day was one of the Person to whom the similitudes pointed rather than the fact of their so doing. As to the fact that the principles themselves were known and understood by the spiritually literate among them, there are many quotations from rabbinical and related sources that say such things as:

"The soul of every creature is bound up in its blood; therefore I gave it to atone for the soul of man—that one soul should come and atone for the other."

"One soul is substitute for the other."

"I gave the soul for you on the altar, that the soul of the animal should be an atonement for the soul of the man."

"The offerer, as it were, puts away his sins from himself, and transfers them upon the living animal."

"As often as any one sins with his soul, whether from haste or malice, he puts away his sin from himself and places it upon the head of his sacrifice, and it is an atonement for him."

"After the prayer of confession (connected with the imposition of hands) the sins of the children of Israel lay on the sacrifice (of the Day of Atonement)."

"Properly speaking, the blood of the sinner should have been shed, and his body burned, as those of the sacrifices. But the Holy One—blessed be He!—accepted our sacrifice from us as redemption and atonement. Behold the full grace which Jehovah—blessed be He!—has shown to man! In His compassion and in the fulness of His grace He accepted the soul of the animal instead of his soul, that through it there might be an atonement."

"He that brought a sacrifice [was] required to come to the knowledge that that sacrifice was his redemption." (Temple, pp. 119-20.)

Having set forth the doctrine that sacrifices were offered—(1) as a means of maintaining communion with Deity; as a renewed seal of man's acceptance of the covenant God made with Moses; as a reaffirmation on the part of the Lord's people that they would keep his statutes and judgments (and burnt offerings and peace offerings were for these purposes); and (2) that they were "intended to restore that communion when it had been dimmed or disturbed"; that through them an atonement was made for sin; that they were the recurring means of receiving freedom from the burdens of iniquity (and sin offerings and trespass offerings were for these purposes)—we now come to a consideration of these four types of sacrifices:

This offering symbolized "the entire surrender unto God, whether of the individual or of the congregation, and His acceptance thereof." It was a "sacrifice of devotion and service. Thus day by day it formed the regular morning and evening service in the Temple, while on the sabbaths, new moons, and festivals additional burnt-offerings followed the ordinary worship. There the covenant people brought the covenant-sacrifice, and the multitude of offerings indicated, as it were, the fulness, richness, and joyousness of their self-surrender." (Temple, pp. 126-27.)

"This is the most important of all sacrifices [from an individual standpoint]. It made atonement for the person of the offender, whereas the trespass-offering only atoned for one special offence. Hence sin-offerings were brought on festive occasions for the whole people, but never trespass-offerings. In fact, the trespass-offering may be regarded as representing ransom for a special wrong, while the sin-offering symbolized general redemption. Both sacrifices applied only to sins 'through ignorance,' in opposition to those done 'presumptuously' (or 'with a high hand'). For the latter the law provided no atonement, but held out 'a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation.' . . . In reference both to sin- and to trespass-offerings, the Rabbinical principle must be kept in view—that they only atoned in case of real repentance. . . . Neither oil nor frankincense were to be brought with a sin-offering. There was nothing joyous about it. It represented a terrible necessity, for which God, in his wondrous grace, had made provision." (Temple, pp. 128-30.)

One rare and unusual sin offering must be noted. It was of a red heifer, one pure in color "upon which never came yoke," and it was to cleanse any in Israel from "Levitical defilement," from "defilement by the dead." The chief thing distinguishing it from all other sacrifices was "that it was a sacrifice offered once for all (at least so long as its ashes lasted); that its blood was sprinkled, not on the altar, but outside the camp towards the sanctuary; and that it was wholly burnt, along with cedarwood, as the symbol of imperishable existence, [with] hyssop, as that of purification from corruption, and [with] 'scarlet,' which from its colour was the emblem of life. Thus the sacrifice of highest life, brought as a sin offering, and, so far as possible, once for all, was in its turn accompanied by the symbols of imperishable existence, freedom from corruption, and fulness of life, so as yet more to intensify its significance. But even this is not all. The gathered ashes with running water were sprinkled on the third and seventh days on that which was to be purified. Assuredly, if death meant 'the wages of sin,' this purification pointed, in all its details, to 'the gift of God,' which is 'eternal life,' through the sacrifice of Him in whom is the fulness of life." (Temple, p. 349.)

This was offered to clear a person from specific instances of wrongdoing, "for certain transgressions committed through ignorance, or else, according to Jewish tradition, where a man afterwards voluntarily confessed himself guilty." (Temple, p. 133.)

"The most joyous of all sacrifices was the peace-offering, or, as from its derivation it might also be rendered, the offering of completion. This was, indeed, a season of happy fellowship with the Covenant God, in which He condescended to become Israel's Guest at the sacrificial meal, even as He was always their Host. . . . It is this sacrifice which is so frequently referred to in the Book of Psalms as the grateful homage of a soul justified and accepted before God." (Temple, p. 134.) Appropriately, for instance, Solomon at the dedication of the temple offered 22,000 oxen and 120,000 sheep as a peace offering. (1 Kgs. 8:63.)

There is much to say about sacrifices as they were from Moses to Zacharias, who begat John, nearly all of which is beyond the scope and need of this work. We cannot, however, leave this portion of our study without referring to the Day of Atonement; the day when all Israel was commanded to look to the Lord for remission of sins; the day when the high priest, who sat in Aaron's seat, mediated between Israel and their King—all according to the directions given by Moses, the man of God. "The most solemn of all sacrifices were those of the Day of Atonement, when the high-priest, arrayed in his linen garments, stood before the Lord Himself within the Most Holy Place to make an atonement." (Temple, p. 132.) On this day, once each year, the high priest entered the Holy of Holies, spoke the ineffable name, sprinkled the blood of the covenant, and performed the expiatory rites by which the Lord's people were cleansed from sin.

Without going into all the preparations for and complexities of the performances undertaken on the Day of Atonement—and they were complex, numerous, and burdensome—but simply as a means of getting a feeling relative to sacrifice as such, let us set forth a portion of what transpired on this day of days. "From Numbers 29:7-11 it appears that the offerings on the Day of Atonement were really of a threefold kind—'the continual burnt offering,' that is, the daily morning and evening sacrifices, with their meat—and drink—offerings; the festive sacrifices of the day, consisting for the high-priest and the priesthood, of 'a ram for a burnt-offering,' and for the people of one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year (with their meat-offerings) for a burnt-sacrifice, and one kid of the goats for a sin-offering; and, thirdly, and chiefly, the peculiar expiatory sacrifices of the day, which were a young bullock as a sin-offering for the high-priest, his house, and the sons of Aaron, and another sin-offering for the people, consisting of two goats, one of which was to be killed and its blood sprinkled, as directed, while the other was to be sent away into the wilderness, bearing 'all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins' which had been confessed 'over him,' and laid upon him by the high priest." (Temple, p. 306.)

As to the sin offering for himself, and the uttering of the ineffable name, Edersheim says of the high priest: "He then laid both his hands upon the head of the bullock, and confessed as follows:—'Ah, JEHOVAH! I have committed iniquity; I have transgressed; I have sinned—I and my house. Oh, then, JEHOVAH, I entreat Thee, cover over (atone for, let there be atonement for) the iniquities, the transgressions, and the sins which I have committed, transgressed, and sinned before Thee, I and my house—even as it is written in the law of Moses, Thy servant: "For, on that day will He cover over (atone) for you to make you clean; from all your transgressions before JEHOVAH ye shall be cleansed."' It will be noticed that in this solemn confession the name JEHOVAH occurred three times. Other three times was it pronounced in the confession which the high priest made over the same bullock for the priesthood; a seventh time was it uttered when he cast the lot as to which of the two goats was to be 'for JEHOVAH;' and once again he spoke it three times in the confession over the so-called 'scape-goat' which bore the sins of the people. All these ten times the high-priest pronounced the very name of JEHOVAH, and, as he spoke it, those who stood near cast themselves with their faces on the ground, while the multitude responded: 'Blessed be the Name; the glory of His kingdom is for ever and ever.' "

Thereafter the two goats were brought forth, the lots were cast, and one was chosen to bear the inscription, "la-JEHOVAH," for Jehovah, the other "la-Azazel," for Azazel (an expression translated "scapegoat" in our Bible). The goat bearing the name of Jehovah was sacrificed; the one chosen as the scapegoat, after all the sins of the people were placed upon him, was to be set free in a wilderness place to carry off the sins and iniquities of the Lord's people. In the course of the various sacrifices the high priest sprinkled the blood of the bullock and the goat according to the ritualistic pattern. (Temple, pp. 310-16.)

"By these expiatory sprinklings the high priest had cleansed the sanctuary in all its parts from the defilement of the priesthood and the worshippers. The Most Holy Place, the veil, the Holy Place, the altar of incense, and the altar of burnt-offering were now clean alike, so far as the priesthood and as the people were concerned; and in their relationship to the sanctuary both priests and worshippers were atoned for. So far as the law could give it, there was now again free access for all; or, to put it otherwise, the continuance of typical sacrificial communion with God was once more restored and secured. Had it not been for these services, it would have been impossible for priests and people to offer sacrifices, and so to obtain the forgiveness of sins, or to have fellowship with God. But the consciences were not yet free from a sense of personal guilt and sin. That remained to be done through the 'scape-goat.' . . .

"Most solemn as the services had hitherto been, the worshippers would chiefly think with awe of the high-priest going into the immediate presence of God, coming out thence alive, and securing for them by the blood the continuance of the Old Testament privileges of sacrifices and of access unto God through them. What now took place concerned them, if possible, even more nearly. Their own personal guilt and sins were now to be removed from them, and that in a symbolical rite, at one and the same time the most mysterious and the most significant of all. All this while the 'scape-goat,' with the 'scarlet tongue,' telling of the guilt it was to bear, had stood looking eastwards, confronting the people, and waiting for the terrible load which it was to carry away 'unto a land not inhabited.' Laying both his hands on the head of this goat, the high-priest now confessed and pleaded: 'Ah, JEHOVAH! they have committed iniquity; they have transgressed; they have sinned—Thy people, the house of Israel. Oh, then, JEHOVAH! cover over (atone for), I intreat Thee, upon their iniquities, their transgressions, and their sins, which they have wickedly committed, transgressed, and sinned before Thee—Thy people, the house of Israel. As it is written in the law of Moses, Thy servant, saying: "For on that day shall it be covered over (atoned) for you, to make you clean from all your sins before JEHOVAH ye shall be cleansed."' And while the prostrate multitude worshipped at the name of Jehovah, the high-priest turned his face towards them as he uttered the last words, 'Ye shall be cleansed!' as if to declare to them the absolution and remission of their sins." (Temple, pp. 316-18.)

Sacrifices—Both Mortal and Eternal

Our Lord was born to die. He came into the world to die upon the cross for the sins of the world. The Lamb of God came to be sacrificed. He came to shed his blood on an eternal altar not made with hands. He came to sprinkle his redeeming blood upon his saints so they might be pure and spotless before him. Did he kneel by a rock—a natural altar—as he sweat great drops of blood in Gethsemane? Was the blood of the Lamb of God sprinkled upon an earthly altar and in a Most Holy Place, as it were? Perhaps; but be that as it may, the eternal reality is that he came to die; he came as a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world as it were, to shed his blood for his brethren. He came to bear their sins, to carry them as Azazel to a land apart. He came as the great and Eternal High Priest to rend the veil of the temple, that all men might enter the Holy of Holies and dwell forever in the Divine Presence. He came as the living Paschal Lamb to put a divine seal upon all the sacrifices, all the burnt offerings, all the sin offerings, all the trespass offerings, all the peace offerings ever offered by either Melchizedek or Aaronic authority since the world began. He came to fulfill the law that he himself had given to Moses, to bring redemption, to atone for the sins of the world. He came as the Lamb of God. He was appointed him to death, and all else incident to his mortal probation was truly incidental.

Did he speak as no man before or since has ever spoken? Was he the Master Teacher, the greatest Rabbi of them all? Did the lame leap when he spoke? the blind eyes see when he willed it? the deaf hear at a whisper from him? Did the decaying and stinking corpse of his friend from Bethany live again because he said, "Lazarus, come forth"? Did wondrous words and wondrous works flow from him as a stream? Was his life perfect in all respects as befits the Holy One of Israel? So be it. All this, and more, is as it is. Never was there such a man as this man. But underlying it all, like a great foundation upon which a Holy Temple is built, is the eternal reality that the chief and foremost achievement in the life of God's Son was his death—his death as a sacrifice for sin, the death in which he made his soul an offering for sin.

We shall trace his travels as best we may. We shall hear his words to the extent our ears are open. We shall rejoice with the sick souls who rise in health from their cots of pain. We shall partake of his feelings as he is glorified by his Father on the Holy Mount, and as he sorrows for the sins of his people. We shall weep with him over doomed Jerusalem. We shall seek to think what he thought, to speak as he spoke, to act as he acted, to feel as he felt—such of necessity must be in studying his life. But underlying it all will be the spoken and unspoken message: He came to die; he must go up to Jerusalem, and suffer many things, and be killed, and be raised again the third day; he must lay down his life of himself because his Father wills it; and he must make his soul an offering for sin, for he is the Lamb of God.

Whatever else he did is all to the good. It prepares men for the one supreme act of his life. Because he spoke and lived as he did, men are able to believe he was the Son of God; and because he was the Son of God, his atoning sacrifice has efficacy, virtue, and force in time and in eternity.

That we may now have an acute awareness of how our Lord's eternal sacrifice crowned all the sacrifices of the past; that we may know how the types and shadows of the Mosaic system took on form and substance in Christ; that we may see how the work of the mediator of the old covenant ended, and how that of the Mediator of the new covenant began, we shall turn to our theological friend, Paul. He wrote to the Hebrews. His message was that Christ came in fulfillment of the Mosaic sacrificial system; that the old covenant was now fulfilled; and that all Israel and all men must now look to the great and Eternal High Priest if they are to enter into the eternal Holy of Holies and dwell with God and Christ and the prophets and apostles of all the ages.

Paul's epistle to the Hebrews takes on a whole new meaning when it is read and studied with an understanding of the sacrificial system and the temple rites that prevailed in the day of Jesus. Our apostolic friend begins his epistle—as it is the nature and disposition of a true apostle to do—by announcing that the Great Elohim, the God to whom the Hebrews prayed in times past, sent his Son into the world; that the Son was in the express image of the Father's person; and that he came as promised in the holy scriptures. The Son is identified by name as the Man Jesus—the Captain of their salvation, who came to destroy death—who "took on him the seed of Abraham," so that "in all things" being made like unto his brethren, . . . he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted." (Heb. 2:16-18.) As we have seen, the high priests in Israel, on the Day of Atonement and at other times, through their sacrificial offerings made "reconciliation for the sins of the people." That is, by the shedding and sprinkling of the blood of bullocks and goats an atonement was wrought and the sins of the people were forgiven. It is this same prerogative that Paul is now claiming for another of Abraham's seed.

With this introduction Paul issues this invitation to his Hebrew brethren: "Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus." (Heb. 3:1.) That is, even as the high priests in Israel made reconciliation for the sins of the people, let us now consider the High Priest of the gospel, of our profession, of the new covenant, and see wherein he also made reconciliation, through his blood for the sins of men. Paul then sets forth how and why Christ's position was greater than that of Moses, the man of God, and tells how their fathers, lacking faith, rejected Jehovah's gospel and were not able, under the law, to enter into the rest of the Lord, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

Having shown from the scriptures that Israel did not and could not enter the Lord's rest under the law, Paul then turns to Christ as the means of so obtaining. "Seeing then that we have a great high priest," he says, "that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession." Let us hold fast to Christ and his gospel, for he has entered into the heavens and can guide us in so doing, which thing the high priests of the Aaronic order could not do. "For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." Our High Priest, the High Priest of the gospel, having suffered, having felt infirmities, having been tempted in all points like as we are, he will understand our like situation and make intercession for us. "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace" as the high priests of old turned to the Holy of Holies wherein was the throne of God with its mercy seat,"that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Heb. 4:14-16.)

With the principle now set forth that the new gospel covenant—"our profession"—has also its High Priest; that the new religion has come to supplant the old, which former system was a type and shadow of things to come; that the High Priest of the new order is Christ Jesus who has ascended into heaven—Paul makes a pointed comparison of the mortal offerings of the Aaronic high priests and the eternal offering of the High Priest who came after the order of Melchizedek. "For every high priest taken from among men," he says having reference to the high priests of the Aaronic order who served on the Day of Atonement and at other times, "is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins." The sacrifices offered by the ancient legal administrators were for the remission of sins. Like baptism and the sacrament, they had cleansing power; sin and iniquity were burned away upon the altars where they were offered. If it had not been so, what a direful and calamitous state rebellious and sinful Israel would have been in.

But such was God's gracious system; and of a high priest who had such a delegation of authority, Paul continues, such a one "can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way; for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity." Transgressions made in ignorance and those for which there was full repentance were forgiven through the sacrifices. "And by reason hereof," by reason of his own infirmities and sins, such a high priest "ought, as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins." We have seen that the high priest went first into the Holy of Holies to cleanse himself and thereafter to cleanse the people so that it would be, as with the priest, so with the people.

"And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." None but God can forgive sins; any man, of himself, who attempts such a high spiritual labor fails. Either God does it or he authorizes someone to act on his behalf. Anciently the one so authorized was Aaron, and those thereafter endowed with this priestly power were those who were called as had been their worthy ancestor. Hence Paul's need to establish the authority of the Son of God himself to act in the sin-remitting capacity here involved. "So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest." He did not assume the prerogative of ministering in that high and exalted status; the power to make reconciliation and forgive sins did not originate with him; it was conferred upon him by his Father, as Paul shows by quoting these words spoken to Christ by the Father: "Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. As he saith also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec."

And so we have an Eternal High Priest, one whose priesthood and service continue forever. The old high priests of the Aaronic order served, each in turn, for a time and a season. Each entered the Holy of Holies on one day each year during their tenure in the high and holy office that was theirs. But now there is an Eternal High Priest, who came after the order of Melchizedek; he continueth ever. Of him the account testifies: "In the days of his flesh," while he dwelt in mortality and before he became immortal, "when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death"—when, as an Intercessor, he had prayed for his brethren; when, on his own behalf he had pleaded that if it were possible, he might not drink the bitter cup, as he took upon himself the sins of the world—"and was heard in that he feared." That is, the Father heard the prayer and declined to remove the cup. The answer was: "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered." 'Though he were a Son yet he learned of obedience its terrible costs and glorious rewards by the things which he suffered, for he knew how to obey.' In agony he drank the dregs of the bitter cup, sweat great drops of blood from every pore, suffered more than it is possible for man to suffer except it be unto death, and thereby performed the appointed sacrificial labor. "And being made perfect, he became the author [the cause] of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him," and the Messianic promise was fulfilled relative to him, being "called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec." (Heb. 5:1-10.)

At this point in his Spirit-guided epistle to the Hebrews—to those who practiced the sacrificial ordinances and who did know or should have known their significance—Paul says there are many things he would like to tell them of the Eternal High Priest if they were not "dull of hearing." (Heb. 5:11.) He does exhort the Hebrew saints to "go on unto perfection" and not to turn back from their newly found profession, lest "they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame," thus becoming sons of perdition. He says God is not unmindful of their "labour of love" as they have "ministered to the saints," and he exhorts them to endure "unto the end."

Then he turns back to their ancient Hebrew history; speaks of Abraham, whom they revered, and of the promises of the Lord to him; tells how Abraham was promised, with an oath, that he and his seed, including all who become his seed by faith, repentance, and baptism, should be blessed forever—even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" (Abr. 2:10-11) [^3]—and then he exhorts the Hebrews to "lay hold upon the hope set before us: Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec." (Heb. 6:1-20.) Paul's exhortation is that the Hebrews should lay hold upon the hope of eternal life promised them as the seed of Abraham. This hope, he says, will be an anchor to their souls and will prepare them to enter within the veil—to pass through the veil of the temple, even as it is in temples today, in similitude of entering the presence of God—which is made possible because of the sacrifice of the Eternal High Priest, Jesus our Forerunner, who as a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek has already passed through the veil.

In this setting, as the Hebrew readers think on Abraham—their patriarch, progenitor, and friend—Paul turns their minds to one who presided over the father of the faithful and to whom their great progenitor was in subjection. He speaks of the man Melchizedek, "who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him." He speaks of the priesthood of the man Melchizedek, a priesthood that that mighty man conferred upon Abraham, and that preceded and is greater than the priestly powers given later to Aaron and his seed. "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. And all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually." (JST Heb. 7:1-3.)

Then follows an argument that cannot be gainsaid. It is that Melchizedek and Abraham held an eternal priesthood that was not confined to any one lineage and was not gained by Levitical descent. This priesthood is the power whereby men gain endless life, which is eternal life, which is exaltation within the veil. It preceded the Levitical order, which order came because of father and mother and was conferred only upon those who descended from Aaron and Levi. In contrast to the higher order, as he had already shown, this lesser priesthood did not prepare men to enter the rest of the Lord; and also, while this Levitical priesthood was in active operation, yet Messianic prophecies were made that another Priest would rise after the order of Melchizedek. Paul's argument is that since perfection came not by the Levitical priesthood which administered the law of Moses, and since there was to be another Priest come after the higher order of Melchizedek, it follows that with the change of priesthood there would be a change of the law also, and that the new law was the gospel. He notes that Christ, who came "after the similitude of Melchisedec," was not of the tribe of Levi but of Judah; that he received his priesthood with an oath, which was not the case with the Levitical priests; and that the oath was a declaration in the Lord's name that he, Jesus, would be a priest forever, that is, that his priesthood would continue in time and in eternity. By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament," Paul says.

Then our apostolic author gets back to the matter of sacrifices and temple ordinances. "And they [the Aaronic high priests of Levitical descent] truly were many priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death." They were born and died, they came and went, one succeeded another, as is the common lot of mortals as pertaining to all the positions to be filled in this life. But this man [Jesus, who received the Melchizedek Priesthood, which is not confined to those of the lineage of Levi], because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them." And even at this time the intercessory prayers continue to ascend to the Father, as the Eternal High Priest pleads: "Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified; Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." (D&C 45:4-5.) Paul continues: "For such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people's: for this he did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore." (Heb. 7.)

Thus far Paul has taught the principles involved. He has shown that Israel failed to enter into eternal glory through the law alone. He has shown that salvation did not come by the law of Moses alone. He has shown that the Messianic High Priest was needed to sacrifice himself for the sins of the people. Now he is prepared to show how each performance of the Mosaic sacrificial system bore record of and pointed to the great and eternal sacrifice of the promised High Priest. "We have such an high priest," he says, "who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens." He is a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man." There is, as it were, an eternal sanctuary, an eternal tabernacle in the heavens above, after which the tabernacle of Moses was patterned; the one was temporal, the other spiritual. "For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest [for he was not of the house of Levi], seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law." But, be it noted, these Levitical priests, these sons of Aaron, these mortal ministers who receive their priesthood because of lineage, who gain their power because of father and mother, as it were, these priests "serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, See, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount." All that Moses ordained in the way of sacrificial performances; all that had been done in Israel in this respect for fifteen hundred years; all the oxen and sheep and goats that had been given as gifts to the Lord to be slain on his altars; all the offerings burned on these altars; all the blood shed and sprinkled in the rituals of the law—all of these things were but a shadow of what was to be; all of them typified and bore record of the Eternal High Priest. Manifestly the tabernacles and the temples in which they were performed must be built according to the heavenly pattern.

And now, because the Eternal High Priest has made his sacrifice, he has "obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant [the gospel], which was established upon better promises. For if that first covenant [the law of Moses] had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second." At this point our inspired writer quotes Jeremiah's prophetic assurance that the Lord would make a new covenant with the house of Israel—a gospel covenant to replace the law—and that part of the new covenant was the promise: "I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more." (Heb. 8.)

As of the Mosaic covenant, whose terms and conditions were kept in force by Aaron's priestly sons, it is written: "Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service." The Lord's hand was in what came to Moses; his law was of divine origin. And this covenant had also "a worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called the sanctuary." This was the Holy Place, set off from the courts by a covering or veil; and the same arrangement prevailed in the temple of Jesus' day. "And after the second veil [which was in reality the veil of the temple], the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all [the Holy of Holies]; Which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant." The ark, the manna, Aaron's rod, the tables whereon the Decalogue was written, and the Urim and Thummim—none of these remained in Herod's Temple, the Holy of Holies containing only a rock whereon the high priest sprinkled the blood on the Day of Atonement. "And over it [the ark, stand] the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly." (Paul is here limiting himself as to what he will write openly about those sacred things which go on in temples.)

"Now when these things were thus ordained," when all these things were in order, "the priests went always [continually from day to day] into the first tabernacle [the Holy Place], accomplishing the service of God. But into the second [the Holy of Holies] went the high priest alone once every year [on the Day of Atonement], not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people." The blood of the bullock and the goat were sprinkled in the Holy of Holies as the earthly high priest atoned for the sins of the people.

With the sacrificial services of the temple thus summarized, and with specific mention being made of the sprinkling of the blood in the Holy of Holies on the Day of Atonement, Paul now says: "The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing: Which was a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience; Which stood only in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation." That is to say: The Holy Ghost bore record—to Paul, to Moses, to all who would hear—that all of these Mosaic performances were but a figure, a type and a shadow, a similitude of what was to be. They of themselves and standing alone did not admit Israel into the Holiest Place, which is heaven itself. The sacrificial service was not to be perfected until Christ's atonement was brought to pass, and all of the offerings, washings, and divers ordinances simply pointed toward the time of reformation, the time when Christ would come with the new covenant, at which time these sacrifices and performances would be done away. (Heb. 9:1-10.)

Now our apostolic friend turns from what was in Moses' day to what Jesus did to fulfill the law and bring in "the time of reformation." "But Christ being come an high priest of good things to come," he says, "by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building; Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us." As the earthly high priests, once each year, entered into the Holy of Holies to cleanse the people with the blood of their sacrifices, so Christ, once for all, entered the eternal Holy of Holies and through the shedding of his own blood made forgiveness of sins possible for all men. "For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh [this is the red heifer whose ashes were sprinkled upon those defiled by contact with death]: How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?"

"And for this cause," because of our Lord's atonement, "he is the mediator of the new testament [covenant], that by means of death [his own], for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament [covenant]"—that is, Christ's death gave efficacy and validity to the sacrificial performances made under the Mosaic system; if he had not been slain for the sins of the world there would have been no forgiveness as a result of the ordinances performed by the high priests of the Aaronic order; and, hence, through his atonement "they which are called," whether in Moses' day or in his own, "receive the promise of eternal inheritance." All men in all ages are saved through the atoning blood of Christ the Lord Omnipotent; any ordinance in any age, past, present, or future, is efficacious only because of that atonement and in no other way.

"For where a testament [covenant] is," Paul continues, "there must also of necessity be the death of the testator. For a testament [covenant] is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator liveth." The gospel covenant was not and could not be put into force and operation without the death of Christ. Except for his atoning sacrifice there would be neither immortality nor eternal life. If there were no atonement, there would be no forgiveness of sins, no reconciliation with God, no validity to baptism, no eternal marriage, no sanctified souls. If there were no atonement, the purposes of creation would have failed. The gospel covenant would have had "no strength at all" without the death of the testator.

"Whereupon neither the first testament [the old covenant made with Moses] was dedicated without blood. For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people, Saying, This is the blood of the testament [covenant] which God hath enjoined unto you. Moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the ministry. And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission." How perfectly did Jehovah make blood sacrifices the type of the sacrifice that he himself should make for the cleansing and purifying of those who believe in him!

"It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these." That is to say, the tabernacle and all its appurtenances, patterned as they were after what was in heaven, were purified by the sprinkling of blood; but they who shall dwell in heaven itself must be purified with an eternal sacrifice, that of Christ. "For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us." Our Lord did not enter the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies in offering his sacrifice—these places are only figures of the true heavenly tabernacle; but he entered into heaven itself there to make intercession forever for us.

"Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others; For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world: but now once in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment: So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. For the law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect." Again the announcement is made that perfection does not come by the Levitical priesthood, for its ordinances were only a shadow of what was to be. "For then would they not have ceased to be offered? because that the worshippers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins. But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins every year. For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins." (Heb. 9:11-10:2.)

At this point Paul quotes a Messianic prophecy that contrasts the sacrifices of the law with the sacrifice of the "body" prepared for the Messiah, and explains that the Lord taketh away the old sacrifices "that he may establish the second. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. And every priest standeth daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins: But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool. For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified."

Lest any reader should think that the apostle was simply drawing interesting analogies or comparing systems which by chance had analogous patterns, Paul says that the Holy Ghost was a witness of the truth of his interpretations. He refers again to Jeremiah's prophecy about the new covenant whereby sins and iniquities will no longer be remembered and then says: "Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin." (Heb. 10:3-18.)

After all these explanations, not a few of which are repetitious in nature, the author of the epistle to the Hebrews applies the doctrine taught to his hearers with these words of exhortation: "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; And having an high priest over the house of God; Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from all evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering."

Coupled with this exhortation is a warning that "if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?" (Heb. 10:19-29.)

There follows the great discourse on faith, some further exhortations and promises of eternal reward, and then a return to the purpose of the epistle, that of proving to the Hebrews, by their own sacrificial performances, that Jesus is the Lamb of God whose atoning sacrifice taketh away the sins of the world. "We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name. But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased." (Heb. 11-13.)

It may seem, in a life of Christ, that we have been unnecessarily prolix and have gone into too much detail relative to the sacrifices of Jesus' day, as well as to their purpose and meaning. To the contrary, this very omission is one of the great deficiencies of most of what is written about our Lord in modern times. Paul thought it of sufficient moment to give forth such statements as we have now quoted, and the reality is that no one can really understand our Lord's life and sayings without a knowledge of the religious system in which he was reared and which was designed to introduce him and bear record of his ministry. The law of sacrifice is the introduction of the Lord Jesus Christ to the world.

It was a desolating day when Herod's Temple died. It was a sad and sorrowful day for the Jews when sacrifices ceased, for with their passing went also the last vestige of the true religious performances that prevailed among them. Without these they had left less than a shell of godliness. Had they turned to the Eternal Temple and to the Eternal Sacrifice, all would have been well with them, but as it is, we can only say, with Peter: "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) The times of restitution commenced in the spring of 1820, and the times of refreshing, when the earth shall be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory, are not far distant.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] On the days preceding the feast, the pilgrim bands—"Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven" (Acts 2:5)—Joyously assembled at Jerusalem, at the Holy City, the City of the Great King, the site of the Lord's House. What a glorious thing it is for the faithful to go up to Zion, the city of their God! See chapters 22, 29, 30, and 95 through 101 in this work, The Mortal Messiah.
[^2] Also before the appointed day, attended by the appointed ceremonial recitations and performances, sheaves of wheat were reaped and the grain was harvested, parched, ground into flour, and sifted through twelve sieves. The night before, the two wave loaves, each of leavened bread and weighing together more than ten pounds, were baked. Israel's calendar was lunar, and the advent of each New Moon - a determination made by observing the lunar phases - became a matter of great moment to them. The calendar was kept in balance by inserting a thirteenth month in the year from time to time. The mean duration of the Jewish month was 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, and 3
[^3] The great altar was cleansed, all things were arranged for the rites to follow, and about midnight the temple gates were opened so the priests could examine the animals brought by the people for burnt offerings and for peace offerings. In addition to the daily sacrifice, the offering included two bullocks, a ram, and seven lambs as a burnt offering, with meat offerings and drink offerings, and a kid as a sin offering. (Num. 28:11-15.) And as on all festive occasions there were also the private offerings of the people.
