Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 9

Jewish Feasts in Jesus' Day

When he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast: for they also went unto the feast. . . . After this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. (John 4:45; 5:1.)

The Nature of Jewish Feasts

Jesus used the Jewish feasts as the ideal and perfect occasions to proclaim his divine Sonship, to dramatize the great and eternal truths concerning himself in such ways that they never would be forgotten, and to work miracles and bless his fellowmen. We may suppose also that he used them as occasions of personal worship and communion with his Father, for such was the very purpose for which they had been established, and it was his wont, as a Jew, to keep his own law, until the time that he himself fulfilled and revoked it.

Many sweet and lovely episodes of his life occurred at the feasts. Some of his most profound doctrine was taught to the worshipful throngs who assembled to keep the feasts; and miracles, beyond compare, were wrought by his hands at those solemn and sacred times. The Jewish feasts were part of the life of Jesus. We see him at the Feast of the Passover, when but twelve years of age, confounding the wise and the learned. He was there because "his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover." (Luke 2:41-52.) We hear him tell Peter and John to prepare the Passover so that he and the Twelve could eat thereof. We hear his brethren—Mary's other sons, who did not then believe—chide him with the challenge to go to the Feast of Tabernacles and work further miracles, and we hear his reply that they should go now and he will come later. We see the Jews, astonished at his absence, seeking him at the feast. About the midst of the feast, we find him teaching in the temple; and then, "In the last day, that great day of the feast," as the priest takes water from the stream of Siloam, in a golden vessel, and pours it upon the altar, we hear his dramatic pronouncement: "If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." (John 7:1-39.)

As we place Jesus in the setting of the Jewish feasts, where he so logically is found and so naturally fits; as we envision that these feasts were part of the great schooling system, part of the way of worship of devout Jews, and were, therefore, imposed upon Jesus by his guardians and by the social pressure of his day; as we realize that he was acquainted with them and participated in their rituals, we must keep foremost in our thoughts the central performances undertaken at them. All of the feasts were occasions for the offering of sacrifices: public sacrifices for the spiritual well-being and salvation of the whole congregation, and private sacrifices for the forgiveness of personal sins and the reconciliation of true worshippers with their God. Sacrificial offerings; offerings made on the great altar, thirty by thirty feet square at the top; sacrifices in which blood was shed as a symbol of reconciliation; sacrifices made in similitude of Him who mingled with the festive throngs at those very feasts, seeking to do them good, while their rulers sought to do him ill—these were the center of Jewish religious worship. They were ordinances of salvation, and without them, as far as that day was concerned, men could not gain an inheritance with Him who dwells behind the veil.

There were three great feasts—the Feast of the Passover, the Feast of Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles. All Israelite males were commanded to appear three times a year before the Lord in his sanctuary, meaning that attendance at these three feasts was obligatory, and all were to go up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, to purify themselves before him, and to carry back to their various cities and farms the spirit of festive worship in which they had participated. Women were welcome—and we find Mary accompanying Joseph, at least when their twelve-year-old son taught in the temple—though they were not required to attend.

These feasts, in ancient times, had a great unifying effect upon the people, both religiously, politically, and socially. Without them the self-willed tribes might have divided themselves into a dozen kingdoms, each going its own way, to the destruction of Israel as a people and as a nation. By the time of Jesus, however, it was no longer possible for all males—scattered among many nations, as they were—to go up three times a year to the City of God. Instead twenty-four courses of lay attendants were appointed to stand in the temple as representatives of all the people; attendance at the feasts became something that could be delegated, as it were.

These great feasts were times for festive offerings, a form of private sacrifices, as distinguished from the public sacrifices for the whole congregation. They were occasions for making freewill offerings for the poor and the Levites. At them and at other feasts there was a holy convocation, or gathering together for sacred purposes; there was rest, either from all work or from all servile work, as the case may be; and certain special sacrifices, depending upon the occasion, were offered for the whole congregation.

We shall now make such reference as must needs be to the feasts here named and to the others—the Feast of Esther or Purim, and the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple—that also played a vital part in Jewish worship.

The Feast of the Passover

By Feast of the Passover we mean the Passover itself, which fell on the 14th of Nisan, and also the Feast of Unleavened Bread, which lasted from Nisan 15 through 21. Though separate feasts, they were considered to be one, and they both commemorated the Exodus from Egyptian bondage. Our chief interest in them, as we study the life of our Lord, is to learn why and how and in what manner they were kept by the Jews in Jesus' day, and for that matter how the Lord Jesus himself kept this greatest of all Jewish feasts. This latter we shall set forth more particularly when we recline with Jesus and the Twelve, in a place apart from the throngs, to eat the Paschal Supper, and see how naturally and easily the sacrament of the Lord's Supper grew out of it.

But as to the Passover proper, and as to the Feast of Unleavened Bread, which was part and portion of the over-all festival—what were they, whence and why did they come, and what purpose did they serve? Without question the Passover season was the most joyous and glorious time of Jewish and Israelitish worship. Israel was born when Jacob's name was changed and when that faithful patriarch began to have seed. Her numbers were a mere seventy when she saved herself from famine by going down in to Egypt. There she prospered until there arose a new king who knew not Joseph. Then came slavery, bondage, toil. Then were her male children slain and her young men scourged. Then did they find their own straw to make the bricks for Pharaoh's palaces and cities. Then were they downtrodden physically, socially, culturally, spiritually. Now, after four centuries, numbering more than two million souls, they cried mightily unto the Lord for deliverance. And the Great I AM, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their fathers, sent them a Moses.

Miracles were wrought: plagues were poured out; Pharaoh hardened his heart; the burdens on Jacob's seed increased; until finally, in their dire extremity, the Lord in his wrath chose to slay the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne, the firstborn of the governors who hated his people, the firstborn of the taskmasters whose whips cut the flesh of the chosen seed, the firstborn in every Egyptian family in all the land, and the firstborn of all their cattle. Let these hosts die, he decreed, and die they did, for they had defied God and said by the mouth of Pharaoh, 'Who is Jehovah that I and my people should give heed unto him?'

Then, in his mercy and goodness, lest the destroying angel slay any of the chosen seed, the Lord provided a Passover, a way of escape for his people. Later, in the wilderness, as their priestly rituals were perfected, he added to this the Feast of Unleavened Bread. That all Israel might know and remember and ponder that the Lord Jehovah, who delivered them from Egyptian bondage, was their Messiah, their Christ and the One who would shed his blood for the sins of the world, the angel of death was commanded to pass over the houses on whose doors and lintels the blood of a sacrificial lamb had been sprinkled. Israel was to be saved by the blood of the lamb.

In each Israelite house a young lamb or kid, a male of the first year and one without blemish, was selected and slain. The head of each house, using a sprig of hyssop, sprinkled blood on the doorposts and on the lintel; the lamb or kid was roasted whole; not a bone was broken; and it was eaten, in haste, along with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.

No uncircumcised male, none in whose flesh the symbol of the Abrahamic covenant was not found, was to partake, but each male who did partake was to stand with his loins girt, his staff in his hand, and his shoes on his feet. Any of the uneaten flesh was to be burned. In later generations this Egyptian Passover became a permanent Passover with such changes and perfections in the ritualistic arrangements as better suited the accustomed and established order of religious services.

Israel was a people, the Lord's people, from the day Jacob and Leah had Reuben. She became a nation, a dependent nation, while dwelling in Goshen and living under Egyptian sovereignty and she went into bondage and slavery when the fortunes of war put Egypt in unfriendly hands. But she was born as a free nation when Jehovah removed the heavy hand of Egypt, and she was redeemed from a state of slavery when the Great Jehovah led her through the Red Sea—first into a wilderness, and then into a fruitful land flowing with milk and honey. Israel became a free people, a free nation, a new kingdom on that first Passover night, and ever thereafter the Passover festivities were a birthday celebration, but—and this was the whole center and heart of the occasion—a celebration in which Christ and his redeeming ministry were brought over and over again to the attention of all those who subjected themselves to the rituals of this chief feast.

In the day of Jesus, both public and private sacrifices were made, and the paschal lambs were slain for each family or group, each of such units containing from ten to twenty persons. Jesus and the Twelve made up a group of thirteen, which dropped to an even twelve when evil Judas withdrew. When Nero sat in Caesar's seat a count was made of the number of lambs slain in Jerusalem at one Passover: the total, 256,000. On the basis of a minimum of ten in each group, this meant a Passover population for the holy city of 2,560,000. Josephus placed it that year at 2,700,200 and there were times when the assembled hosts numbered not less than 3,000,000.

Rabbi Gamaliel, the teacher of Paul, said: "Whoever does not explain three things in the Passover has not fulfilled the duty incumbent on him. These three things are: the Passover lamb, the unleavened bread, and the bitter herbs. The Passover lamb means that God passed over the blood-sprinkled place on the houses of our fathers in Egypt; the unleavened bread means that our fathers were delivered out of Egypt (in haste); and the bitter herbs mean that the Egyptians made bitter the lives of our fathers in Egypt." (Temple, p. 237.)

Paul, who was taught from on high as well as being the pupil of Gamaliel, knew more about the Passover than did his rabbinical instructor. In administering a severe rebuke to the sinning saints of Corinth, the apostle says: "Your glorying is not good." Then he asks: "Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?" That is, if you have in your heart the spirit of the gospel, it will influence you to pursue a course of righteousness, but if you still have in your heart the spirit of the world, your conduct will be after the manner of the world. "Purge out therefore the old leaven"—forsake the world and cast away the evil inclinations of your souls—"that ye may be a new lump"—that ye may be born again, be a new creature of the Holy Ghost, live in a newness of life—"as ye are unleavened"—that is, live in righteousness because ye are no longer leavened with the unrighteousness of the world. "For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us," meaning that all this is possible because the Eternal Paschal Lamb has wrought the atoning sacrifice for us. "Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness: but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." (1 Cor. 5:6-8.) With the offering of the Eternal Sacrifice the Passover ceases except in the sense that the true saints adopt the true principles upon which it was based, and so purge the leaven of wickedness out of their souls and eat forever of the unleavened bread of truth and righteousness.

The Feast of Unleavened Bread was an occasion in Israel for joy and rejoicing. The bread itself was called "the bread of affliction," to remind Israel of the sorrows and sufferings of their Egyptian bondage (Deut. 12:1-8), but the emphasis was not upon the afflictions of the past but upon the joys of the present and the future. Israel had been delivered from bondage through the Passover, and the eating of unleavened bread for seven days did more to remind them that the fulness of the earth was now theirs than to unduly emphasize the afflictions that once were theirs.

On the first day of the feast (the second day of the Passover) there was a holy convocation, and the first ripe sheaf of grain was presented to the Lord. It was the feast of spring, with all the joy and rebirth that goes with the season. On each day of the feast, following the regular morning sacrifice, burnt offerings were made wherein the people surrendered their will to the will of the Lord, and sin offerings were made as an atonement for their sins. On the concluding day there was a solemn assembly. All in all it is difficult to imagine how a festive period could have been devised, under the Mosaic system, that would have done more to bring spirituality and blessings into the lives of the people than did the performances and worship of the Passover period. And that the Lord participated in them to the full we shall set forth in due course. [^1]

Everything connected with the Passover period, from Nisan 14 through 21, is so dramatic, so filled with symbolism, so designed to center the attention of the Lord's people in the great and eternal truths of salvation that even today, when the Passover is past and we no longer need, to the extent our forebears did, to ponder its place in the plan of salvation, we are still prone to use its happenings to teach various related truths and principles. Thoughtful Christians may well reason, as many of them have, along such lines as these:

The Passover is a type of deliverance from the slavery of sin; from the bondage of the world; from the Pharaohs of greed and power and lust. It is the passing over of the angel of spiritual death so that the darkness of unbelief is replaced by the light of the gospel. It is a deliverance from the doom we deserve for our sins; from the spiritual death that awaits the wicked; from the outer darkness of Egypt and Sodom and Sheol—because the blood of Christ has been applied to us by faith. By sprinkling our Lord's blood upon the doorposts of our hearts and upon the lintels of our souls, we set our dwellings apart from the world; we make open and visible confession of our allegiance to Him whose blood has eternal saving power; we set ourselves apart from the Egyptians, the Sodomites, and the seekers after Sheol; and we place ourselves with the believing portion of mankind. As each family group ate their paschal lamb and drank of the cup of blessing, so must we eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Lord Jesus. As the Passover was useless unless eaten, so must we live godly lives in Christ, and openly certify our love for him by keeping his commandments. As it was eaten with bitter herbs, so must we eat our Passover with the bitter herbs of confession and repentance. As ancient Israel ate their Passover girt for a journey, shod with sandals, with a staff in their hands, so must modern Israel dress for their journey; so must they clothe themselves with the robes of righteousness, as they journey from Idumea to Zion, from Babylon to Palestine. As they, in the face of all the power and influence of Egypt, prepared to follow Moses wherever he led them, so must we follow our modern Moses through the Red Sea of doubt, into the wilderness of trials, and finally over the Jordan to that Promised Land where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and all the saints now dwell, there to rest in glory.

Truly the saints today can slay their own paschal lambs, eat their own unleavened bread, keep their own Passover, and serve Him whom their forebears served during that millennium and a half when the original Feast of the Passover was kept with joy and rejoicing!

The Feast of Pentecost

Pentecost had its beginning in the Passover, and the Passover had its ending, seven weeks later, in Pentecost; the two feasts are tied together, with the one growing out of the other. At the Passover, on the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, Israel presented the Passover sheaf to the Lord. With ritualistic ceremony they harvested the first of the barley crop, threshed the heads of grain, parched the grain, and ground it into fine flour. One omer (just over five pints) of fine flour was chosen, and oil and frankincense were added; the mixture was then waved before the Lord, and a portion was burned on the altar. This was the beginning of the harvest, which would be climaxed fifty days later at Pentecost. The Passover began on Nisan 14 (early April) with the beginning of the harvest of barley, and Pentecost came on Sivan 6 (about the end of May) with the start of the harvest of wheat. They were the harvest festivals of Israel.

On the day of Pentecost—called also the Feast of Harvest, the Day of First Fruits, and the Feast of Weeks—Israel was to hold a holy convocation and do no servile work. All males were to appear before the Lord in his sanctuary, and the appointed sacrifices and offerings were to be made. The order of worship and the performances attending it are generally conceded to be as follows:

Jewish tradition, having apparent foundation in fact, held that as the Passover commemorated the deliverance from Egypt, so Pentecost commemorated the wondrous outpouring of divine grace that occurred fifty days later when with his own finger—the same finger that had touched the sixteen stones for Moriancumer—the Great Jehovah wrote his law on tablets of stone and gave them to Moses the man of God. What is more to the point is that our Lord was crucified as part of the Passover, and that the Holy Spirit of God came in power on the Day of Pentecost. For forty days after his resurrection Jesus continued to minister among the Twelve as a resurrected Being. Then he ascended to his Father, leaving them with instructions to tarry in Jerusalem until they were endowed with power from on high. Ten days later, "when the day of Pentecost was fully come," the apostles, with Matthias now one of their number, and perhaps other believers, "were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting."

Were they in the temple at the time, and was the house where they were sitting one of the porches where Jesus had so often sat to teach and expound? Opinions may vary, but such is not improbable. The "house," wherever it was, was open to the public, for great hosts—of whom three thousand were converted and baptized—rushed to hear and see and feel the miracle. How many houses there were, aside from the house of the Lord, where three or ten or scores of thousands could readily assemble is open to question. Further, the place where Jerusalem's throngs were found on a feast day was in the great court that surrounded the holy sanctuary. But an even more compelling question is: Where else would the Jewish apostles and their followers have gone on a Jewish feast day than to the Lord's holy sanctuary? They, as yet—for the gift of the Holy Ghost had not taken hold of their minds—felt subject to the law that called for every male to appear before the Lord in his sanctuary on that day. Would they have been keeping the commandment and standing in the line of their duty, as they then understood it, or would they have been elsewhere, plotting, as it were, against what they had always known to be the established order? For that matter, it was their wont, on all days, to make the temple their center of worship. Habits change gradually. Jesus and the Twelve had worshipped in the temple while the Lord dwelt among them. Each one of them, time after time, had made the required appearance at the appointed place.

Further, after Jesus "was parted from them, and carried up into heaven," the Twelve "worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy: And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God." (Luke 24:49-53.) And even after the Day of Pentecost, their numbers swelled by the three thousand Pentecostal baptisms, the record says: "And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart. Praising God, and having favour with all the people." (Acts 2:46-47.) Later still, Peter and John, while walking through the gate called Beautiful, healed the man lame from his mother's womb, causing the "Gentile" mobs, then in the court of the Gentiles, to cause their arrest and imprisonment. Indeed, we might well ask: If fire was to come down from heaven again, as it had done in Solomon's Temple, where else would it come than to the house used by the Lord as his own?

But wherever the miracle occurred, it was the ushering in of the day of miracles and revelation that always attends the true saints. For, "there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them." It was as though the fires on the stony altars of the dying dispensation were now ignited in the mellowed hearts of the Saints. "And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. . . . Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language." The apostles spoke in Aramaic, with their Galilean and Palestinian dialects, and all men, be they whosoever they might be and speaking whatsoever language was theirs, heard and understood. "And they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak Galileans? And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?" (Acts 2:1-13.) How fitting it was that, while the sacrificial fires yet burned on the altar of sacrifice, living fire should come down from heaven to burn forever in the hearts of those who were to sacrifice their lives in the cause of truth and righteousness.

The Feast of Tabernacles

Taking our cues and quotations from Edersheim (Temple, pp. 268-87), but tempering his views with the added light and knowledge revealed in the dispensation of the fulness of times, we shall now turn to the Feast of Tabernacles, "the most joyous of all festive seasons in Israel." As we have heretofore seen, this is the one great Jewish-Israelitish feast that was not abolished forever when He who gave the law also fulfilled that which had come from Him. As the prophets have said, it shall be celebrated again during the Millennium, when the sons of Levi, in purity and worthiness, at the direction of the Melchizedek authority that governs the Church of God in all ages, shall offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. Our present major concern, however, is to see how and in what manner this feast bore record of Jesus and to see how he himself used it during his mortal ministry to show the people what witness they were in fact bearing through its sacred and holy rituals.

Of Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles—the three annual festive occasions when Jehovah commanded all male Israelites to appear before him in his holy sanctuary in Jerusalem, and not to come empty handed—it is appropriately said: "If the beginning of the harvest had pointed back to the birth of Israel in their Exodus from Egypt, and forward to the true Passover-sacrifice in the future; if the corn-harvest was connected with the giving of the law on Mount Sinai in the past, and the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the Day of Pentecost; the harvest-thanksgiving of the Feast of Tabernacles reminded Israel, on the one hand, of their dwelling in booths in the wilderness, while, on the other hand, it pointed to the final harvest when Israel's mission should be completed, and all nations gathered unto the Lord." (Temple, p. 269.)

Thus the Feast of Tabernacles is called also the Feast of Booths, for Israel dwelt in booths or huts when she first came out of Egypt, and the Feast of Ingathering, for by Tishri 15, when the seven-day feast began (the September-October period), the whole harvest, with its corn and wine and oil, had been stored for the winter ahead. To envision how Jewish Israel worshipped in the days of Jesus, it will be instructive to summarize what was done at this feast. As with all feasts, it was a period of worship and spiritual refreshment, a time to renew covenants and return unto the Lord with full purpose of heart. In this case, however, the feast began four days after the Day of Atonement, "in which the sin of Israel had been removed, and its covenant relation to God restored. Thus a sanctified nation could keep a holy feast of harvest joy unto the Lord, just as in the truest sense it will be in that day" spoken of by the prophets, when "every one that is left of all the nations . . . shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles," when millennial righteousness will be such that "Holiness unto the Lord" will be inscribed on almost all things. (Zech. 14:16-21; Temple, pp. 271-72.)

Joyous festivities marked the Feast of Tabernacles; the "ingathering" spirit prevailed; without their harvests Israel would perish for want of bread; and famine was a constant threat. How natural that they should rejoice in what the Lord had given them—from the soil and the rain and the sun! And how natural that Jehovah would expect of them thanksgiving and rejoicing for the bounties that flowed from his hands! Thus we hear him say: "Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine: And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates." Why? "Because the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice." Then, as to the three great feasts—Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles—the Lord said of all who went up to Jerusalem to keep them: "And they shall not appear before the Lord empty: Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee." (Deut. 16:13-17.) And at these festive occasions, both those who gave and those who received would have occasion to rejoice. "Votive, freewill, and peace-offerings would mark their gratitude to God, and at the meal which ensued the poor, the stranger, the Levite, and the homeless would be welcome guests, for the Lord's sake." (Temple, p. 272.)

In the day of Jesus, as had been the case since the day of Moses, all male Israel, at Tabernacle-time, left their houses of wood and stone and dwelt in huts or booths made of the boughs of living trees. For one week, except in very heavy rain, they ate, slept, prayed, studied, and lived in these temporary abodes. Women, the sick and their attendants, slaves, infants dependent on their mothers, and some away on pious duties were exempt. "When ye have gathered in the fruit of the land," was the decree the Lord had given them, "ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day shall be a sabbath." The eighth day, the Octave of the feast, was, strictly speaking, not part of the feast itself, but served as an added day of worship. "And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God seven days." The use of these boughs and branches in the rejoicing rites shall be set forth shortly. "And ye shall keep it a feast unto the Lord seven days in the year. It shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month. Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths: That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God." (Lev. 23:39-43.) Surely there were those among them who realized thereby, not alone that their tent-type life in escaping from Egypt was a temporary arrangement as they traveled en route to a promised land, but that all men are strangers and pilgrims on earth, en route to a more enduring abode, a home, not made with hands, that is eternal in the heavens.

We have heretofore dealt, sufficiently for our needs—in connection with Passover and with Pentecost and with Mosaic sacrificial performances as such—with the sacrificial system of worship. We are aware of how sins are forgiven, how covenants are made, how vows are kept, how God is blessed and glorified, and how spiritual refreshment comes through sacrificial offerings. We need here merely point out the unique and peculiar nature of the sacrifices required at the Feast of Tabernacles, and to remind ourselves that sacrifices as such—whether public or private, and whether offered as burnt offerings, sin offerings, trespass offerings, or peace offerings—were at the heart and core of ritualistic religion in those days.

Burnt offerings—the sacrifices of devotion and service, which symbolized the entire surrender of the people to Jehovah and his acceptance of them—were more numerous during the Feast of Tabernacles than at any of the other festivals. On each of the seven days two rams and 14 lambs were offered; on the first day 13 bullocks were also offered, with this number being diminished by one each day so that seven only were offered on the seventh day. Thus 182 burnt offerings, each with its proper meat and drink offering, sent their sweet savor up to Jehovah during this period. In addition, one kid was offered for a sin offering on each day; and on the Octave day, seven lambs, one ram, and one bullock were offered as burnt offerings, plus one kid as a sin offering. All of these were in addition to the continual burnt offerings, their meat and drink offerings, and all of the private offerings of the hosts of devout worshippers. Our purpose in setting this forth is simply to show that the Feast of Tabernacles should have been and was the great period both of thanksgiving and of rededication.

Now let us go back to "the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook," which the people were to take and use as they rejoiced before the Lord. In the day of Jesus—and we must assume such was the case from the beginning of the feast—these were carried in the hands of the people. Since the use to which they were put is the same as that of the white handkerchiefs, when the Hosanna Shout is given at temple dedications and certain other solemn assemblies in latter-day Israel, we shall note particularly the rabbinical regulations relative to them. "The Rabbis ruled, that 'the fruit of the goodly trees' meant the aethrog, or citron, and 'the boughs of thick trees' the myrtle, provided it had 'not more berries than leaves.' The aethrogs must be without blemish or deficiency of any kind; the palm branches at least three handbreadths high, and fit to be shaken; and each branch fresh, entire, unpolluted, and not taken from any idolatrous grove. Every worshipper carried the aethrog in his left hand, and in his right the lulav, or palm, with myrtle and willow branch on either side of it, tied together on the outside with its own kind, though in the inside it might be fastened even with gold thread. There can be no doubt that the lulav was intended to remind Israel of the different stages of their wilderness journey, as represented by the different vegetation—the palm branches recalling the valley and plains, the 'boughs of thick trees,' the bushes on the mountain heights, and the willows those brooks from which God had given his people drink; while the aethrog was to remind them of the fruits of the good land which the Lord had given them. The lulav was used in the Temple on each of the seven festive days, even children, if they were able to shake it, being bound to carry one."

The use of these lulavs was in this manner: On each of the seven days of the feast, "while the morning sacrifice was being prepared, a priest, accompanied by a joyous procession with music, went down to the Pool of Siloam, whence he drew water into a golden pitcher." Amid much pageantry this water was carried back to the great altar; and when the wine of the drink offering was poured out, so was the water from Siloam, as part of an elaborate ceremony. "As soon as the wine and the water were being poured out, the temple music began, and the 'Hallel' was sung. . . . When the choir came to these words, 'O give thanks to the Lord,' and again when they sang, 'O work then now salvation, Jehovah;' and once more at the close, 'O give thanks unto the Lord,' all the worshippers shook their lulavs towards the altar. When, therefore, the multitudes from Jerusalem, on meeting Jesus, 'cut down branches from the trees, and strewed them in the way, and . . . cried, saying, O then, work now salvation to the Son of David!' they applied, in reference to Christ, what was regarded as one of the chief ceremonies of the Feast of Tabernacles, praying that God would from 'the highest' heavens manifest and send that salvation in connection with the Son of David, which was symbolized by the pouring out of the water." (Temple, pp. 274-79.)

In the cries of praise and adoration—given each day for seven days, as the temple throngs waved their palm branches toward the great altar, and consisting of a three-times-repeated expression of glorious exultation—we see the pattern for the Hosanna Shout as it has been revealed anew and is now given also on special and sacred occasions. In our day, while waving white handkerchiefs with each word or phrase of praise, united Israel exults:

Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, To God and the Lamb; Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, To God and the Lamb; Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, To God and the Lamb; Amen, Amen, Amen!

However, at the Feast of Tabernacles, in addition to the daily Hosanna Shout, which followed and grew out of the offering of the daily sacrifice, there was yet another shout—a Great Hosanna, a Hosanna of Hosannas—which was given on one day only, following the festive sacrifices, and on "that great day of the feast." The setting for the Great Hosanna was the ceremonial circuiting of the altar by those appointed so to do. "On every one of the seven days the priests formed in procession, and made the circuit of the altar, singing: 'O then, now work salvation, Jehovah! O Jehovah, give prosperity!' But on the seventh, 'that great day of the feast,' they made the circuit of the altar seven times, remembering how the walls of Jericho had fallen in similar circumstances, and anticipating how, by the direct interposition of God, the walls of heathenism would fall before Jehovah, and the land lie open for his people to go in and possess it." This time, on the day called by the Rabbis "Day of the Great Hosanna," "Day of Willows," and "Day of Beating the Branches," amid their cries of praise to Jehovah, the worshipping throngs waved their lulavs with such vigor that "all the leaves were shaken off the willow boughs, and the palm branches beaten in pieces by the side of the altar." Such was the climactic moment of the Hosanna Shout in the Feast of Tabernacles. (Temple, pp. 280-81.)

Similitudes of the Feast of Tabernacles

There are in the Feast of Tabernacles more ceremonies that center in Christ, more similitudes that tell of his life and ministry, and more types and shadows that testify of him and his redeeming sacrifice than in any of the other feasts. In a general sense, the Feast of Tabernacles has all that the other feasts had, and a great deal more that is unique, distinctive, and reserved for this most joyous of all festive occasions.

The chief and most important symbolism in all the feasts was that shown forth through the sacrificial ordinances. These bore record of the coming sacrifice of the Lamb of God and taught the people how redemption came and how sins were to be remitted by the sprinkling of his blood. At the Feast of Tabernacles the number of public sacrifices was multiplied and we may suppose that in practice—because the Day of Atonement had just cleansed and sanctified the people, and because of the especially joyous nature of the feast—there were more private sacrifices, more votive offerings, more freewill offerings than at any other time.

We are aware of the reasons Israel dwelt in booths at this season and of their rejoicing over the harvests reaped; and we see in these things a type of man's pilgrimage through the wilderness of the world and of the eternal rejoicing that will attend the harvest of the souls of men. We have noted how the Hosanna Shout spoke praise to Jehovah and how its very words were interpreted by the multitudes to apply to the Son of David as he made his triumphal entry into Jerusalem as they spread palm branches in the way. We need not pursue further what is clear to all who are spiritually literate, except to show how two of the special ceremonies of the feast bore record of Christ and were used by him to dramatize and announce the fulfillment of the figures found in them. One of these is the pouring out of the water, which preceded the Hosanna Shout, and the other is the illumination of the temple. Both of these ceremonies are said to be post-Mosaic and post-Exilic, that is, to have been added after the day of the great lawgiver and after the return from Babylon. This may be true; if so, it is an indication of continuing revelation to the Lord's people; or, it may be that the rites, though not mentioned in Holy Writ, were part of the ceremonies from the beginning. In any event they were a vital part of valid and approved performances in the day of Jesus. He was acquainted with them and used them for his own purposes.

As we have seen, the priests poured the water from Siloam on the altar after the daily morning sacrifice and before the festive offerings and as a prelude to the waving of palm branches in the Hosanna Shout. Of this pouring of the water it is said: "Its main and real application was to the future outpouring of the Holy Spirit, as predicted—probably in allusion to this very rite—by Isaiah the prophet. Thus the Talmud says distinctly: 'Why is the name of it called, The drawing out of water? Because of the pouring out of the Holy Spirit, according to what is said: "With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation." Hence, also, the feast and the peculiar joyousness of it are alike designated as those of 'the drawing out of water;' for, according to the same Rabbinical authorities, the Holy Spirit dwells in man only through joy."

Now with this concept before us—that Israel by the power of the Spirit was to draw waters from the wells of salvation, and that such was symbolized by the rite then in progress—and with the Hosanna Shout ringing in our ears, let its see what happened in the life of Jesus on the seventh day of the feast. It was on the day after the priest had returned from Siloam with his golden pitcher, and for the last time poured its contents to the base of the altar; after the 'Hallel' had been sung to the sound of the flute, the people responding and worshipping as the priests three times drew the threefold blasts from their silver trumpets—just when the interest of the people had been raised to its highest pitch, that, from amidst the mass of worshippers, who were waving towards the altar quite a forest of leafy branches as the last words of Psalm 118 were chanted—a voice was raised which resounded through the Temple, startled the multitude, and carried fear and hatred to the hearts of their leaders. It was Jesus, who 'stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.' Then by faith in him should each one truly become like the Pool of Siloam, and from his inmost being, 'flow rivers of living water.' 'This spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.' (John 7:37-39.) Thus the significance of the rite, in which they had just taken part, was not only fully explained, but the mode of its fulfilment pointed out." (Temple, pp. 279-81.)

At the close of the first day of the feast—amid hymns and songs of praise; with instrumental music accompanying and trumpets blowing repeated blasts; as dancers held flaming torches in their hands; and amid pageantry that was itself ritualistic—four of the sons of Levi lighted the four great golden candelabras. "The light shining out of the Temple into the darkness around, and lighting up every court in Jerusalem, must have been intended as a symbol not only of the Shechinah which once filled the Temple, but of that 'great light' which 'the people that walked in darkness' were to see, and which was to shine 'upon them that dwell in the land of the shadow of death.'" (Temple, p. 285.) Surely, Master Teacher that he was, the shining forth of this light from the temple was the occasion for Jesus, at that very feast, to say: "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.)

So much for the similitudes of the past. But what of the future? The Feast of Tabernacles is both past and future. What wondrous types and figures, what sacred similitudes and symbolisms, will yet be given at the Feast of Tabernacles that is to be? Surely, whatever they are—fitted to the then-existing needs, as they will be—they will testify of a Lord who came, of a Christ who is risen, and of a King who reigns. And it is not without significance that when the Beloved John saw in vision the hosts of Israel and of all men worshipping God in millennial peace and in celestial glory, he saw a renewed scene, before the throne of God, of what had been prefigured around the altar in Herod's Temple. "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb." These are they who are "before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple." And "the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters." (Rev. 7.)

Other Feasts, Fasts, and Formalities

Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles—each with its sacred symbolism; each with its redeeming power; each serving as a shadow of better things to come—these were the three great feasts of Jewish Israel, the triennial times when all adult males were to appear before the Lord, in the holy sanctuary and there renew their covenants and receive anew a remission of their sins. But if there are greater feasts, there must needs be lesser ones: there cannot be the blazing light of the sun at its zenith unless there is also the lesser light of the dawning day or the calming glow of an approaching twilight, and what we must not forget is that the lesser light also guides our footsteps and the lesser feasts also feed our souls.

Each New Moon—of which there were twelve or thirteen each year, as the case may be [^2]—was a festive day marked by the offering of special sacrifices, [^3] the blowing of trumpets, and a joyous spirit of rededication. It was also an occasion for state banquets, for family feasts, and one, like the Sabbath, when trade and handicraft work ceased. It was with the Day of the New Moon as it was with all else that Israel had: by offering in sacrifice the firstlings of their flocks and the firstfruits of their harvests, all of their flocks and the whole of their harvests became holy before the Lord; and so by sanctifying the first day of the month, the whole lunar period became one of rejoicing and thanksgiving. Religion was truly a way of life with Jewish Israel; their whole course of conduct was religious in nature, worshipful in character, and Jehovah-centered in fact.

"Scarcely any other festive season could have left so continuous an impress on the religious life of Israel as the 'New Moons.' Recurring at the beginning of every month, and marking it, the solemn proclamation of the day, by—'It is sanctified,' was intended to give a hallowed character to each month, while the blowing of the priests' trumpets and the special sacrifices brought, would summon, as it were, the Lord's host to offer their tribute unto their exalted King, and thus bring themselves into 'remembrance' before Him. . . .

"In the law of God only these two things are enjoined in the observance of the 'New Moon'—the 'blowing of trumpets' and special festive sacrifices. Of old the 'blowing of trumpets' had been the signal for Israel's host on their march through the wilderness, as it afterwards summoned them to warfare, and proclaimed or marked days of public rejoicing, and feasts, as well as the 'beginnings of their months.' The object of it is expressly stated to have been 'for a memorial,' that they might 'be remembered before Jehovah,' it being specially added: 'I am Jehovah your God.' It was, so to speak, the host of God assembled, waiting for their Leader; the people of God united to proclaim their King. At the blast of the priests' trumpets they ranged themselves, as it were, under his banner and before his throne, and this symbolical confession and proclamation of him as 'Jehovah their God,' brought them before him to be 'remembered' and 'saved.' And so every season of 'blowing the trumpets,' whether at New Moons, at the Feast of Trumpets or New Year's Day, at other festivals, in the Sabbatical and Year of Jubilee, or in the time of war, was a public acknowledgment of Jehovah as King. Accordingly we find the same symbols adopted in the figurative language of the New Testament. As of old the sound of the trumpet summoned the congregation before the Lord at the door of the Tabernacle, so 'His elect' shall be summoned by the sound of the trumpet in the day of Christ's coming, and not only the living, but those also who had 'slept'—'the dead in Christ.' Similarly, the heavenly hosts are marshalled to the war of successive judgments till, as 'the seventh angel sounded,' Christ is proclaimed King Universal: 'The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.'" [^4]

On the first day of the seventh month, Tishri, the New Moon festival became the Feast of Trumpets, or the Day of Blowing of Trumpets, when horns and trumpets were blown—not merely during the offering of sacrifices as on the regular New Moon festivals, but all day long in Jerusalem, when additional sacrifices were prescribed, [^5] and when a holy convocation was held. This was New Year's Day, the first day of the civil year. It preceded the Day of Atonement by ten days, during which time the people were expected to repent, as a condition precedent to the remission of sins that came when the high priest made an atonement for them and sprinkled the redeeming blood in the Holy of Holies.

In the day of Jesus there were three other festive seasons that are not mentioned in the law of Moses, but that were an established part of the worship system to which our Lord was subject. These feasts, brought into being by the spirit of inspiration as it had rested upon the recognized leaders of the people, were established to commemorate great historical events rather than to typify gospel truths. Hence, no special rites and sacrifices were prescribed.

The Feast of Purim, commemorated the preservation of the Jews in Persia from the massacre planned by Haman in the days of Esther and Ahasuerus. It lasted two days and included the reading of the book of Esther, the cursing of Haman and all idolaters, and the blessing of Mordecai and all Israelites. It was an occasion of great merriment and rejoicing, and is believed by Some to be the "feast of the Jews" to which Jesus went when he healed "the impotent man" at the pool of Bethesda. (John 5:19.) [^6]

The Feast of Dedication commemorated the cleansing and rededication of Zerubbabel's Temple in 164 B.C., when Judas Maccabaeus freed the Jews from Syro-Grecian domination. It was patterned after the Feast of Tabernacles to the extent that it lasted eight days, included the illumination of the temple, the singing of the Hallel on each day, and the waving of palm branches toward the altar in the Hosanna Shout. It was during this feast that the Lord Jesus, having healed the man who was blind from birth, having announced himself as the Good Shepherd, and having taught plainly that he would die for the people, made the great proclamation: "I and my Father are one." (John 9, 10.)

There were eight times each year when selected families were privileged to bring wood to the temple for sacrificial use, and a ninth, the Feast of Wood Offering, when all the people—"even proselytes, slaves, Nethinim, and bastards, but notably the priests and Levites"—were so privileged. "On this occasion (as on the Day of Atonement) the maidens went dressed in white, to dance and sing in the vineyards around Jerusalem, when an opportunity was offered to young men to select their companions for life." (Temple, pp. 336-35.)

Feasting is one form of worship and fasting another; both are so ordained as to bring the Lord's people into communion with him, so that he can bless them for their goodness and purity of heart. From Adam's day to ours, whenever and wherever the true saints have dwelt on earth, the law of the fast has been interwoven into their system of worship. If we had the records of all the dispensations from the beginning, we would find in them the same type of recitation found in the Nephite scripture: "And the church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls." (Moro. 6:5.)

And so it was with the Jews in the day of Jesus. Fasting was a basic and integral part of their way of worship. The Day of Atonement was a fast day; so also was the first day of the Feast of Purim, which was called the Fast of Esther. Besides these two, there were four other great fasts: one, "in memory of the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar and the interruption of the daily sacrifice"; another, "kept on account of the destruction of the first (and afterwards of the second) Temple"; still another, "in memory of the slaughter of Gedaliah and his associates at Mizpah," as set out in Jeremiah 41; and fourth, commemorating the day on which "the siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar commenced." Further: "It was customary to fast twice a week, between the Paschal week and Pentecost, and between the Feast of Tabernacles and that of the Dedication of the Temple. The days appointed for this purpose were the Monday and the Thursday of each week—because, according to tradition, Moses went up Mount Sinai the second time to receive the Tables of the Law on a Thursday, and came down again on a Monday." (Temple, pp. 339-40.) From Passover to Pentecost was seven weeks, and from Tabernacles to Dedication was about ten weeks, the two periods thus adding about thirty-four fast days to the Jewish calendar of fasts, bringing to a total of about forty the number of formal fast days in each year. In addition there were such private fasts for private purposes as devout persons felt they should hold, all of which adds up to a far heavier fasting schedule than is commonly followed in the true Church as it is now constituted.

When the whole sacrificial system, plus the ritualistic formalities of the various feasts, plus the rituals attending the formal fasts are all viewed together, we have a reasonably comprehensive picture of at least the formal side of Jewish worship in our Lord's day. We have heretofore summarized their rites and formalisms where sacrifices and feasts are concerned. These words relative to fasts complete the picture: "On public fasts, the practice was to bring the ark which contained the rolls of the law from the synagogue into the streets, and to strew ashes upon it. The people all appeared covered with sackcloth and ashes. Ashes were publicly strewn on the heads of the elders and judges. Then one more venerable than the rest would address the people, his sermon being based on such an admonition as this: 'My brethren, it is not said of the men of Nineveh, that God had respect to their sackcloth or their fasting, but that "God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way." Similarly, it is written in the "traditions" of the prophets: "Rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto Jehovah your God."' An aged man, whose heart and home 'God had emptied,' that he might give himself wholly to prayer, was chosen to lead the devotions. Confession of sin and prayer mingled with the penitential Psalms. In Jerusalem they gathered at the eastern gate, and seven times as the voice of prayer ceased, they bade the priests 'blow!' and they blew with horns and their priests' trumpets. In other towns, they only blew horns. After prayer, the people retired to the cemeteries to mourn and weep. In order to be a proper fast, it must be continued from one sundown till after the next, when the stars appeared, and for about twenty-six hours the most rigid abstinence from all food and drink was enjoined." (Temple, pp. 340-41.)

Our Lord fasted for forty days at the beginning of his ministry, although he and his disciples deliberately did not conform to the burdensome and ritualistic fasting formalities of the day. Instead, in some of the strong language he was wont to use, he condemned the hypocritical and self-seeking level to which the fasting of his day had degenerated.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Two opening prayers or "benedictions" were offered. Those in use two thousand years ago were: These words appertain to the building of the Kirtland Temple, which temple was a synagogue; that is to say, the Kirtland Temple was not a temple in the full and true sense of the word; it was not a sanctuary set apart from the world; it was not designed for the performance of those endowments, ordinances, and sealings which open the door to eternal salvation for the living and the dead - for, in the day of its building, these things had not yet been revealed in this dispensation. The Lord's House in Kirtland was a temple in the sense that it was a House of the Lord, one to which he and his servants came, but it was also, in a manner of speaking, a synagogue, meaning a House of the Lord, where true worshippers came to worship the Father in Spirit and in truth.
[^2] Then came the Shema. This consisted of the reading of three passages of scripture from Deuteronomy and Numbers that were considered credal in nature; that is, they expressed the basic belief of the Jews concerning the Lord and their relationship to him, and the need on their part to keep his statutes and judgments as a condition precedent to the receipt of his blessings. The initial word in the passage that begins "Hear, O Israel," is Shema; hence the name applied to the scriptures involved. The three passages were:
[^3] Next came the prayers after the Shema.
[^4] Then came nineteen eulogies, benedictions, or supplications. The first three and the last three—and we shall quote these six—were fixed and formalized in the day of Jesus. In his day other petitions, extemporaneous in nature, were inserted between the two groups of three, thus giving rise to the endless repetitions and long prayers so offensive to our Lord. The six formal eulogies were as follows:
[^5] At this point the Aaronic blessing was pronounced, either by a priest or by someone appointed to represent him.
[^6] Then came the reading of the law. That is, selected readings were taken from the Pentateuch, composed of the five books of Moses, which was considered to be the law. On the Sabbath seven persons were called upon to read from the law, and on other days a lesser number. The first and the last reader also offered a benediction.
