Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 10

Jewish Synagogues in Jesus' Day

Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God; That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord; that your outgoings may be in the name of the Lord; that all your salutations may be in the name of the Lord, with uplifted hands unto the Most High. (D&C 88:119-120.) [^1]

The Law of Synagogue Worship

What is a synagogue? In the proper and true and full sense, it is a congregation of saints who worship the Father, in the name of the Son, by the power of the Holy Spirit. It is a congregation of people, of true believers; an assemblage of the saints, of those who have received the truths of heaven by revelation and are trying to apply them to their lives. Just as Zion is the pure in heart, so the synagogue is the saints of God. Zion is people, and the synagogue is people.

But Zion is also a place, one where the pure in heart congregate; and a synagogue is also a place, a house of worship, a building where the worshippers of the true God assemble to pay their devotions to the Most High. In the very nature of things, the term synagogue came to refer to the building in which the Lord's people assembled to praise his name and seek his grace. It became a house of worship comparable to the ward meetinghouses and the stake tabernacles found in latter-day Israel. When the people who are Zion lose their purity in heart, and when the congregation that is a true synagogue departs from the faith, all that is left is the house or place where they communed with their Maker. The Spirit may depart, but the building remains. It is looked upon as the synagogue and is so considered by all who see it. Such were the synagogues of which the New Testament speaks.

The word synagogue itself is of Greek origin and means to bring together or assemble; it is used in the Septuagint for the Assembly of Israel. It is thus the scriptural designation given, especially from exilic times, to the congregations of true believers, although there have been synagogues or congregations or assemblies of saints from the beginning. Adam assembled his righteous posterity in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, possibly in a house built to hold them; Enoch and others of the preachers of righteousness who lived before the flood presided over congregations of true saints; and Shem, Melchizedek, Abraham, and others of the patriarchs did likewise after the day when the earth was cleansed by water. Moses and the prophets, Aaron and his sons, and various of the Levites and other Israelites continued so to do all down through Jewish history.

We do not know what kinds of temples the saints had before the flood. Our knowledge is limited to the fact that the gospel and its ordinances are always the same, and are always administered in the same way and according to the same terms and conditions; that those who lived anciently were as much entitled to endowments and sealings and washings and anointings and conversations in holy places as we are; and that the Lord has told us that he always, and in all ages, commands his people to build a house to his "holy name." (D&C 124:39.)

Similarly, we do not know what kinds of buildings were used as synagogues before the flood, or during patriarchal times, or while Israel dwelt in Egypt, or during the period of the First Commonwealth, which extended from the Exodus to the Babylonian captivity. Since there were congregations of true worshippers in those days, it follows that they built, as directed by the spirit of inspiration, such facilities as fitted their needs. We do know from secular and archeological sources that synagogues were built during the entire period of the Second Commonwealth, which extended from the captivity of the Jews in Babylonia to the destruction of their temple in A.D. 70. The Book of Mormon tells us that the Nephites had temples and sanctuaries and synagogues "which were built after the manner of the Jews." (2 Ne. 26:26; Alma 16:13.) It is clear from this, since Lehi and Ishmael and their families left Jerusalem just before that great city was overrun by Nebuchadnezzar, that there were synagogues in Jewish Israel before that people was taken into Babylonia. Jews since the destruction of their temple have, of course, continued to build and use synagogues.

Based on the records of the past, and knowing the divinely approved practice of the true Church in modern times, we conclude that synagogues are essential to salvation; that is to say, the Lord's people always and ever must build holy houses in which they can worship him whose they are. Otherwise the great blessings of the gospel will not flow to them in such an abundant measure as to prepare them for celestial rest.

The Manner of Worship in Jewish Synagogues

Whatever the nature of synagogues may have been for the first four thousand years of planet Earth's temporal continuance, our present interest is in what they were like and how they were used in the day the Mortal Messiah dwelt among men. Pure religion, as it once came from the Eternal Fountain, had long since been muddied with the silt and dross of disobedient men; and the synagogues, where streams of living water should have flown, had become stagnant pools full of filth and disease.

These synagogues—those in Judea and Galilee and Perea and in all the places where Jewish Israel dwelt in the first decades of the Christian era—were built in prominent places: on the highest ground, at the corners of streets, or at the entrance to chief squares. Sacred symbols, such as the seven-branched candlestick or a pot of manna, were often carved on the lintels. The synagogues contained seating room for the worshippers, an ark or chest containing the rolls of the law, and a platform with a pulpit or lectern. They were consecrated by prayer, and rules of decorum were imposed upon worshippers, including decency and cleanliness of dress and reverence in demeanor. The church buildings of the early Christians were patterned after them. It is said that there were between 460 and 480 synagogues in Jerusalem at the time it was burned by the torch of Titus. Assuming a normal city population of 600,000, this means somewhat more than 1250 worshippers for each synagogue, a not improbable circumstance.

Synagogues were not used for the offering of sacrifices, but they were used for nearly all other forms of worship—for prayers, funerals, weddings, circumcisions, musical presentations, scriptural readings, sermons, and lectures, as schools for young children, and as places of general assembly and social intercourse. It is apparent from several New Testament accounts that they sometimes were the centers of religious contention and debates. Judicial bodies met in them, and penalties of beating and scourging were carried out within their walls.

Synagogue worship did not fall into a rigid mold. There was a needed elasticity in the approved services, and the ruler of the synagogue exercised the prerogative of altering the services as special needs arose, of inviting whom he would to offer prayers, and of calling on such guest readers and preachers as he chose. It was then as it is now: the overall objective was the teaching of the people; then, as now, the purpose was to learn the Lord's law and to gain the encouragement needed to keep his commandments. The basic pattern of synagogue worship in the day of Jesus, and thus the one with which he was familiar and in which he participated, was as follows:

"I. Blessed be Thou, O Lord, King of the world, Who formest the light and createst the darkness, Who makest peace and createst everything; Who, in mercy, givest light to the earth and to those who dwell upon it, and in Thy goodness day by day and every day renewest the works of creation. Blessed be the Lord our God for the glory of His handiwork and for the light-giving lights which He has made for His praise. Selah! Blessed be the Lord our God, Who hath formed the lights."

"II. With great love hast Thou loved us, O Lord our God, and with much overflowing pity hast Thou pitied us our Father and our King. For the sake of our fathers who trusted in Thee, and Thou taughtest them the statutes of life, have mercy upon us and teach us. Enlighten our eyes in Thy law; cause our hearts to cleave to Thy commandments; unite our hearts to love and fear Thy name, and we shall not be put to shame, world without end. For Thou art a God Who preparest salvation, and us hast Thou chosen from among all nations and tongues, and hast in truth brought us near to Thy great Name—Selah—that we may lovingly praise Thee and Thy Oneness. Blessed be the Lord Who in love chose His people Israel." (Sketches, pp. 269-70.)

"Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord: And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart: And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates." (Deut. 6:4-9.)

"And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul, That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full. Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; And then the Lord's wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth you. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates: That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth." (Deut. 11:13-21.)

"And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue: And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring: That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the Lord your God." (Num. 15:37-41.)

"True it is, that Thou art Jehovah our God and the God of our fathers, our King and the King of our fathers, our Saviour and the Saviour of our fathers, our Creator, the Rock of our salvation, our Help and our Deliverer. Thy name is from everlasting, and there is no God beside Thee. A new song did they that were delivered sing to Thy Name by the seashore; together did all praise and own Thee King, and say, Jehovah shall reign world without end! Blessed be the Lord Who saveth Israel!"

Next: "O Lord our God! cause us to lie down in peace, and raise us up again to life, O our King! Spread over us the tabernacle of Thy peace; strengthen us before Thee in Thy good counsel, and deliver us for Thy Name's sake. Be Thou for protection round about us; keep far from us the enemy, the pestilence, the sword, famine, and affliction. Keep Satan from before and from behind us, and hide us in the shadow of Thy wings, for Thou art a God Who helpest and deliverest us; and Thou, O God, art a gracious and merciful King. Keep Thou our going out and our coming in, for life and for peace, from henceforth and for ever." (Sketches, p. 271.)

"I. 'Blessed be the Lord our God and the God of our fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob; the great, the mighty, and the terrible God; the Most High God, Who showeth mercy and kindness, Who createth all things, Who remembereth the gracious promises to the fathers, and bringeth a Saviour to their children's children, for His own Name's sake, in love. O King, Helper, Saviour, and Shield! Blessed art Thou, O Jehovah, the Shield of Abraham.'

"II. 'Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever; Thou, Who quickenest the dead, art mighty to save. In Thy mercy Thou preservest the living; Thou quickenest the dead; in Thine abundant pity Thou bearest up those who fall, and healest those who are diseased, and loosest those who are bound, and fulfillest Thy faithful word to those who sleep in the dust. Who is like unto Thee, Lord of strength, and who can be compared to Thee, Who killest and makest alive, and causest salvation to spring forth? And faithful art Thou to give life unto the dead. Blessed be Thou, Jehovah, Who quickenest the dead!"

"III. 'Thou art holy, and Thy Name is holy; and the holy ones praise Thee every day. Selah! Blessed art Thou, Jehovah God, the Holy one!'"

At this point there were thirteen other eulogies, and then the following three:

"XVII. 'Take gracious pleasure, O Jehovah our God, in Thy people Israel, and in their prayers. Accept the burnt-offerings of Israel, and their prayers, with Thy good pleasure; and may the services of Thy people Israel be ever acceptable unto Thee. And oh that our eyes may see it, as Thou turnest in mercy to Zion! Blessed be Thou, O Jehovah, Who restoreth His Shechinah to Zion!'

"XVIII. 'We praise Thee, because Thou art Jehovah our God, and the God of our fathers, for ever and ever. Thou art the Rock of our life, the Shield of our salvation, from generation to generation. We laud Thee, and declare Thy praise for our lives which are kept within Thine hand, and for our souls which are committed unto Thee, and for Thy wonders which are with us every day, and Thy wondrous deeds and Thy goodnesses, which are at all seasons—evening, morning, and mid-day. Thou gracious One, Whose compassions never end; Thou pitying One, Whose grace never ceaseth—for ever do we put our trust in Thee! And for all this Thy Name, O our King, be blessed and extolled always, for ever and ever! And all living bless Thee—Selah—and praise Thy Name in truth, O God, our Salvation and our Help. Blessed art Thou, Jehovah; Thy Name is the gracious One, to Whom praise is due.'

"XIX. 'Oh bestow on Thy people Israel great peace, for ever; for Thou art King and Lord of all peace, and it is good in Thine eyes to bless Thy people Israel with praise at all times and in every hour. Blessed art Thou, Jehovah, Who blesseth His people Israel with peace." (Sketchs, pp. 273-75.)

All of these prayers were given by one person, with the congregation responding by an "Amen." The normal procedure was for the one appointed to give the prayers and recite the Shema also to be the one who read from the prophets. If this procedure was followed in Capernaum on that Sabbath when our Lord read the prophecy of Isaiah relative to Himself and announced its fulfillment in Him, then Jesus himself gave, on that occasion, the foregoing prayers. A careful analysis will show many things in these prayers that were fulfilled in the mortal ministry of him of whom we testify.

This blessing was:

"The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace." (Num. 6:24-26.)

How Jesus Used Jewish Synagogues

There can be little room for doubt that the Lord Jesus while a child went to school in a synagogue in Nazareth. We know he grew up in subjection to Mary and Joseph, and synagogue schooling was a way of life for all of the young and rising generation. Nor can there be any doubt that during his formative and maturing years our Lord worshipped in various synagogues, even as he also went to Jerusalem and mingled with the worshipping throngs in the temple courts at Passover time. He was a Jew, brought up in subjection to Jewish law and Jewish tradition, and these included making the synagogue a living part of one's being.

We do know that from the day he began his ministry until he voluntarily laid down his life, the temple and the various synagogues became his bases of operation. In them he taught and read and preached; in them he testified, exhorted, and rebuked; in them he healed the sick and wrought endless miracles; in them the Divine Light was shown forth with a heavenly radiance that left no place for the shadows of darkness then enshrouding a fallen nation.

Our New Testament accounts themselves do not recite the mode and manner of worship carried out in the synagogues in our Lord's day in the Land of Jesus; nor is it needful that they should do so. Those to whom the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles were first written were already familiar with the songs and sermons, with the prayers and preachments, and with the rites and readings presented so repetitiously in those Jewish houses of worship and learning. What we have recounted in this respect has come from nonscriptural but authentic sources. Our scriptures simply say that the Savior taught or healed or read or preached in the synagogues, and it is left for us to conclude—and there is no alternative but to do so—that his doings and sayings within the sacred walls of necessity fitted into the regular order supervised by the rulers of the synagogues and with which those then and there assembled were familiar.

He taught in the synagogues because that is where people went to be taught, to hear sermons, and to learn how and in what manner they might draw near to Jehovah. And he healed the sick in the synagogues because that is where devout people, people with faith to be healed, came to seek blessings from the Source of all that is good. Those who first received the scriptural words of the apostles Matthew and John and of the disciples Mark and Luke would expect to read that Jesus taught and healed in the synagogues because those were the places where such things should have been done in the society and under the circumstances then prevailing.

When the day of Jesus' ministry arrived, he was first baptized by John in Jordan. There the Holy Ghost descended in quiet serenity like a dove. Then he was led of the Spirit into the wilderness, where he fasted for forty days, was tempted of the devil, and overcame the world as it were. Then he was ready to preach; then he was ready to heal.

As Matthew records it: "From that time Jesus began to preach. . . . And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people." (Matt. 4:17-23.) Also: "And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people." (Matt. 9:35; 13:54-58; Mark 6:1-6.)

Mark says our Lord called Zebedee's sons from their nets, and that he and they went straightway into Capernaum, where Jesus "on the sabbath day. . . entered into the synagogue, and taught. . . . And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit," which evil spirit forsook his ill-gotten abode at Jesus' word. Thereafter, "he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast out devils." (Mark 1:16-39; Luke 4:31-44.)

Luke gives this account of the commencement of his ministry: "And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all. And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read." This day in Nazareth was the one on which he announced his divine Sonship by saying in the synagogue that he came in fulfillment of Isaiah's great Messianic prophecy about preaching the gospel, healing the brokenhearted, and setting the captive free. (Luke 4:15-30.) And so it was that day in and day out, Sabbath after Sabbath, throughout his whole ministry, he sought out congregations of hearers, who were assembled, as was the norm of the day, in places where preachments should be given, and he there gave food and drink to those who hungered and thirsted after righteousness.

It was in a synagogue on the Sabbath that he was asked, "Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?' to which he responded, "It is lawful to do well on the sabbath days"; then, so that his answer would be forever implanted in the hearts of his hearers, he said to one with a withered hand, "Stretch forth thine hand," and he doing so was healed instantly. (Matt. 12:9-13; Luke 13:9-17.) It was in a synagogue in Capernaum, upon whose lintel archeologists have found carved a pot of manna, that he preached his great sermon on the bread of life, showing that the manna given to their fathers was but a type of the living bread that should come down from heaven, "that a man may eat thereof, and not die." (John 6:50.) We need not say more along this line except to note that, when questioned by the high priest, Jesus answered, "I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort." (John 18:19-20.)

Until the day of Jesus, except for the temple itself Jewish synagogues were the only divinely approved houses of worship in the Old World. But as the Jewish people began the process of rejecting their Jewish Messiah, the true spirit of worship began to withdraw itself from those houses in which the revealed truths of the past had been taught with at least a measurable degree of understanding. As the people became polarized—a few believing in Jesus, the great masses rejecting his divine Messiahship—the Pharisees and rulers of the synagogues decreed that all who believed in Christ "should be put out of the synagogue." (John 9:22; 12:42-43; 16:2.) The schooling, the social intercourse, the religious teachings of the people—these were to be denied them.

In process of time the synagogues became houses of hate and persecution rather than houses of learning and true worship. Jesus told the Twelve and other true believers: "Beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues." (Matt. 10:17; 23:34; Mark 13:9.) In those sacred spots where sermons had attested to the saving power of the Promised Messiah, cries of anguish would now be heard from the lips of true believers as the scourgers' lash cut their flesh. Paul himself, "breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord," took letters from the high priest addressed to the rulers of the synagogues in Damascus, reciting "that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem." (Acts 9:1-2.) In an open confession of his sins, Paul later said, "Lord . . . I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee." (Acts 22:19; 26:11.) By rejecting Jesus and opposing the truth, the congregation of Israel became the congregation of unbelief, of hatred, of evil, of Lucifer. They became, as the scripture recites, "the synagogue of Satan." (Rev. 2:9, 3:9.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The temple, Jehovah's holy house, the place where Deity revealed himself, and to which he called all Israel to come and serve and worship him; These comments about Jewish Sabbath observance and the illustrations set forth are digested from Edersheim, pages 775-87, and from Geikie, pages 448-50, both of which authors, in turn, digested their material from the Mishnah. The English version of the Mishnah, used in this work by the present author, takes thirty-seven solid pages of fine print to set forth the detailed policies and illustrations that governed Sabbath observance in ancient Jewry (Mishnah, pp. 100-136), plus special Sabbath regulations recited in connection with the feasts and other matters.
