Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 11

Jewish Sabbaths in Jesus' Day

The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath: Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath. . . .

Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? (Mark 2:27-28; 3:4.)

The Law of Sabbath Worship

We do not overstate our case when we say that the Jewish system of Sabbath observance that prevailed in the day of Jesus was ritualistic, degenerate, and almost unbelievably absurd, a system filled with fanatical restrictions. Nor do we think that this is a conclusion upon which reasonable minds can differ, once the facts are in and the evidence is weighed.

Their system of Sabbath worship clearly shows how a great and important concept can be preserved even though it is twisted and perverted in the hands of uninspired teachers. To see why our Jewish brethren in the meridian of time placed such emphasis on Sabbath observance, we need but record the true order of such worship that has prevailed among the Lord's people from the beginning. This we have done, in brief form, in chapter 21 of The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ. For our purposes now, as a prelude to a recitation of what prevailed in our Lord's day, we shall simply summarize some of the basic principles.

Those whose souls are touched by the Holy Spirit and who understand the hand-dealings of the Almighty with his earthly children know that Sabbath observance is essential to salvation, and that those who keep this day holy, in the manner and way Deity designed, shall be guided along the path leading to salvation in the celestial kingdom of heaven. Again, we are not overstating the case, nor are we reaching a conclusion without scriptural warrant.

The Lord our Heavenly Father created us; ordained the plan and system whereunder we could advance and progress and become like him; placed us in this mortal sphere, where we are subject to all of the lusts and passions of the flesh; and decreed that if we would overcome the world and live godly lives in spite of earth and hell, he would save us in his everlasting presence. While here, we must deal with temporal things and be subject to Satan's enticements. Unless we somehow manage to turn from worldly matters and put first in our lives the things of God's kingdom, we shall fail the test and lose our souls.

We need help, constant help—help from day to day, help all the time. Such is given through the gospel and by the Holy Spirit. And the Sabbath day is one of the chief arrangements whereby this spiritual help is made available. That Holy Being who prepared the test we are now taking, in his infinite wisdom, knew—and so arranged—that if we would devote one day in seven exclusively to spiritual things, we would have power to conduct ourselves in such a way as to save our souls. Hence came the Sabbath.

The true Sabbath is a day of worship, a day for spiritual refreshment, a day to learn the laws of the Lord, a day to renew our covenants, a day to pay our devotions to the Most High. The true Sabbath is a day to remember the Lord and his goodness to us, a day to read and ponder his holy word, a day to confess our sins, a day to strengthen each other, and to visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction. The true Sabbath is a day of preaching and testifying, a day of fasting and prayer, a day of rejoicing and thanksgiving, a day to partake of the good things of the Spirit and to sanctify our souls. The true Sabbath is essential to salvation, and those who use it to the full, according to the divine intent, shall attain celestial rest.

In the very nature of things, true Sabbath worship precludes worldly activities. Hence on that day we rest from all servile work; we lay our temporal pursuits aside for the moment; we refrain from recreational activities; we let our crops and our herds fend for themselves and our shops and our factories remain closed and idle; we leave the fish in the streams and the golf clubs in the locker room. Except for the preparation of modest meals, or the pulling of the ox from the mire, as it were, on this the Lord's day, we do no other things except to worship the Lord in spirit and in truth. Such was the law of the Sabbath among the ancestors of the Jews, and such is that law among us.

It should come as no surprise, then, to find this law singled out as a sign between the Lord and his people. Its proper observance always has identified and always will identify the true saints, and its desecration and improper observance always has revealed and always will reveal those who are not the Lord's people and who are not feeding their souls spiritually according to the plan of the great Creator. It should come as no surprise to find the Lord, by the mouth of Moses, decreeing death to those who desecrate his holy day or to hear him promise Israel that if they would hallow the Sabbath, "As I commanded your fathers . . . Then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever." (Jer. 17:20-27.)

We need not, for our present purposes, pursue further the matter of the true law of the Sabbath. It suffices for us to know that few things in the gospel are more important, and for us to be aware of the original philosophy that preceded the perversions of Jesus' day. The Sabbath as such was no less important among the Jews in that day than it had ever been. If properly kept, it could have led to the fulness of the blessings of the gospel. That those then living in the fading light of the past still knew, in principle, that it was important beyond expression is perfectly clear from the records of the day. The issue is that they chose to keep and observe its law in such a way that their very observance was itself a desecration.

The Jews and Their Sabbath

Jewish worship in the day of Jesus—with its inordinate emphasis on formalisms, on rituals, on performances, on the letter rather than the spirit of the law—revolved around four centers:

As to the temple—it was still the Lord's house, though it had been defiled in large measure by wicked men, so much so that the Divine Presence no longer rested between the cherubim in the Holy of Holies.

As to sacrifice—they were still performed by Aaronic authority, though the priestly administrators and the people generally no longer saw in them the great spiritual symbolisms that made them such an important part of the worship of their fathers.

As to the feasts—they still assembled Israel to the city of the Great King, where true worship and divinely approved ordinances could he performed, but they had degenerated into occasions of revelry and debate, and the worship that should have attended them left much to be desired.

As to Sabbath observance—this was a field in which all Jewry had gone wild, a true principle, out of which a sane practice should have grown but which was so altered, twisted, and perverted that what should have been a holy day had become a blasphemous mockery. The synagogue services had some merit, to which reference has been made in chapter 10, but all else that then attended these dehallowed days came from beneath and not from above.

"Ye Shall Do No Servile Work Therein"

Of his holy day—"the sabbath of the Lord thy God"—Jehovah commanded: "In it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates." (Ex. 20:10.)

Such was the divine decree, but the practical problem was—what is work? What physical acts might be done by members of the chosen race, or their slaves, or their cattle, without incurring the wrath of Him who was jealous of his name and who visited the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation among those that hated him?

Sowing and reaping are clearly work. But suppose only a few seeds are scattered on unploughed land, is such an act sinful? If oxen bear a yoke and pull a plough, it is work, but if they only carry the weight of a rope, what then? Is it permissible to set a broken arm, to give medicine to sick persons, or for a lame man to use his crutches? Can an author write a page, a single line, or even one letter from the alphabet? Is it permissible to read, or walk, or boil water, or what have you, and if so, how limited or extensive may the exertions be? If a man stumbles and falls, must he lie prone until the Sabbath's end? How heavy a burden may he bear without breaking the divine decree? These and ten thousand other tickish, petty questions occupied the time of the brightest minds in all Jewry, and the answers they gave and the rules they adopted can scarcely be believed.

Jewish law in Jesus' day forbade thirty-nine chief or principal types of work. These were: (1) sowing, (2) ploughing, (3) reaping, (4) binding sheaves, (5) threshing, (6) winnowing, (7) sifting (selecting), (8) grinding, (9) sifting in a sieve, (10) kneading, (11) baking—all of which restrictions had to do with the preparation of bread; (12) shearing the wool, (13) washing it, (14) beating it, (15) dyeing it, (16) spinning, (17) putting it on the weaver's beam, (18) making two thrum threads, (19) weaving two threads, (20) separating two threads, (21) making a knot, (22) undoing a knot, (23) sewing two stitches, (24) tearing in order to sew two stitches—all of which restrictions had to do with dress; (25) catching deer, (26) killing, (27) skinning, (28) salting it, (29) preparing its skin, (30) scraping off its hair, (31) cutting it up, (32) writing two letters, (33) scraping in order to write two letters—all of which are connected with hunting and writing; (34) building, (35) pulling down, (36) extinguishing fire, (37) lighting fire, (38) beating with the hammer, and (39) carrying from one possession into the other—all of which appertain to the work necessary for a private house. Each of these thirty-nine principal prohibitions contained within itself numerous related items that were banned on the Sabbath day.

Jewish tractates of Jesus' day set forth chapter after chapter of detailed explanations and illustrations relative to these thirty-nine principal types of prohibited work. For instance: Scattering two seeds was sowing; sweeping away or breaking a single clod was ploughing; plucking one blade of grass was sin; watering fruit or removing a withered leaf was forbidden; picking fruit, or even lifting it from the ground, was reaping; cutting a mushroom was a double sin, one both of harvesting and of sowing, for a new one would grow in place of the old; fishing, or anything that put an end to life, ranked with harvesting; rubbing ears of corn together, or anything else connected with food, was classed as binding of sheaves.

"If a woman were to roll wheat to take away the husks, she would be guilty of sifting with a sieve. If she were rubbing the ends of the stalks, she would be guilty of threshing. If she were cleansing what adheres to the side of a stalk, she would be guilty of sifting. If she were bruising the stalk, she would be guilty of grinding. If she were throwing it up in her hands, she would be guilty of winnowing. Distinctions like the following are made: A radish may be dipped into salt, but not left in it too long, since this would be to make pickle. A new dress might be put on, irrespective of the danger that in so doing it might be torn. Mud on the dress might be crushed in the hand and shaken off, but the dress must not be rubbed (for fear of affecting the material). If a person took a bath, opinions are divided, whether the whole body should be dried at once, or limb after limb. If water had fallen on the dress, some allowed the dress to be shaken but not wrung; others, to be wrung but not shaken. One Rabbi allowed to spit into the handkerchief, and that although it may necessitate the compressing of what had been wetted; but there is a grave discussion whether it was lawful to spit on the ground, and then to rub it with the foot, because thereby the earth may be scratched. It may, however, be done on stones. In the labour of grinding would be included such an act as crushing salt. To sweep, or to water the ground, would involve the same sin as beating out the corn. To lay on a plaster would be a grievous sin; to scratch out a big letter, leaving room for two small ones, would be a sin, but to write one big letter occupying the room of two small letters was no sin. To change one letter to another might imply a double sin. And so on through endless details!" (Edersheim 2:783.)

What constituted a burden that might not be carried on the Sabbath day? By the mouth of Jeremiah the Lord had said: "Take heed to yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem: Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers." (Jer. 17:21-22.)

To the followers of rabbinism this meant: Carry no burden greater than the weight of a fig and no food larger than the size of an olive. Anything, however trifling, that could be put to practical use was a burden. "Thus, two horse's hairs might be made into a birdtrap; a scrap of clean paper into a custom-house notice; a small piece of paper written upon might be converted into a wrapper for a small flagon. In all these cases, therefore, transport would involve sin. Similarly, ink sufficient to write two letters, wax enough to fill up a small hole, even a pebble with which you might aim at a little bird, or a small piece of broken earthenware with which you might stir the coals, would be 'burdens!' " (Edersheim 2:784.)

"It was forbidden to write two letters, either with the right hand or the left, whether of the same size or of different sizes, or with different inks, or in different languages, or with any pigment; with ruddle, gum, vitriol, or anything that can make marks; or even to write two letters, one on each side of a corner of two walls, or on two leaves of a writing-tablet, if they could be read together, or to write them on the body. But they might be written on any dark fluid, on the sap of a fruit-tree, on road-dust, on sand, or on anything in which the writing did not remain. If they were written with the hand turned upside down, or with the foot, or the mouth, or the elbow, or if one letter were added to another previously made, or other letters traced over, or if a person designed to write the letter and only wrote two, or if he wrote one letter on the ground and one on the wall, or on two walls, or on two pages of a book, so that they could not be read together, it was not illegal. If a person, through forgetfulness, wrote two characters at different times, one in the morning, the other, perhaps towards evening, it was a question among the Rabbis whether he had or had not broken the Sabbath." (Geikie, pp. 448-49.)

What if a house or its contents caught fire on the Sabbath? To put out a fire and save a building or its contents was clearly work. However, one might rescue from the fire the scriptures and the phylacteries and the cases that contained them, but liturgical pieces, though they contained the name of Deity, were to be left to the flames. Only the food and drink needed for the Sabbath might be rescued, except that "if the food were in a cupboard or basket the whole might be carried out. Similarly, all utensils needed for the Sabbath meal, but of dress only what was absolutely necessary, might be saved, it being, however, provided, that a person might put on a dress, save it, go back and put on another, and so on." (Edersheim 2:784-85.)

How far might one carry a burden on the Sabbath day? The set distance was an ordinary Sabbath day's journey, which extended two thousand cubits from one's dwelling. But out of practical necessity and by the use of legal fictions this distance might be extended. For instance, if groups of houses could be somehow defined as one dwelling, then burdens could be carried between them. Each house opening onto a private court was, of course, a private dwelling, and so it was unlawful to carry things from one to another on the Sabbath. If, however, all of the families would deposit, before the Sabbath, some food in the common court, a connection would thus be established among them all so that they could be considered one dwelling, and all difficulties about carrying burdens from one to the other would be removed. Or if a man deposited, on Friday, food for two meals, at a distance of two thousand cubits from his dwelling, he thereby constituted that place his dwelling, and on the Sabbath he could carry burdens an extra two thousand cubits. Or if a beam, a wire, or a rope were placed across a blind alley or a narrow street, this made all the houses thereon one dwelling "so that everything was lawful there which a man might do on the Sabbath in his own house." (Edersheim 2:777.)

Practice of the healing arts was work and therefore could not be done on the Sabbath. Broken bones could not be set; surgical operations were not allowed; emetics could not be given. "A plaster might be worn, provided its object was to prevent the wound from getting worse, not to heal it, for that would have been a work. Ornaments which could not easily be taken off might be worn in one's courtyard. Similarly, a person might go about with wadding in his ear, but not with false teeth nor with a gold plug in the tooth. If the wadding fell out of the ear, it could not be replaced. Some, indeed, thought that its healing virtues lay in the oil in which it had been soaked, and which had dried up, but others ascribed them to the warmth of the wadding itself. In either case there was danger of healing—of doing anything for the purpose of a cure—and hence wadding might not be put into the ear on the Sabbath, although if worn before it might be continued. Again, as regarded false teeth: they might fall out, and the wearer might then lift and carry them, which would be sinful on the Sabbath. But anything which formed part of the ordinary dress of a person might be worn also on the Sabbath, and children whose ears were being bored might have a plug put into the hole. It was also allowed to go about on crutches, or with a wooden leg, and children might have bells on their dresses; but it was prohibited to walk on stilts, or to carry any heathen amulet." (Edersheim 2:782.)

Although remedies could not be used for the curing of the sick, certain acts could be performed if there was "actual danger to life." Thus: "If on the Sabbath a wall had fallen on a person, and it were doubtful whether he was under the ruins or not, whether he was alive or dead, a Jew or Gentile, it would be duty to clear away the rubbish sufficiently to find the body. If life were not extinct, the labour would have to be continued; but if the person were dead nothing further should be done to extricate the body." (Edersheim 2:787.)

To kindle a fire on the Sabbath day was forbidden. Food must be prepared, lights kindled, and vessels washed before sunset on Friday. Ovens could not be kept warm for Sabbath use, and there were scores of regulations relative to food that might be eaten. For instance: "If a hen had laid on the Sabbath, the egg was forbidden, because, evidently, it could not have been destined on a weekday for eating, since it was not yet laid, and did not exist; while if the hen had been kept, not for laying but for fattening, the egg might be eaten as forming part of the hen that had fallen off!" (Edersheim 2:787.)

If an object was thrown into the air and caught again with the same hand, it was sin; if caught with the other hand, there was a division of opinion; if caught in the mouth and eaten, there was no guilt because the object no longer existed. "If it rained, and the water which fell from the sky were carried, there was no sin in it; but if the rain had run down from a wall it would involve sin. If a person were in one place, and his hand filled with fruit stretched into another, and the Sabbath overtook him in this attitude, he would have to drop the fruit, since if he withdrew his full hand from one locality into another, he would be carrying a burden on the Sabbath." (Edersheim 2:779.)

We need not go further in our analysis of the degenerate system of Sabbath observance imposed by the Rabbis upon Jesus, Joseph, Mary, Peter, James, John, and all the Jews of their day. We must state pointedly, however, that what is here recited is only a sample, a small sample—not so much as a thousandth part—of what then existed. [^1] Obviously the mere recitation of such regulations as these should suffice to show the apostate nature of that Jewish system of worship which was so caustically condemned by Him who said: "Ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition." (Matt. 15:6.)

We must also state that however absurd and lacking in spirituality these Jewish Sabbath regulations seem to us, they were of deep and sincere concern to those who had submitted themselves to that rule of priestcraft out of which they grew. In this connection, there were even times in their long history when they submitted to slavery and death rather than wage war on the Sabbath, although in the days of the Second Commonwealth it had been established that defensive military acts were permissible. [^2]

In the light of all this it will come as no surprise—as we hereafter set forth how the Rabbis and those who sat in Aaron's seat opposed the great High Priest who ministered among them—to find religious bigots thirsting for Innocent Blood because the Son of Man defies their traditions and claims Lordship over the Sabbath itself.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Deut. 6:49. See also Deut. 6:20-25; 4:9-10; 11:19; 31:10-13. Special provision was aso made in the law of Moses that parents should teach their children all things appertaining to the Passover and their deliverance from Egyptian bondage. (Ex. 12:26-27; 13:8, 14.)
[^2] In this connection how comforting is the scriptural assurance: "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it." (Prov. 22:6.)
