Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 13

Jewish Apostasy in Jesus' Day

This is an evil generation. (Luke 11:29.)

Ye are the children of them which killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? (Matt. 23:31-33.)

Apostasy Through the Ages

Adam and Eve—our first parents, our common ancestors, the mother and father of all living—had the fulness of the everlasting gospel. They received the plan of salvation from God himself, it being "declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Moses 5:58.) They saw God, knew his laws, entertained angels, received revelations, beheld visions, and were in tune with the Infinite. They exercised faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; repented of their sins; were baptized in similitude of the death, burial, and resurrection of the Promised Messiah; and received the gift of the Holy Ghost. They were endowed with power from on high, were sealed in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, and received the fulness of the ordinances of the house of the Lord.

After baptism, and after celestial marriage, they walked in paths of truth and righteousness, kept the commandments, and endured to the end. Having charted for themselves a course leading to eternal life, they pressed forward with a steadfastness in Christ—believing, obeying, conforming, consecrating, sacrificing—until their calling and election was made sure and they were sealed up unto eternal life.

And they taught all these things unto their children. They preached the gospel in plainness and perfection to all their numerous progeny. They made known the laws and ordinances of salvation—all to the end that the sons of men might believe and obey and come to know the joy of their redemption, "and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:11.)

But, alas, sorrow rather than salvation lay ahead for many of the seed of mighty Michael and his lovely consort Eve. Many who were the seed of their bodies apostatized; they departed from the truth; they left the faith of their fathers; they turned from light to darkness, from righteousness to wickedness, from God to Satan. Apostasy consists of two things:

And so, from the very beginning, "Satan came among them, . . . and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." (Moses 5:11-13.) Thus apostasy began; men fell away from the truth even in the day of righteous Adam; men turned to carnal and ungodly practices even in the day when there were living witnesses to tell them of Eden's beauty, of the fall and promised redemption, and of angelic ministrations and heavenly revelations of the mind and will of Him whose they and we are.

Cain, a first generation son of the first man, rejected the gospel, refused to hearken to Adam, and loved Satan more than God. In his carnal and fallen state, Cain "rejected the greater counsel which was had from God," coveted the flocks of Abel, made a covenant with Satan, slew his righteous brother, and gloried in his wickedness. Others followed his course, and apostasy, rebellion, and wickedness became the established order of that and all succeeding days. (Moses 5.)

In Enoch's day there were great wars and rebellions; wickedness was so great in Noah's day that a merciful God swept the wicked and ungodly into a watery grave; Abraham's father worshipped idols; the whole city in which Melchizedek dwelt had departed from the truth; and all the Gentile nations in the days of ancient Israel were outside the pale of saving grace.

Apostasy has been and is the prevailing social and religious state of most men in all ages from Adam's to ours. The devil is not dead: Lucifer lives as surely as God does; he slays others but has not himself been slain. His influence covers the earth and has done so since the fall of man. He seeks to damn men, and "wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction." (Matt. 7:13.) Of our own day it is written: "Darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my face." (D&C 112:23.) Also: "The whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin." (D&C 84:49.) The war that began in heaven is continuing here among mortals, and up to this point most of the victories have been won by the enemy of all righteousness.

Apostasy in Ancient Israel

Israel—the Lord's own people, his own peculiar treasure, a people favored above all the nations of the earth—spent her entire history, as a people, wavering between true and false religion. Like a great pendulum the people swung back and forth between the true worship of Jehovah and the paying of devotions to Baal and all the gods of the degenerate nations in whose custody they found their promised land. The righteousness of parents was swallowed up in the wickedness of their children, with the children's children turning back to the standard of their grandparents. Eli served the Lord, and his sons served Baal. One king kept the feasts and commanded obedience to the law of Moses; the next honored the priests of Baal and worshipped the queen of heaven; and yet the next cut down the groves and destroyed the altars of the heathen. And so it went generation after generation.

Knowing the plagues God had poured out upon Egypt; having seen the waters of the Red Sea part to free them from Pharaoh; seeing the pillar of fire that gave protection by night and the cloud that went before them by day; hearing the rolling thunders and seeing the burning fires that rested on Sinai when the Lord came down to talk with Moses; eating daily the bread that miraculously came down from heaven; brandishing swords and staves that put to flight armies of aliens; seeing the earth open and swallow those who opposed Moses; living and walking, as it were, in the light of daily miracles—yet in the midst of all this, Israel murmured and forsook the Lord. From time to time her people made a golden calf; they longed for the fleshpots of Egypt; their children were sacrificed in the fires of Molech; the daily sacrifices were done away; the Israelite hosts came not up to Jerusalem to keep the Feast of Tabernacles; they worshipped gods of wood and stone; they bowed before idols that neither hear nor see nor speak; and they kept not the law of Moses, the man of God.

As Moses' mortal ministry neared its end, he assembled all Israel and "commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandments which I command you this day." Thereupon he summarized the blessings of obedience and set forth the cursings of apostasy. Among the curses, plagues, diseases, and torments that should come upon them if they chose disobedience was the assurance that the Lord would destroy their nation by bringing upon them fierce and relentless warriors; that in the siege of their cities delicate Hebrew women would eat their own children; and that the chosen people would be scattered "among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other," where they would "serve other gods," which neither they nor their fathers had known, and that they would no longer enjoy the light of heaven in which their fathers had basked. (Deut. 27-33.) That these dire calamities befell them—when Benhadad, king of Syria, besieged Samaria (2 Kgs. 6:26-29); and again when Nebuchadnezzar laid Jerusalem low (Lam. 4:10); and yet again when Titus overthrew the Holy City and tore apart the temple stone by stone—is well known.

As a means of impressing upon the people both the blessings of obedience and the cursings of disobedience, Joshua, as Moses had aforetime commanded, assembled all Israel in the valley between Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal. Six of the tribes were over against Mount Gerizim to bless the people and the other six against Mount Ebal to respond to the cursings. The Levites then read, one by one, the cursings and the blessings, and the respective groups, speaking for all the house of Israel, gave a solemn response of "Amen," thus binding the whole nation to seek righteousness and shun evil. The concluding statement of this solemn rededication to Jehovah was: "Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them." (Deut. 27:9-26. See also Josh. 8:32-35.)

We need make no attempt in this present work to recite all that befell ancient Israel because of apostasy and rebellion against the Lord. Let it suffice for our purposes—and we are only laying a foundation for a consideration of that apostasy which culminated in the crucifying of a God—let it suffice simply to point to three passages from Holy Writ.

The first of these involves the final overthrow of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar in the day of Zedekiah, who, though a puppet ruler, had rebelled against Babylonia. "Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the Lord which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. And the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place: But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy. Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand." This was the day when the house of the Lord was burned, the walls of Jerusalem broken down, and those who escaped the sword were carried captive to Babylon. (2 Chr. 36:9-23.) [^1]

Next, without any exposition, for the meaning is clear from the words themselves, we quote this language from the Psalms: "They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them: But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works. And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils, And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land was polluted with blood. Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance. And he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that hated them ruled over them. Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into subjection under their hand. Many times did he deliver them; but they provoked him with their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity." (Ps. 106:34-43.)

And third, these words of Isaiah deserve thoughtful consideration, for they not only describe the apostate condition of ancient Israel, but also have application to those who lived in the day of Jesus. "Ah sinful nation," Isaiah intones, "a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward. . . . Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah." (Isa. 1: 4-9.)

Apostasy Among the Jews

Except for "a very small remnant"; except for a few priests and Levites who sat in Aaron's seat and offered sacrifices as required by the law of Moses; except for a rugged Peter, a visionary John, a guileless Nathanael; except for a believing Mary and a testifying Martha, a submissive Elisabeth, and a zealous Zacharias; except for the untutored and unlearned common people, who received Him gladly because they had not been contaminated by the scribes and Rabbis; except for a relatively few people, "a very small remnant," who would believe on Mary's Son—except for such as these, all the Jews of Jesus' day were apostate.

In that day, chosen and hallowed by Him who is holy as the day for his Son to make flesh his tabernacle; in that day when the light and glory of God should shine forth in the Person of his Beloved Son; in that day when the Lord Omnipotent, who was, and is, from all eternity to all eternity, would minister among his people; in that day when the infinite and eternal atonement should be wrought; in that day—above all days from creation's morn to the hour of the crucifixion—apostasy reigned among the sons of Adam.

It was a day not as Isaiah had said of ancient Israel, that "except" for "a very small remnant" they "should have been as Sodom, and . . . like unto Gomorrah" (Isa. 1:9), but a day when even Jerusalem, their capital city, was identified by John as "the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified." (Rev. 11:8.) [^2] Israel of Isaiah's day, who, except for a few righteous among them, would have become "as Sodom," had now, in Jesus' day, degenerated spiritually until in prophetic language, in spite of the few believing souls among them, they had become both "Sodom and Egypt."

Theirs was no ordinary apostasy. It was not the apostasy of the Amorites and the Philistines who were born to darkness and had never known any course except that of astrology and witchcraft and the sodomic vices. Nor was it the apostasy of a Jeroboam or a Jezebel who openly rejected the God of Israel and swore allegiance to Baal, awful and wicked as such a course was. But the Jewish apostasy in the days of Jesus was one in which they had the greatest measure of truth then possessed by any people, and yet they rejected the stone, the Cornerstone, upon which their whole religious structure was built. It was an apostasy among a people who actually had the Aaronic Priesthood. It was an apostasy among a people who had "the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John" who baptized Jesus. (D&C 84:26-27.)

It was an apostasy among a people who searched the scriptures, who memorized the Messianic prophecies, who knew that the hour of his coming was upon them, and who yet rejected him—though he raised the dead and created loaves and fishes out of nothing, as it were. Theirs was a refined, cultured, congenial apostasy, if we may use such terms to identify those who love darkness more than light because their deeds are evil. Theirs was an apostasy that followed truth in name, but not in deed; one in which they worshipped the true God with their lips, while their hearts were full of adultery and lasciviousness; an apostasy in which light and darkness were so intermixed that the resultant twilight kept even devout men and women from turning to the dawning brilliance of the new day.

Why the Jews of Jesus' Day Were Apostate

Why, of all people, were the generality of the Jews of Jesus' day so completely apostate? Why were they so dulled and insensitive spiritually that they failed to see in Jesus the fulfillment of all their Messianic dreams? How came they to be so hardened and cruel, so lacking in common compassion, that they would cry, "Crucify him, crucify him," as they berated the One who they all knew had opened blind eyes, unstopped deaf ears, and even reanimated cold corpses?

Three reasons are germane to the issues here raised:

We are not saying they were foreordained to a course of hatred and murder, only that they were the kind of spirits—the kind of mortals—who found it easy to work wickedness and spread darkness. Like Ahaz and Jezebel, like Pilate and Herod, like Laman and Lemuel, like Antiochus Epiphanes who sacrificed swine on the holy altar, like the wicked and ungodly of all races and places, they found it easy to fight the truth because of their native inclinations to walk in a worldly course. Such was their spiritual inheritance, though, as with all men, it was within their power, at any time, to save themselves by repentance and righteousness.

This matter of a devout and seemingly religious people becoming spiritually blind "by looking beyond the mark" illustrates perfectly how true and saving religion can become a damning burden. For generations that went before, and then in the day of our Lord's ministry, his Israelite brethren, by "looking beyond the mark," turned the truth of heaven into a system that led them to hell. That is to say, they took the plain and simple things of pure religion and added to them a host of their own interpretations; they embellished them with added rites and performances; and they took a happy, joyous way of worship and turned it into a restrictive, curtailing, depressive system of rituals and performances. The living spirit of the Lord's law became in their hands the dead letter of Jewish ritualism.

To the true order of Sabbath worship they added so many restrictions and performances that what should have been a day of rejoicing and rededication become a gloomy burden. To the true concept about their Messiah, they added the idea of a temporal ruler, so that the Deliverer who was sent to redeem them from death, hell, the devil, and endless torment was pictured as an earthly king with a sword like Caesar's in his hand. With their true system of sacrificial offerings they interwove such greedy practices that their conduct made of the Father's house a den of thieves. And so it went—through one doctrine and performance after another, their additions to what the Lord intended turned pure religion into anything but what it was intended to be. And so Jacob, by way of prophecy, was able to say that "by the stumbling of the Jews they will reject the stone upon which they might build and have safe foundation." (Jacob 4:14-15.)

But whatever the causes, the fact is that darkness covered the land of Palestine in that day and gross darkness filled the hearts of the generality of the people. The fires that should have been eternal had burned out, and the light of heaven no longer guided the people. Spiritual darkness shrouded the nation. So degenerate and wicked were the inhabitants of the land that Jacob, speaking prophetically, said: "Christ . . . should come among the Jews, among those who are the more wicked part of the world." Those who had once walked in the light now stumbled in the darkness. "And they"—Jews of Abrahamic descent; Jews who knew the words of Moses; Jews for whom Joshua had stopped the sun; Jews who had slain one Goliath after another through their long history; these Jews, "the more wicked part of the world"!—"they shall crucify him—for thus it behooveth our God, and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God. For should the mighty miracles be wrought among other nations they would repent, and know that he be their God." So prophesied Jacob. Then he gave his explanation as to why the Jews had sunk to such a low level. "Because of priestcrafts and iniquities," he said, "they at Jerusalem will stiffen their necks against him, that he be crucified. Wherefore, because of their iniquities, destructions, famines, pestilences, and bloodshed shall come upon them; and they who shall not be destroyed shall be scattered among all nations." (2 Ne. 10:3-6.)

Priestcrafts and iniquities! And the effects that flow from them! What a lesson modern Christendom, those who should be the Lord's people today, can learn from the Jews, those who should have been the Lord's people yesterday!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Jewish High Priest. The office of presiding bishop in the Church today is a hereditary office, designed and intended to go from father to son in the appointed lineage. The Lord, however, up to this point has not revealed the lineage, but undoubtedly will do so at some time in the future, perhaps when the millennial era is ushered in. Speaking of the presiding bishop of the Church, the Lord says: "And if they be literal descendants of Aaron they have a legal right to the bishopric, if they are the firstborn among the sons of Aaron; For the firstborn holds the right of the presidency over this priesthood, and the keys or authority of the same. No man has a legal right to this office, to hold the keys of this priesthood, except he be a literal descendant and the firstborn of Aaron." (D&C 68:16-18.)
[^2] Priest and Levites. "The Sadducees uniformly fell back on the letter of the Law, the prescriptive rights of the Temple, and the glory of the priesthood; the Pharisees, on the other hand, took their stand on the authority of the Rabbinical traditions, the value of sacred acts apart from the interposition of the priest, and advocated popular interests generally. "The contrast between the spirit of the two parties showed itself prominently in the harsh tenacity with which the Temple aristocracy held to the letter of the Mosaic Law in its penalties, as opposed to the milder spirit in which the Pharisees interpreted them, in accordance with the spirit of the times. The Pharisees, for example, explained the Mosaic demand - an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth - metaphorically, and allowed recompense to be made in money, but the Sadducees required exact compliance. The Sadducees required that the widow should literally spit in the face of the brother-in-law who refused her the levirate marriage rights, but it was enough for the Pharisees that she spat on the ground before him. The Pharisees permitted the carcass of a beast that had died to be used for any other purpose than food, to save loss to the owner, but the Sadducees denounced the penalties of uncleanness on so lax a practice. They sternly required that a false witness be put to death, according to the letter of the Law, even if his testimony had done the accused no injury, and many did not even shrink from carrying out the reasoning of the Rabbis, that, as two witnesses were always required to condemn the accused, both witnesses should always be executed when any perjury had been committed in the case." (Geikie, p. 540.)
