Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 14

Jewish Sects and Beliefs in Jesus' Day

Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment. . . . Is Christ divided? (1 Cor. 1:10-13.)

What Did the Ancient Jews Believe?

All of the ancient Jews who were faithful believed either all or part of the gospel—the gospel of Jehovah, the gospel of the Messiah, the gospel of Christ, the gospel that is the plan of salvation, the gospel that Jesus restored and taught in his day, the everlasting gospel (God does not change!), the same gospel restored in our day through Joseph Smith.

Beginning with Abraham, the father of the Jews; going on down through Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and Ephraim; including Moses and the prophets; considering particularly the kingdom of Judah, which was taken into Babylonian captivity, and then permitted to return and rebuild their temple in Jerusalem—all these Jews, who were faithful, believed either the fulness of the gospel or the preparatory gospel, as the case may be, depending on the degree of their faith and allegiance to the Lord.

Whenever there were legal administrators among them who held the Melchizedek Priesthood, the people had the fulness of the gospel, the same as we do, and, be it remembered, all the prophets held this high and holy order of divine authority. Our best illustration of this is the Nephite people, who both kept the law of Moses and rejoiced in the fulness of the gospel.

The mere presence of the higher priesthood, of itself and in its nature, means that the fulness of the gospel is present. The fulness of the gospel consists in the possession of the Melchizedek Priesthood and the enjoyment of the gift of the Holy Ghost, which gift is conferred by the power of this higher priesthood. The fulness of the gospel consists of all the laws, ordinances, doctrines, powers, and truths needed to assure mortals of a fulness of salvation, which is eternal life in the kingdom of God.

Whenever there were legal administrators among them who held only the Aaronic Priesthood, the people had only the preparatory gospel, the lesser law, the Mosaic law, the law of sacrifices and performances and carnal commandments. The presence of the Aaronic Priesthood, without the Melchizedek Priesthood, so that the lesser order holds rule and sway because there is no greater, means that the preparatory gospel only is present. This gospel, which includes faith and repentance and baptism, is to prepare men to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost and the higher ordinances of salvation, and therefore to prepare them for the fulness of the gospel and the fulness of salvation.

In the day when Jesus began his ministry there were no prophets or righteous men who held the Melchizedek Priesthood. Indeed, our Lord came to restore this higher order. John the Baptist held the Aaronic Priesthood, baptized by immersion in Jordan for the remission of sins, and promised that One would come after, the latchet of whose shoes he felt unworthy to unloose, who would baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost.

Thus, the Jews in Jesus' day had the preparatory gospel—at least some of those among them did who were faithful; and the Jews of that day looked forward to the receipt of the fulness of the gospel with the advent of their Messiah—at least those did who were faithful. As we are aware, the generality of the people were apostate in their feelings, did not understand the purpose of the preparatory gospel that their priests administered, and failed to receive the fulness of the saving power when it came in the person of the One whose gospel it is.

What Did the Jews in Jesus' Day Believe?

There was no united Jewish religion in our Lord's day any more than there is a united Christianity in our day. It does not suffice to speak of what the Jews believed or how they lived or what their social circumstances were any more than it does to utter similar generalities with reference to modern Christendom. There are Christian churches, so-called, that define a Christian as a person who believes the three basic creeds: the Apostles Creed, the Nicene Creed, and the Athanasian Creed. There are those who say that none are Christians except those who believe in the Trinity as set out in these weather-worn documents from an uninspired past, meaning those who believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are a spirit essence or power that fills the immensity of space and is everywhere and nowhere in particular present. There are Christians, so-called, who suppose that revelation has ceased, that visions are a thing of the past, that miracles are done away, that apostles and prophets are no longer needed.

On the other hand, there are followers of Christ who believe that the creeds of Christendom are an abomination in the sight of the Lord: that the Father and the Son are personal beings having bodies of flesh and bones as tangible as man's, and that the Holy Ghost is a personage of Spirit; and that without revelation, visions, miracles, priesthood, apostles and prophets, and every gift and grace enjoyed and possessed by the ancients, man does not have the pure gospel and cannot be saved in the kingdom of God.

As with us Christians, so with those Jews. There were Jewish cults, Jewish sects, and Jewish doctrinal aberrations in the day of Jesus. There were those who believed in a resurrection and those who did not; those who believed in angels and visions and revelations and those who did not; those who looked for a Messiah who would be a temporal despot and those who saw in the lowly Nazarene the fulfillment of the Messianic prophecies.

And the very fact that these divisions of thought and conduct existed is of itself proof conclusive of the prevailing apostasy. Paul asked, "Is Christ divided?" In Jewish parlance, and fitted to their circumstances, the query would have been: "Is Jehovah divided? Does he say one thing to the Pharisees, another to the Sadducees, and yet another to the Essenes?"

To study our Lord's life in a setting of reality, we must know about the major sects and cults and doctrinal perversities that prevailed in the minds of those to whom he attempted to teach his gospel and proclaim his own divine Sonship.

Jewish Sects, Parties, and Denominations

We shall note those sects, parties, and denominations—and certain officers who served in connection with them—whose beliefs and activities had a direct bearing on the mortal ministry of the Promised Messiah. Those cults and the cultists who comprised them; those Palestinian persons of affluence and influence; those Jewish patriots and Roman rulers, plus their bootlicking sycophants; those teachers and molders of religious and political thinking in the day of the Natural Heir to David's throne—all of them lumped together—formed the social and cultural and religious milieu in which Jesus ministered and from which his converts came. Their influence upon the inhabitants of the Holy Land influenced in turn what he said and did, where he went, and whom he gathered into his fold. Since the words and works of Jesus were not wrought in a vacuum and cannot be understood as an isolated phenomenon, since no happening in the Gospel accounts is perfectly understood apart from its Jewish setting, and since an understanding of the Christian church in the meridian of time presupposes a knowledge of Jewish history and culture, with which it is inseparably joined by innumerable threads, we shall make a necessary but brief comment about the following peoples and groups:

If Aaron, Israel's first high priest, had returned to his beloved Palestine to observe conditions generally; if, with Eleazar and Ithamar, his priestly sons, he had come into Herod's Temple in the day of Jesus to compare its rites and performances with those that he and they administered in the forerunner of that house of worship; if he had stood in the court of the majestic house of the Lord that crowned Jerusalem, and had looked upon the giant altar and compared the proceedings there with what he did in the tabernacle of the congregation; but, more importantly, if he had contrasted the vain and degenerate and wicked lives of those who then sat in his seat, with the righteousness and godly walk of their ancestors, many generations before, we may suppose he would have been sick at heart and would have felt like lamenting over doomed Jerusalem and its twice doomed temple, even as Jesus himself would soon do. The Jewish high priests of Jesus' day were a far cry from their counterparts in the days of Israel's genesis.

Aaron, who held the Melchizedek Priesthood and qualified by purity of heart, along with Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the elders of Israel, to see the God of that chosen people, was called of God to preside over the lesser priesthood, which ever thereafter would bear his name. He was the presiding bishop of the Church, as it were, and the office was ordained of God to be hereditary, to go from father to son, and to be the rightful inheritance of the oldest man in direct descent among the sons of Aaron. [^1] And so it was in the early generations. But in the days of the kings of Israel and Judah, high priests were sometimes installed and banished from office by the unrighteousness of the occupant of the throne, and by the days of Jesus such appointments and removals were made by Gentile overlords as a matter of political expediency and without reference to the lineage of the Levite involved. As a consequence, the high priests were of the same low spiritual stature as the Herods and Pilates who appointed them. But what concerns us is that they wielded great political and religious influence, that they molded public sentiment, and that their conduct became a pattern for Jews in general.

It is worthy of note that these, shall we say, illegitimate sons of Aaron were considered nonetheless to be Jehovah's representatives, that they were subject to secular powers and engaged in political connivings that were outside the bounds of their priestly callings, and that they were a symbol or standard around which the people would rally either to worship or to crucify.

It is also worthy of note that they wielded considerable influence; were overly endowed with this world's goods; received their offices, in some instances, by crime and bribery; and were subject to the mandates and murderous designs of the Great Sanhedrin. They were "high priests by investiture" and not "high priests by anointing," as had been their forebears; and though they could still simulate and wear the breastplate, the Urim and Thummim that Aaron and his original successors once carried upon their breasts had long since been taken from their ungodly hands, and with the loss of these holy interpreters had gone also, in large measure, the spirit of prophecy and revelation.

These high priests did, however, still hold the Aaronic Priesthood; they still performed sacrificial rites with all the similitudes and symbols that had always attended these sacred ordinances; and they still directed appropriate worship at the great feasts and made atonement for the people on that one day each year when they entered the Holy of Holies and pronounced the Ineffable Name ten times.

As to the two despicable priestly rulers who sought the blood of the Guiltless One and who joined in the conspiracy that carried him to the cross, Edersheim says: "St. Luke significantly joins together, as the highest religious authority in the land, the names of Annas and Caiaphas. The former had been appointed by Quirinius. After holding the Pontificate for nine years, he was deposed, and succeeded by others, of whom the fourth was his son-in-law Caiaphas. The character of the High-Priests during the whole of that period is described in the Talmud in terrible language. And although there is no evidence that 'the house of Annas' was guilty of the same gross self-indulgence, violence, luxury, and even public indecency, as some of their successors, they are included in the woes pronounced on the corrupt leaders of the priesthood, whom the Sanctuary is represented as bidding depart from the sacred precincts, which their presence defiled. It deserves notice, that the special sin with which the house of Annas is charged is that of 'whispering'—or hissing like vipers—which seems to refer to private influence on the judges in their administration of justice, whereby 'morals were corrupted, judgment perverted, and the Shekhinah withdrawn from Israel.' " (Edersheim 1:263.)

We know that the Aaronic Priesthood itself has been the same from its beginning to the present, meaning that we now have what John the Baptist had, and he possessed what Aaron himself held. We know that in the Aaronic Priesthood today there are four offices—deacon, teacher, priest, and bishop. But we cannot determine from the Old and New Testament accounts what offices there were in the lesser priesthood in previous ages. The priesthood itself is power and authority; the offices in the priesthood are appointments to use the priesthood for specified purposes. When the purposes change for which priesthood is needed and used, it may well be that the offices themselves are changed. From the day of Aaron to the building of Solomon's Temple, for instance, the Levites transported the tabernacle of the congregation and had special care for the ark of the covenant. These functions were no longer needed when the House of the Lord became a permanent rather than a portable dwelling place. Functions that once were laid upon the Levites were no longer needed, and it may well be that the offices in their Levitical Order of priesthood also underwent changes.

In Aaron's day, he and his son were priests. Aaron himself—and his firstborn after him, from generation to generation—was the presiding priest; in this capacity he carried the designation of high priest, and served as the equivalent of the presiding bishop. The other members of the tribe of Levi also held the Aaronic Priesthood, or, as it is also called, the Levitical Priesthood, but they did not hold the office of priest. In the scriptural accounts they are simply called Levites. The offices they held are not named, although the duties assigned them are described. These duties were to assist Aaron's sons in transporting and caring for the tabernacle of the congregation and in various performances in the temple. Their services were comparable to those of deacons and teachers today. Our deacons and teachers cannot baptize or administer the sacrament, and the Levites, although they did some menial work connected with sacrifices, such as preparing the altar and gathering the wood, did not perform the sacrifices themselves. We assume they did not baptize and that this ordinance was left for the priests only. We know there were judges anciently and that a bishop is a common judge in Israel, and so we conclude that the present office is comparable to the ancient one.

Under the Mosaic system the Levites were scattered among the other tribes and received no landed inheritances of the sort distributed by lot to their fellow tribes. All the other tribes paid tithes to the Levites, and they in turn tithed their tithes for the support of the priests. Since our deacons—holding the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, as they do—are appointed to teach the gospel, and to warn, expound, and exhort, and to invite all to come to Christ; since our teachers are to watch over the Church always and to be with and strengthen the members; since they are to see that there is no iniquity in the Church and that all the members do their duty; since our priests are to visit in the homes of the members and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties, we assume their counterparts anciently—indeed, there can be little question on the matter—had similar responsibilities. It is certainly not an exaggeration to say that the priests and Levites were a sanctifying and uplifting influence on the people generally and that they were looked upon as the Lord's servants and were treated accordingly.

In the day of Jesus, the priests and Levites, whose numbers were comparatively great, administered in the sacrificial services, performed the various rituals at the feasts, cared for the temple, and were expected to be learned in the law. If nothing else, they were an ever-present witness and symbol that the Lord's priesthood was on earth and that men should turn to Jehovah for strength and guidance. That they failed to give that guidance which would have led the people to believe in their true Messiah, when as a mortal he ministered among them, shows the depths to which the Jewish social and religious structure had sunk and justifies the assertion that their priesthood had been perverted into priestcraft. The sons of Levi of that day had become impure. But in the providence of Him whose servants they should have been, the promise is that in the last days he will purify them again that once more they may perform those duties assigned to them in the priestly order which has come down from Aaron.

"In trying to picture to ourselves New Testament scenes, the figure most prominent, next to those of the chief actors, is that of the Scribe. He seems ubiquitous; we meet him in Jerusalem, in Judea, and even in Galilee. Indeed, he is indispensable, not only in Babylon, which may have been the birthplace of his order, but among the 'dispersion' also. Everywhere he appears as the mouthpiece and representative of the people; he pushes to the front, the crowd respectfully giving way, and eagerly hanging on his utterances, as those of a recognised authority. He has been solemnly ordained by the laying on of hands; and is the Rabbi, 'my great one,' Master, amplitudo. He puts questions; he urges objections; he expects full explanations and respectful demeanour. Indeed, his hyper-ingenuity in questioning has become a proverb. There is not measure of his dignity, nor yet limit to his importance. He is the 'lawyer,' the 'well-plastered pit,' filled with the water of knowledge 'out of which not a drop can escape,' in opposition to the 'weeds of untilled soil' of ignorance. He is the Divine aristocrat, among the vulgar herd of rude and profane 'country people,' who 'know not the Law' and are 'cursed.' More than that, his order constitutes the ultimate authority on all questions of faith and practice; he is 'the Exegete of the Laws,' the 'teacher of the Law,' and along with 'the chief priests' and 'elders' a judge in the ecclesiastical tribunals, whether of the capital or in the provinces. Although generally appearing in company with 'the Pharisees,' he is not necessarily one of them—for they represent a religious party, while he has a status, and holds an office. In short, he is the Talmid or learned student, the Chakham or sage, whose honour is to be great in the future world. Each Scribe outweighed all the common people, who must accordingly pay him every honour. Nay, they were honoured of God Himself, and their praises proclaimed by the angels; and in heaven also, each of them would hold the same rank and distinction as on earth. Such was to be the respect paid to their sayings, that they were to be absolutely believed, even if they were to declare that to be at the right hand which was at the left, or vice versa." (Edersheim 1:93-94.)

Israel's divine guidance as a nation began with Moses, the man of God. He spoke and the issue was determined. His voice was the voice of Jehovah. Thereafter there were judges and prophets who had scribes to record their sayings and memorialize their doings, but always the divine word was available for the asking and the mind of the Lord was revealed for the seeking. In post-exilic days the prophetic word began to decrease and the position of the scribe, as the one in whose hands the divine word was found, grew in importance. Ezra was both a prophet and a scribe. After his day, through an evolving course, as inspired utterances were less frequent, the understanding and interpretation of the seeric sayings of the past became more important and the position of the scribes took on a new meaning, until finally their influence excelled all others in molding religious thought and practice.

This same course—for Lucifer has no new ideas, but merely applies what he already knows to new situations—has been followed in apostate Christendom. When there were no longer apostles and inspired men to give the Lord's message and word to living men, the world turned to interpreters—to scholars, to doctors of divinity, to theologians, to professors of religion—to set forth what they thought or imagined the divine word of former days meant. In the opening of our dispensation the Lord, after saying that the creeds of Christendom were "an abomination in his sight" (and these creeds were the interpretations and conclusions of the scribes, as it were), then said that "those professors" (meaning all who, like the scribes, had by their interpretations and teachings perverted the truth and made it of none effect) "were all corrupt." Then he said, paraphrasing Isaiah, "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." (JS-H 1:19.) This same charge—shall we say curse? yes, for so it is—was the one hurled by the Lord Jesus against the "scribes and Pharisees" of his day, quoting also the same root text from Isaiah. (Matt. 15:1-9; Mark 7:1-9; Isa. 29:13.)

By the time of Jesus, the Jewish scribes, exalted and revered by the people, had become the chief creators and upholders of priestcraft; they had become the devisers of doctrines that condoned and upheld iniquity—and it should be remembered that, according to the prophetic word, it was "because of priestcrafts and iniquities" that our Lord was "crucified." (2 Ne. 10:5.) The scribes had become and were the enemies of Christ. They were the ones who added to the law of Moses those detailed performances and perversions which made the law of no effect. They were the ones approved to explain and teach the law and to make decisions under it. There was a tradition that they alone understood the whole law, and their words came to have more impact and import than the law itself. It is as though they were the law. They were required to learn by heart the oral law, and they spent their time teaching others and disputing among themselves. They were, in effect, false ministers, false teachers, and false prophets, all of which gives great meaning to the scriptural comment that Jesus "taught . . . as one having authority, and not as the scribes." (Matt. 7:29.)

No group had greater influence over the people than they did. Nearly all the judges came from their ranks; they made up almost the whole teaching force of the nation, and they were well represented on the Sanhedrin. No priest could attain a position of prominence and influence unless he was also a scribe. They are the ones spoken of as the lawyers and teachers of the law. In New Testament times, the terms lawyer and scribe were synonymous. Most of the scribes were also Pharisees, but as a body they were distinct from them. Of them Jesus said: "All their works they do for to be seen of men: they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi." They are the ones upon whom he heaped perhaps the severest woes ever uttered by him, including the excoriating declaration. "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?" (Matt. 23.) They were a class who could have been a blessing to the people, for they were privileged to be teachers; but, in fact, they became a cursing, for they taught not the truth. "And all those who preach false doctrines, . . . and pervert the right way of the Lord, wo, wo, wo be unto them, saith the Lord God Almighty for they shall be thrust down to hell!" (2 Ne. 28:15.)

Jesus' counsel to his disciples that they should not be called Rabbi—"for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren" (Matt. 23:8)—was itself a condemnation both of the false adulation heaped on the uninspired teachers of the day and a denunciation of Rabbinism itself, that is, of the great body of theological absurdities that had come into being through the warped interpretations of those who were looked upon as lights to the people. As occasion requires, and as we deal with the various vagaries of Jewish theology, we shall see the revolting absurdities imposed by Rabbinism upon a religion that once had divine approval. For the present we need only note that in Jesus' day all scribes were considered to be Rabbis, for the title was merely one of respect that was given by the Jews to all of their doctors and teachers. But the title was not limited to those self-appointed embodiments of all wisdom. Christ and John the Baptist, for instance, were both addressed by respectful persons by rabbinical titles. Different degrees of honor were intended as people used the term Rab, meaning master; Rabbi, my master; and Rabboni, my lord and master, this last and most exalted of all the titles being the one used by Mary outside the open tomb as she bowed before the risen Master. It will suffice for our present purposes merely to be aware that all that was said of the scribes applies in part at least to the Rabbis, and that this latter group must bear much of the responsibility for creating the climate and preparing the way for the crucifixion of a God. What an awesome responsibility one assumes when he chooses to teach false doctrine! [^2]

These all, in effect, were politico-religious sects or parties. Theoretically their bases were religious and their differences doctrinal; in fact, they were also political and social and cultural. They came into being in post-exilic historical settings of anguish and political oppression, and each of them exercised a leavening and sometimes controlling influence in Jewish Israel.

The Pharisees, of whom there were only between six thousand and seven thousand in the day of Jesus, had by all odds the greatest influence over Jewish thought and practice. The bulk of the common people believed as they did and conformed to some extent to their practices. Their number included the scribes, whose self-appointed mission was to tempt, berate, and deride the Son of God; and their doctrine was Rabbinism, that maze of Jewish absurdity which turned living truth into dead letter and imposed such burdens upon men that none but deluded fanatics could bear them in full. Paul was a Pharisee; so also were Gamaliel, Nicodemus, and the Arimathean called Joseph, in whose tomb our Lord was laid.

As best we can determine, from those educated guesses which historians are pleased to call historical facts, the Pharisees were those who continued the work of Ezra in collating, memorizing, and interpreting the law and all the commandments therein recorded. Apparently they began as a distinct group with political influence as the Hasidaeans back in the days of the high priest Onanias III, who was deposed by Antiochus Epiphanes in the second century B.C. Their name signifies "God's loyal ones," and they were traditionally known as "the separated ones." Under John Hyrcanus (134-104 B.C.) they had great political power, and from that time onward they maintained a dominating position in the Sanhedrin. Such was true in the day when that body condemned our Lord.

Our special interest in the Pharisees centers in what they believed and taught and practiced in that day when the Lord Jesus had one confrontation after another with them. A knowledge of their opinions and practices in that day when our Lord was restoring the gospel again is almost essential to an understanding of the Christianity that then came into being. In that day their interest was not, as it had once been, in keeping or interpreting the law of Moses, in the true sense of the word. Rather, they then had created a new law, an oral law—the portion of the Talmud called the Mishna or "second law"; it is a law founded on tradition instead of revelation, a law that they esteemed to be of greater worth than the Torah, or law of Moses itself. A digest of Jewish traditions as well as a compendium of the ritualistic performances of the law, it was made up of formalistic minutiae; of the need for washings before they could eat bread; of the requirement to bathe following a trip to the market; and of the practice of washing cups, pots, and brazen vessels. It included fasting twice a week (on Mondays and Thursdays) between the Paschal week and Pentecost, and between the Feast of Tabernacles and that of the Dedication of the Temple. Their observance of the law of tithing was punctilious beyond belief, even going to the point of refusing to buy food from or to eat food in the homes of non-Pharisees, lest the food should not have been tithed; and so on and so on and so on. And out of these beliefs and practices there grew up among them a feeling of proud self-righteousness, which dulled their spirits and closed their minds against the truths Jesus offered them.

Theologically speaking, the Pharisees believed in the unity and holiness of God, the election of Israel, life after death, the resurrection from the dead, the ministering of angels, and some among them at least in the continuation of the family unit in eternity. They were extreme advocates of the doctrine of observing the Sabbath day, to which doctrine they had appended thirty-nine principal species of prohibited acts on that day. Most of their religious emphasis, however, was on ethical principles rather than doctrinal concepts.

It was not easy to be a Pharisee, but perhaps that was part of the Pharisees' appeal to a people who believed that life never was intended to be easy. In any event they wielded the greatest religious power of any group in our Lord's day.

The Sadducees, fewer in number than their Pharisaic opponents, claimed only four thousand adherents in the day Jesus walked among men. But they were the aristocracy of the nation—the priests and rulers, the wealthy and influential, the consorters with Herod and the friends of Caesar.

Jewish legend places their beginning with Zadok, whose family ministered at the altar in the Lord's house; and among their number was found the presiding high priest, the one who, alone among all his kindred priests, went annually to commune with the Most High in the most holy place. After Cyrus opened the prison that was Babylon and sent Zerubbabel and the others back to the once Holy City to build Jehovah's house again, the remnant of Zadok stood foremost among the priestly families, ministering again, as was their right by lineage, in the sacred sacrificial offerings.

They grew into a reactionary politico-religious organization as part of an insurgent movement against the Maccabean party in the second century B.C. In their veins, at the time of John and Jesus and their apostolic colleagues, flowed the purest Jewish blood of the nation. The whole thrust of their not-too-popular party was one of opposition to the Pharisees and the oral law with all its ritualistic formalities. For them, the temple—not the synagogues, which were dominated by the Pharisees, the Rabbis, and the scribes—was the center of a religious system whose true significance they no longer understood. Being satisfied with life as it then was, they had little interest in the coming of a Messianic Deliverer, though the Sadducean sacrifices they offered on the great altar were in similitude of his promised atoning sacrifice. When Titus set the Roman torch to the temple in A.D. 70, wrenching each separate stone from the ancient foundation, the Sadducees died as a party; from then on Judaism centered in the synagogue and not the temple.

"But this priestly aristocracy were by no means the most zealous for the sanctuary from which they drew their honours and wealth. They . . . had even sought to turn parts of the Temple into a splendid family mansion. They had coquetted and debased their offices to win favour with the Ptolemies and the Syrian kings; they had held back, in half Greek irreligiousness from taking a vigorous part in the glorious Maccabean struggle, and now [in the day of Jesus] truckled to heathen procurators, or with a half heathen king, to preserve their honours and vested interests. To please Herod, they had admitted Simon Boethus, the Alexandrian, the father of the king's young wife, to the high priesthood, from which a strict Jew, Jesus the son of Phabi, had been expelled to make room for him. They had even shown frank and hearty submission and loyalty to Rome.

"The nation, with its chosen religious leaders, the Pharisees—the representatives of the 'Saints' who had conquered in the great war of religious independence—never forgot the faint-heartedness and treachery of the priestly nobility in that magnificent struggle. Their descent might secure its members hereditary possession of the dignified offices of the Church, and there might still be a charm in their historical names; but they were regarded with open distrust and dislike by the nation and the Pharisees alike, and had to make many concessions to Pharisaic rules to protect themselves from actual violence.

"The strict fanatical heads of the Synagogue and leaders of the people, and the cold and polished Temple aristocracy, were thus bitterly opposed, and it added to the keenest of the dislike that the dreams by the Rabbinical, or Pharisaic party, of a restored theocracy, could only be realized through the existing organization of the priesthood, of which the indifferent Sadducees had the control." (Geikie, pp. 538-39.)

Theologically, the Sadducees found little to please them in the beliefs of the Pharisaically inclined masses. Strange as it may seem among a people who praised Jehovah with their lips and had his law written on scrolls of papyrus that were everywhere available for study and scholastic analysis, the Sadducees did not believe in a resurrection. They denied the reality of a future state in which rewards and punishments would be meted out as a result of good or evil acts performed by mortal men. They scoffed at the Pharisaic concepts of the immortality of the soul, and believed neither in preexistence nor the ministering of angels nor the existence of spirits. They did not believe in foreordination or that Divine Providence ruled in the lives of men, but did lay stress on the fact that men had freedom of choice as to good and evil, and concluded that whatever happened in one's life was the direct result of the exercise of such agency. [^3]

But in nothing was the difference between Pharisees and Sadducees more marked than in the contrast between the Pharisaic Messianic hope and the Sadducean rejection of or at least indifference to this nationalistic concept. "The Pharisees, as the hereditary representatives of puritans who had delivered the nation in the great struggle against Syria, looked forward with touching though fanatical yearning, to the realization of the prophecies of Daniel, which, as they understood them, promised that Israel, under the Messiah, and with it, themselves, should be raised 'to dominion, and glory, and a kingdom; that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve Him, and that His kingdom should be everlasting.' [^4] They believed that this national triumph would be inaugurated so soon as Israel, on its part, carried out to the full the requirements of the ceremonial laws, as expounded in their traditions. It was a matter of formal covenant, in which the truth and righteousness—that is, the justice, of Jehovah were involved. . . .

"To this dream of the future, the Sadducees opposed a stolid and contemptuous indifference. Enjoying the honours and good things of the world, they had no taste for a revolution which should introduce, they knew not what, in place of a state of things with which they were quite contented. Their fathers had had no such ideas, and the sons ridiculed them. They not only laughed aside the Pharisaic idea of righteousness, as identified with a life of minute and endless observance, but fell back on the Mosaic Law, and mocked at the Messianic hope from which the zeal of their rivals had sprung. . . .

"The nation zealously supported the Pharisees. The spirit of the age was against the Sadducees. The multitude disliked to hear that what the Maccabeans had defended with their blood was uncanonical. They yielded cheerfully to the heavy yoke of the Pharisaic Rabbis, for, the more burdensome the duties required, the greater the future reward for performance. The Pharisees, moreover, were part of the people, mingled habitually with them as their spiritual guides, and were the examples of exact obedience to their own precepts. Their Messianic dreams were of national glory, and thus the crowd saw in them the representatives of their own fondest aspirations. The Sadducees—isolated, haughty, harsh, and unnational—were hated: their rivals honoured and followed. The extravagances and the hypocrisy of some might be ridiculed, but they were the accepted popular leaders.

"Indeed, apart from all other considerations, the fact that the Sadducees supported zealously every government in turn, was enough to set the people against them. Instead of this, the Pharisees shared and fostered the patriotic and religious abhorrence of the Roman supremacy, and were sworn enemies of the hated Herodian family. The result was that, in the words of Josephus, 'the Pharisees had such an influence with the people, that nothing could be done about divine worship, prayers, or sacrifices, except according to their wishes and rules, for the community believed they sought only the loftiest and worthiest aims alike in word and deed. The Sadducees were few in number; and though they belonged to the highest ranks, had so little influence, that when elected to office, they were forced to comply with the ritual of the Pharisees from fear of the people.' " (Geikie, pp. 541-42.)

If the Pharisees were a "generation of vipers" who could not "escape the damnation of hell" (Matt. 23:33), as Jesus said (and they were), and if the Sadducees used their political influence to bring about our Lord's crucifixion, thus consigning themselves to the same depths of damnation (and so it was), they both had a bedfellow whose departure from the truth and whose apostate practices equaled and even surpassed those of these two more influential sects. We speak of the Essenes. In number—there were some four thousand of them in Jesus' day—they were as numerous as the Sadducees. Their influence among the people, however, was slight, and they are not so much as mentioned by name in the New Testament. It was to the Pharisees that the masses turned for religious guidance, and it was to the Sadducees that the people bowed where their sacrificial system was concerned and where their relationships to the Caesars and the Herods were involved.

The Essenes drew into their fold the utter and complete fanatics of the nation. Many of them lived in colonies apart from their fellow Jews, held their property under a communal system, ate at a common table, and lived a rigid agrarian type life, full of ceremonialism. Some were celibates, "the precursors of the Christian monks," Geikie says.

Their doctrine was as far afield from reality as is common in the more freakish cults of Christendom. Their aim in life was to keep the law of Moses, which they studied day and night every day. "To blaspheme the name of Moses was the highest crime, punishable with death, and to give up his Books was a treachery which no Essene would commit, even under the agonies of torture or death." The Dead Sea Scrolls, of relatively modern discovery, were apparently kept by ancient colonies of these super-separatists from the mainstream of Jewish life.

They had their own synagogues, were pacifists, ate no animal food (since the law said, "Thou shalt not kill"), bathed their whole bodies before each meal, and took terrible oaths of secrecy to conceal their doctrines and "the secret names of the angels, which were known to the brotherhood, and gave him who learned them power, by pronouncing them, to draw down these awful beings from heaven."

"They were rigid Predestinarians, believing that all things in the course of nature and in the life of man, are fixed by fate. When there was no moral freedom, it was idle either to preach or teach, and so they did neither." They did, however, profess to have the gift of prophecy, and were called in, from time to time, by the Herods and others to interpret dreams and give meaning to various superstitions. The Essenes came in contact with the people," Geikie says, "as healers, prophets, dream-interpreters and exorcists, not as teachers or preachers." (Geikie, pp. 252-57.) They were, it would seem, not far removed from the sorcerers, astrologers, and magicians of the ancient courts of Babylon and Egypt.

Historians have been wont to ascribe to the Essenes an influence and status wholly disproportionate to that which, in fact, was theirs. Since there are some high moral and ethical principles in their writings, they have been referred to as heralds of that Christianity which was to be. In this connection there has been some intellectual consternation in some quarters to discover in the documents of the Essenes some of the very concepts Jesus gave forth in his teachings, all of which simply means that gospel truths have been revealed in dispensations past and preserved in garbled form among those who have forsaken the full truth. [^5]

At least from the days of Moses, both men and women in Israel were privileged to take vows setting themselves apart to serve the Lord in some special way for an appointed period. Such persons, while subject to their vows, were called Nazarites. Frequently the period of penance and pondering and worship and devotion was for thirty days. In the case of Samson it was for life, and John the Baptist is considered by some to have had the same lifetime obligation. As set out in Numbers 6:1-21, those so separating themselves unto the Lord, for whatever period was involved, must abstain from wine and strong drink and the eating of grapes or anything coming from the vine tree. They must let their hair grow and avoid any Levitical uncleanness. At the end of their period of separation, they shaved their heads and offered burnt offerings, sin offerings, peace offerings, and meat and drink offerings, with all their attendant formalities. Even Paul, as a temporizing gesture to the partially converted Jewish-Christians in Jerusalem—and after the law of Moses, including the law of sacrifice and the law of the Nazarite, had been done away—participated in these vows and the offerings made incident thereto. (Acts 21:23-26.)

In the days of Jesus, before he fulfilled the law of Moses and ended the offering of sacrifices, Nazarites were present in his congregations and were exerting an influence for good among the people. Their vows were personal matters and their worship a personal attempt to draw near to the Lord, as distinguished from the ascetic brotherhood found in the false worship of the Essenes.

Footnotes

Jewish Sects and Beliefs (Chapter 14) footnote: All scribes were Rabbis, but not all Rabbis were scribes. Jesus and other teachers were Rabbis, but most assuredly they were not scribes. In chapter 6, "The Rabbis at the Time of Christ, and Their Ideas Respecting the Messiah," in The Life of Christ by Cunningham Geikie, we find this analysis of the station, influence, and ministry of those Rabbis who also were scribes: "If the most important figures in the society of Christ's day were the Pharisees, it was because they were [that is, among them were most of] the Rabbis, or teachers of the Law. As such they received superstitious honour, which was, indeed, the great motive, with many, to court the title, or join the party.

"The Rabbis were classed with Moses, the patriarchs, and the prophets, and claimed equal reverence. Jacob and Joseph were both said to have been Rabbis. The Targum of Jonathan substitutes Rabbis, or Scribes, for the word 'prophets,' where it occurs. Josephus speaks of the prophets of Saul's day as Rabbis. In the Jerusalem Targum all the patriarchs are learned Rabbis. . . . They were to be dearer to Israel than father or mother, because parents [as they falsely supposed] avail only in this world, but the Rabbi for ever. They were set above kings, for is it not written, 'Through me kings reign?' Their entrance into a house brought a blessing; to live or to eat with them was the highest good fortune. To dine with a Rabbi was as if to enjoy the splendour of heavenly majesty. . . .

"To learn a single verse, or even a single letter, from a Rabbi could be repaid only by the profoundest respect. . . . The table of the Rabbi was nobler than that of kings; and his crown more glorious than theirs.

". . . The Mishna declares that it is a greater crime to speak anything to their discredit than to speak against the words of the Law. The words of the Rabbis are to be held as worth more than the words of the prophets. . . .

"Heresy, which would be fatal to the blind unanimity which was their political strength, could only be excluded by rigidly denouncing the least departure from their precepts. The Law and the Prophets must, therefore, be understood only in the sense of their traditions . . . .

"Yet, in form, the Law received boundless honour. Every saying of the Rabbis had to be based on some words of it, which were, however, explained in their own way. The spirit of the times, the wild fanaticism of the people, and their own bias, tended, alike, to make them set value only on ceremonies and worthless externalisms, to the utter neglect of the spirit of the sacred writings. Still, it was owned that the Law needed no confirmation, while the words of the Rabbis did.

"So far as the Roman authority under which they lived left them free, the Jews willingly put all power in the hands of the Rabbis. They or their nominees filled every office, from the highest in the priesthood to the lowest in the community. They were the casuists, the teachers, the priests, the judges, the magistrates, and the physicians of the nation. But their authority went still further, for, by the Rabbinical laws, nearly everything in daily life needed their counsel and aid. No one could be born, circumcised, brought up, educated, betrothed, married, or buried-no one could celebrate the Sabbath or other feasts, or begin a business, or make a contract, or kill a beast for food, or even bake bread, without the advice or presence of a Rabbi. The words of Christ respecting binding and loosing, were a Rabbinical proverb: they bound and they loosed as they thought fit. What they loosed was permitted-what they bound was forbidden. They were the brain, the eyes, the ears, the nerves, the muscles of the people, who were mere children apart from them. . . .

"They were Pharisees as to their party, and Rabbis in their relations to the Law. That one who came, not indeed, to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to free them from the perversions of Rabbinical theology, should have been met by the bitterest hatred and a cruel death, was only an illustration of the sad truth, to which every age was borne witness, that ecclesiastical bodies who have the power to persecute, identify even the abuses of their system with the defense of religion, and are capable of any crime in their blind intolerance." (Geikie pp. 52-55.)

---
Notas:
[^1] After Abraham, who then had no seed and whose wife Sarah was past the childbearing age, was told that his seed should be as the stars of heaven in number and should possess the land of Canaan, the restored scriptural account says: "Abram [for his name had not yet been changed] said, Lord God, how wilt thou give me this land for an everlasting inheritance? And the Lord said, Though thou wast dead, yet am I not able to give it thee? And if thou shalt die, yet thou shalt possess it, for the day cometh, that the Son of Man shall live; but how can he live if he be not dead? he must first be quickened. And it came to pass, that Abram looked forth and saw the days of the Son of Man, and was glad, and his soul found rest, and he believed in the Lord; and the Lord counted it unto him for righteousness." (JST, Gen. 15:1-12.)
[^2] We have no greater passage on the power and authority of the holy priesthood, nor one that shows better the great spiritual insight of the Prophet Joseph Smith, than the one here involved. It not only contains words and phrases reciting that "Melchizedek was a man of faith, who wrought righteousness; and when a child he feared God, and stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire," and says that in the priesthood is the power "to put at defiance the armies of nations" and tells how Melchizedek's people "wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven," but also tells of Enoch and his city, of the laws governing the translation of the righteous, and of the return of Zion in "the latter days, or the end of the world." (JST, Gen. 14:25-40.)
[^3] "Moses," Paul says, as he tells things that are not recorded in our present Old Testament, "was ordained by the hand of angels to be a mediator of this first covenant, (the law.) Now this mediator was not a mediator of the new covenant; but there is one mediator of the new covenant, who is Christ." (JST, Gal. 3:19-20.)
[^4] The beginning point for those desiring to research this matter is found in the Book of Mormon references to the named individuals.
[^5] Jude also, in the brief twenty-five verses of his one-chapter New Testament book, speaks of Michael contending for the body of Moses (verse 9), which is an allusion to the pseudepigraphic book The Assumption of Moses. This book tells of Moses' translation and his ascent as a fiery angel into heaven. (R.H. Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament in English 2:407-24.) From the Book of Mormon and other sources we are led to believe that Moses was translated so he could return, in his body, before the day of resurrection, along with translated Elijah, to give the keys of the priesthood to our Lord on the mount of transfiguration. See Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 515-16.
