Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 15

Jewish Scripture in Jesus' Day

Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. (John 5:39.)

All things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me. Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures. (Luke 24:44-45.)

Scriptures Guide Men to Salvation

We have in the Holy Scriptures—those inspired and canonized utterances of the holy prophets; those heaven-sent fragments from the records of eternity; those words and phrases spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost—we have in these sacred writings the plan and the pattern, the laws and the requirements, the gospel recitations, that will guide us to eternal life in our Father's kingdom. They chart the course we must pursue to gain peace in this life and glory and honor in the life to come.

We are not saved by the scriptures as such. In the beginning the plan of salvation was "declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Moses 5:58.) The laws and truths so declared were recorded, and such of them as we now have are called the Holy Scriptures. They tell how all men—not the ancients only—may hear the voice of God, entertain angelic messengers, and enjoy the outpourings of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Scriptures are given to guide men to that state of spiritual enlightenment and perfection attained by those of old who worked out their salvation.

"The holy scriptures," Paul told his beloved Timothy, "are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus." The scriptures open the door; they mark the course we must pursue; they identify the strait and narrow path; they testify of Christ and his laws; they engender faith; their worth cannot be overstated. But once the path is revealed, men must walk therein to gain the desired eternal reward. Thus, "All scripture," Paul continues, "is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." (2 Tim. 3:15-17.)

The law of the Lord is perfect, Converting the soul: The testimony of the Lord is sure, Making wise the simple.

The statutes of the Lord are right, Rejoicing the heart: The commandment of the Lord is pure, Enlightening the eyes.

The fear of the Lord is clean, Enduring for ever: The judgments of the Lord Are true and righteous altogether.

More to be desired are they than gold, Yea, than much fine gold: Sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.

Moreover by them is thy servant warned: And in keeping of them There is great reward.

—Psalm 19:7-11

In the full and complete sense, every word spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost is scripture. It is "the will of the Lord, . . . the mind of the Lord, . . . the word of the Lord, . . . the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:4.) It could not be otherwise, for the Holy Ghost is God, is one with the Father and the Son, and is their witness and revelator. His words are their words whether he speaks them personally or impresses the thoughts upon the minds of men so they find utterance by mortal tongues.

But the scriptures of which we now speak consist of those inspired statements of holy men which have been preserved for the guidance of all men and which find general acceptance by faithful people. This canonical reservoir of revealed writ varies in size and dimensions from one time to another and as between one people and another. One nation in one age has a small library of sacred writings, another in a more blessed day has many shelves stacked high with what the Lord has said to many prophets. As a general rule, the more sacred parts of Holy Writ, such as the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon, are withheld from those of lesser spiritual stature. And ofttimes that which is available has been muddied by the carelessness or unbelief or defiant rebellion of those in whose custody the sacred records have rested at any given time, as witness the plain and precious parts of Genesis not found in modern Bibles but restored by revelation in the Pearl of Great Price.

Further, there is the practical matter of interpretation and of equating and of comparing the written word with the continuing stream of oral utterances that, because the speaking voice has been inspired from on high, are themselves also scripture. Principles revealed in one day must be applied to new situations in another time; the ancient scriptures must live again in the lives of those into whose hands they fall; someone must tell what the word of God, given anciently means today.

It takes an inspired man to understand and interpret an inspired utterance. No one but a prophet can envision the true and full meaning of prophetic words. Any person of normal mentality can absorb some of the intended meaning from the scriptures, but no one can plumb the depths unless enlightened by the same power that gave the revealed truths in the first instance. Hence, "no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation." as Peter said. Why? Because "the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:20-21.) Similarly, holy men of God, as moved upon by the Holy Ghost, are the only ones who can make authoritative and complete statements as to the meaning and application of revealed truth.

And therein lies the problem. Such scriptures as were available to our Jewish brethren in the day of our Lord were completely buried under the private interpretations of the Rabbis.

Inspired men were few and far between in that day. Men did not look to living prophets to tell what dead prophets meant by their prophetic words. It was a day when the school of Hillel debated with the school of Shammai, and neither of them came anywhere near the truth. When our Lord and his associates came, speaking with authority "and not as the scribes" (Matt. 7:29), it was more than a shock: it was the ax of revealed truth and of inspired interpretation chopping down the vines of tradition that encumbered the vineyard of scriptural learning.

Ancient Jewish Scriptures

When Jesus said, "Search the scriptures" (John 5:39); when "the voices of the prophets" (Acts 13:27) were heard, as it were, and the writings of Moses were "read in the synagogues every sabbath day" (Acts 15:21); when Paul spoke of "the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation" (2 Tim. 3:15), to what books of Holy Writ did they have reference?

Adam and his posterity kept a book of remembrance in which sacred things were recorded. Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah, and all the holy men who lived before the flood wrote down what the Lord said to each of them. Shem and Melchizedek, Abraham and his descendants, and the mighty men of old—who saw God, heard his voice, entertained his messengers, saw within the veil, and knew the mysteries of the kingdom by revelation—all these were the proud possessors of authoritative writings long since lost among the children of men. In due course, as part of the restoration of all things—which Peter promises shall include all things "which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:21)—we shall receive again the Book of Enoch, the Book of Joseph, the remainder of the Book of Abraham, plus unnumbered and unknown volumes. No revealed truth, no sacred scripture, no recorded revelation is ever permanently lost; what God has said to one person, he will say to another, and what was known in one age shall come forth again. The more truth a gracious God can give to his people, the better he and they like it.

But the Jews of Jesus' day, even as the sectarians in our day, were denied the blessing of having the fulness of revealed truth to read in their homes and preach in their synagogues. They did have enough to teach them of their Messiah and to direct their feet in the path leading to greater light and added revelation, but the inspiration rained from heaven no longer filled the reservoirs of revelation as had been the case among their fathers. They had the Old Testament, probably more of it than is found in our modern versions, but certainly only a fraction of what should have been compiled upon its pages.

We have every reason to believe that the full and pure accounts that tell of the revelation of the gospel to Adam and Noah, of their baptism and the priesthood they held, and of the Lord's extended dealings with them, as such accounts have been revealed anew through Joseph Smith, were not extant among the Jews in Jesus' day. At least there is no intimation in the teachings of Jesus or in the New Testament writings that the knowledge in these original accounts was then available to the people. It does seem clear, however, that the book of Genesis, as they had it, contained more than does the same record in the King James Version of the Bible. For instance, Jesus, in teaching that he, as Jehovah, was "before Abraham," said: "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad" (John 8:56-58), no record of which ancient vision is found in Genesis. That Abraham did have such a vision was revealed to Joseph Smith, and he inserted the account in the Inspired Version. [^1] It was the unvarying practice of Jesus, when quoting scripture, to take his words from those accounts with which his hearers were or should have been familiar. We must suppose he followed this course in this instance.

An even more conclusive reason to believe that the Jewish Genesis excelled the Christian Genesis is seen in the writings of Paul. He quoted and paraphrased a number of scriptures and referred to some historical facts, which are not in the Bible of Christendom, but which original sources have been restored by the great prophet of latter days. The clearest of these is his reference in Hebrews to ancient worthies "who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight [and] turned to flight the armies of the aliens." (Heb. 11:33-34.) This language is, of course, a paraphrase, a quotation, and a summary of what Genesis once contained relative to Melchizedek, which makes it perfectly clear that the Melchizedek material was still in Genesis when Paul wrote to his Hebrew brethren. [^2] Paul's statements about "God" preaching "before the gospel unto Abraham" (Gal. 3:8) and his explanations as to how and in what manner Moses was the mediator of the old covenant also show a more extended biblical background than is available to modern writers. [^3] There seems, thus, to be little doubt that although the Jews did not have a full and perfect book of Genesis, they did have a better and more accurate one than modern Christendom possesses.

As far as we know, the other prophetic writings and Psalms, had among the Jews in the meridian of time, were substantially the same as those we now have, although, yet again, what is now extant is far less than what once was. The Hebrews on the American continent found on the brass plates of Laban sayings and writings of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, of Moses and Isaiah, of Zenos, Zenock and Neum, and possibly of Abraham, and perhaps of many unnamed prophets, none of which seem to have been preserved through the Babylonian exile and down to our Lord's day. [^4] At least there are no allusions or intimations in the New Testament accounts or the writings of contemporary historians that the Jews then had these precious gems of celestial truth; which would have been theirs had they been in complete harmony with the divine will.

The Old Testament of Jesus' Day

We have come to call the Jewish scriptures the Old Testament, meaning, as men have falsely supposed, that it is a record of Deity's dealings with a people subject to an old testament, an old covenant, a lesser law, which antedated and was less than that Christianity revealed by the Son of God. The New Testament is supposed to contain the accounts relative to the new covenant, which superseded, fulfilled, and to some degree at least abolished what went before. In fact, both testaments or covenants deal with the eternal principles and truths that make up the everlasting gospel, the gospel of salvation, which is both an old, a present, a new, and a future covenant; it is the new and everlasting covenant. More than a third of the time period covered by the Old Testament was one in which the lesser law was "added" to the higher principles of revealed religion. Many of the ancients, though subject to the law of Moses, continued to live the higher law that had, in fact, antedated everything revealed to Moses and Aaron and their successors. The Old scriptural accounts deal with both the higher gospel truths and the formalities and rigid requirements of the lesser law of Moses.

In the day of Jesus, though there were Hebrew or Aramaic copies of the scripture in usage, the Old Testament of the people, the one used generally, the one quoted by Jesus and Paul and the New Testament authors, was the Septuagint. This Greek version of Holy Writ—commonly referred to as the LXX, because according to tradition it had been translated from Hebrew into Greek by about seventy scholars—was by no means a perfect reflection of the mind and will of Him from whom scripture comes. It contained all of our present Old Testament, plus many apocryphal books, and much license had been taken by the translators. It was completed more than two hundred years before the Christian era, and many of its passages contained gross mistakes while others presented clarifications of the Hebrew originals. Edersheim says that the "free handling of the text" by Hellenistic translators resulted in "a strenuous effort . . . to banish all anthropomorphisms, as inconsistent with their ideas of Deity." (Edersheim 1:28.)

It was of these ancient scriptures, in their original form and before they fell into evil hands, that an angel said to Nephi: "The book that thou beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel." Then the angel, speaking more particularly of the New Testament, continued: "Thou hast beheld that the book proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew; and when it proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the plainness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record." After these scriptures went forth "in purity," they came into the hands of "a great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches." Of this ill-spawned and devil-built perverter of true religion, the angel said: "They have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away." (1 Ne. 13:23-26.) That is to say, both the Old and the New Testaments found among men in our day have been subject to the deletions, perversions, and alterations of persons whose interests were not compatible with those of the prophets and apostles whose words they dared to twist.

But in addition to LXX—which includes many apocryphal writings—and to the scriptural versions in their own language, the Jews had studied the pseudepigraphic books. As to the Apocrypha, as it is now constituted—and there have been many different selections of apocryphal books over the years—we have these revealed words: "There are many things contained therein that are true, and it is mostly translated correctly." And also: "There are many things contained therein that are not true, which are interpolations by the hands of men." Those who are "enlightened by the Spirit shall obtain benefit" from studying it. (D&C 91:1-6.) Those not so gifted will do better devoting their attention to the scriptures that have greater worth. Apocryphal writings are quoted in the Jewish Talmud.

Other Jewish writings, purporting to be scripture but which never attained either canonical or apocryphal authenticity, because their authors are assumed to be unknown, are called, collectively, the pseudepigrapha. These pseudepigraphic writings contain a remarkable intermixture of truth and error. They do talk about many things found in latter-day revelation that are not otherwise recorded in either the Bible or Apocrypha. Two of these pseudepigraphic books purport to be the writings of Enoch, of whom the world knows almost nothing. Because Jude in his New Testament book quotes from the writings of Enoch the prophecy that "the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, To execute judgment upon" the ungodly (Jude 1:14-15), [^5] let us here refer to some of the doctrines found in this so-called Book of Enoch, writings that were known and studied by the Jews in the day Jesus ministered among them.

In the pseudepigraphic writings of Enoch we find visions, prophecies, exhortations, and doctrinal expositions relative to the Second Coming and the Millennium; the names and functions of the seven angels (including Raphael, Michael, and Gabriel); the separation of the spirits of righteous and wicked men as they await the day of judgment; the coming judgment of the wicked; the attainment of salvation by the righteous and elect; the bringing of the Son of Man before "the head of days" (meaning, obviously, the Ancient of Days); the resurrection of the dead and the separation by the Judge of the righteous and the wicked; the translation of Enoch; preexistence and the creation of the souls of all men before the foundation of the world; the war in heaven and the casting out of Satan; the dividing of the eight-thousand-year history of the earth into the first six thousand years, to be followed by one thousand years of rest, after which would come another one thousand years, and then the end; a list of beatitudes, not far removed in wisdom from those of Jesus himself; personal responsibility for sin; the salvation of animals; the state of eternal life for those who keep the commandments; and much, much more. [^6]

It will be observed that the matters here recited, though taught in part and by inference in the canonical scriptures of that and our day, are in fact known only in plainness and purity by latter-day revelation. It is far more than coincidence that doctrines attributed to Enoch in the pseudepigraphic writings are the very ones the Lord saw fit to restore in plainness in our dispensation. Unfortunately, the whole of these ancient writings cannot be accepted as the mind and will and voice of Him from whom revelation comes. As with the study of the apocryphal books, so it is with the study of the pseudepigraphic writings: the seeker after revealed wisdom must be guided by the power of the Holy Spirit.

The Old Testament vs. the Talmud

Our Jewish brethren in Jesus' day were blessed with an ample library of inspired writing. They had the Old Testament in a better and more complete form than is now had in Christendom. As we have set forth, after that volume of sacred writing left their hands—during the Dark Ages when darkness covered the earth and gross darkness the minds of the people—many of the covenants of the Lord were taken from it by evil men who worked for another Master.

Our Jewish brethren in that day had also the numerous apocryphal and pseudepigraphic books, which they believed and accepted on more or less the same basis as those Old Testament writings to which we now attach canonical authenticity. It must be remembered that much found in these latter works was the interpolation of men, was not true scripture and could and did lead men astray.

But what our Jewish brethren did not have was communion with the heavens; they did not have a prophet to interpret the prophecies; they no longer received revelations; for them the canon of scripture was full. And be it known that whenever a people believe the canon of scripture is complete; whenever they try to feed themselves spiritually upon the prophetic word of the past alone; whenever they are without prophets and apostles to give them the living word; whenever they cease to receive new revelations—then they are no longer capable of interpreting and understanding past revelations. The prophecies of the past can only be understood by living prophets who are endowed with power from on high and whose minds are enlightened by the same Holy Spirit who authored the ancient word. People without revelation take the only course open to them: they turn to interpreters, to scribes, to ministers, to theologians, who tell them what the ancient word meant, making their determination on the basis of intellectuality rather than spirituality.

When the prophets and apostles of the Christian era no longer ministered among men, religionists turned to uninspired men for guidance; they wrote creeds and devised doctrines; they created new ordinances and changed old ones; and they came up with a new religion called by the old name, which had little resemblance to the primitive pattern. And when, after their return from Babylonian exile, the Jews ran out of prophets and no longer had living oracles to reveal and interpret the mind of Jehovah, they turned to scribes and teachers, to Rabbis and politically appointed high priests to tell them what the Lord meant when he said thus and so to Moses and the prophets.

And thus came the Midrash, the Mishnah, the Gemara, and the Talmud, which had the effect of nullifying true religion and sending a whole nation to spiritual destruction and to temporal banishment in a new Babylon, composed of all the nations of the earth, from which bondage they will not be freed until they hear again the voice of their Messiah, as he calls scattered Israel to return to his fold.

After the Jews came back to Jerusalem and their ancient land holdings in Palestine, through the good offices of Cyrus the Persian; after they no longer walked in that heavenly light which rests only upon those who listen to a prophet's voice and hear the word of God; and feeling the need to apply their ancient law to new conditions—they developed gradually, over the centuries, a whole new (and apostate!) system of religious government. Scribes, who once had been keepers of the records and copiers of the scrolls, became interpreters of the law and teachers of the people. And as uninspired men almost never agree on the meaning of scriptural passages, there soon grew up schools and sects and cults, one Rabbi or teacher vying with another, and one voice saying, as it were, Lo here is Christ, and another, Lo there. In the days of Herod the Great, the two most influential rabbinical schools were those of Hillel and Shammai, who agreed or disagreed on points both great and small as suited their fancies, their prejudices, and their nationalistic leanings. To illustrate how devoid they were of the Spirit of the Lord, we need only note that in one deliberative assembly, in order to gain approval of eighteen decrees designed to prevent all intercourse with the Gentiles, the Shammaites first murdered a number of the Hillelites.

For their own purposes of study and usage, the Jews divided the Old Testament into three parts: (1) the law, which consists of the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses—Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy; (2) the prophets, including the former prophets (Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings), and the latter prophets (Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the twelve so-called minor prophets); and (3) the writings, which includes Psalms, Proverbs, Job, and the rest of the book. In the very nature of things, the law was deemed the most important part of the scriptures; therein were the laws and formalities governing their whole system of worship.

Having need to interpret and apply the law to changing conditions, the scribes, no longer guided by revelation, turned to these words in Exodus: "And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel." (Ex. 34:27.) From them and some related passages, they posited the proposition that there was both a written law, which was found in the Books of Moses, and an oral law, which had been handed down from mouth to mouth. These originally were assumed to be of equal import, but since changes can be supported more easily by tradition that comes down by word of mouth than by the fixed language of divine decrees written by the finger of Jehovah on tablets of stone, the oral law gradually began to take precedence. In other words, tradition triumphed over the scriptures, leading Jesus to make the caustic comment: "Ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition." (Matt. 15:6.)

The oral law was set forth in preaching and by way of oral commentaries that told what the written law was supposed to mean. These spoken interpretations—themselves the traditions of the fathers—were called the Midrash. When they in turn were written down, they became the Mishnah, or Second Law, which took precedence over the scriptures because they explained and applied them. The Midrash was the study and investigation that created the traditions and enabled the Jews to depart from their Mosaic moorings. The Mishnah was the formal, authoritative compilation of these traditions.

By adding the New Testament to their canon of scripture, the Christians changed and altered their whole course of conduct and way of life after our Lord's mortal ministry. By adding the Mishnah to their Old Testament, the Jews—as they prepared the dry ground out of which the Living Root would grow—also changed their whole course of conduct and way of life, becoming thereby the priest-ridden people who would reject and slay their Savior.

What does the Mishnah contain? In size it is almost three times as large as New Testament; in literary style and craftsmanship it is as far removed from the New Testament as are the mediocre scribblings of untutored students from Shakespeare; and as to subject matter, it deals with rituals and traditions and with all of those priestly procedures which turned a once joyous religion into a millstone of despair. It is, for instance, the source of the Sabbath laws and restrictions set forth in chapter 11 herein.

The Torah (the Law) embraced both the written law and the oral law, the latter itself being also written in the Mishnah, thus making the Mishnah the repository of the culture, religion, and traditions of the people. It is a deposit of four centuries of religious and cultural development in Palestine. In its present form it came into being during the two hundred years before and the two hundred years following our Lord's mortal life, and without question it held a tighter grip on the minds of men when Jesus was here than it has at any other time.

As now published, the Mishnah is divided into six main sections, which are further divided into sixty-three tractates or subsections, which in turn are divided into verses. The subjects covered embrace the whole range of pentateuchal legislation, and the approach is to present the opinions of various sages and Rabbis, many of which are contradictory, and all of which are devoid of inspiration.

But the Mishnah contains only a portion of the traditions of the elders. The balance is contained in the two Talmuds or Gemaras—the Jerusalem Talmud and the Babylon Talmud. These Talmuds are commentaries on the Mishnah; phrase by phrase and thought by thought, they analyze and interpret the Mishnic recordings. Authoritatively collected and edited, they contain discussions, illustrations, explanations, and additions to the Mishnah. "If we imagine," Edersheim says, "something combining law reports, a Rabbinical 'Hansard,' and notes of a theological debating club—all thoroughly Oriental, full of digressions, anecdotes, quaint sayings, fancies, legends, and too often of what, from its profanity, superstition, and even obscenity could scarcely be quoted, we may form some general idea of what the Talmud is." (Edersheim 1:103.)

This, then, was the state of religious understanding and scholarship among our Jewish brethren in Jesus' day. They had the scriptures, which was all well and good, but for want of inspiration they could not understand them and did not apply them to their lives. They had the apocryphal and pseudepigraphic writings, which in large measure led them astray. They had lost the theology of the past and were reveling instead in the traditions of the elders. Edersheim summarizes their religious and cultural state in these words:

"In truth, Rabbinism, as such, had no system of theology: only what ideas, conjectures, or fancies the Haggadah [that which was said by the elders] yielded concerning God, Angels, demons, man, his future destiny and present position, and Israel, with its past history and coming glory. Accordingly, by the side of what is noble and pure, what a terrible mass of utter incongruities, of conflicting statements and too often debasing superstitions, the outcome of ignorance and narrow nationalism; of legendary colouring of Biblical narratives and scenes, profane, coarse, and degrading to them; the Almighty Himself and His Angels taking part in the conversations of Rabbis, and the discussions of Academies; nay, forming a kind of heavenly Sanhedrin, which occasionally requires the aid of an earthly Rabbi. The miraculous merges into the ridiculous, and even the revolting. Miraculous cures, miraculous supplies, miraculous help, all for the glory of great Rabbis, who by a look or word can kill, and restore to life. At their bidding the eyes of a rival fall out, and are again inserted. Nay, such was the veneration due to Rabbis, that R. Joshua used to kiss the stone on which R. Eliezer had sat and lectured, saying: 'This stone is like Mount Sinai, and he who sat on it like the Ark.' Modern ingenuity has, indeed, striven to suggest deeper symbolical meanings for such stories. It should [however] own the terrible contrast existing side by side: Hebrewism and Judaism, the Old Testament and traditionalism; and it should recognize its deeper cause in the absence of that element of spiritual and inner life which Christ has brought. Thus as between the two—the old and the new—it may be fearlessly asserted that, as regards their substance and spirit. There is not a difference, but a total divergence, of fundamental principle between Rabbinism and the New Testament, so that comparison between them is not possible. Here there is absolute contrariety." (Edersheim 1:106-7.)

Truly, the time was upon them when it would take God's own Son—if they would heed his voice—to save them from the religious and cultural degeneracy into which their whole nation had sunk! What a fearful thing it is to depart from the living God, from the scriptures that flow from the pens of his prophets, and from the living oracles whom the Lord seeks to send to all who will heed their words and to turn instead to the traditions of men!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] After Abraham, who then had no seed and whose wife Sarah was past the childbearing age, was told that his seed should be as the stars of heaven in number and should possess the land of Canaan, the restored scriptural account says: "Abram [for his name had not yet been changed] said, Lord God, how wilt thou give me this land for an everlasting inheritance? And the Lord said, Though thou wast dead, yet am I not able to give it thee? And if thou shalt die, yet thou shalt possess it, for the day cometh, that the Son of Man shall live; but how can he live if he be not dead? he must first be quickened. And it came to pass, that Abram looked forth and saw the days of the Son of Man, and was glad, and his soul found rest, and he believed in the Lord; and the Lord counted it unto him for righteousness." (JST, Gen. 15:1-12.)
[^2] We have no greater passage on the power and authority of the holy priesthood, nor one that shows better the great spiritual insight of the Prophet Joseph Smith, than the one here involved. It not only contains words and phrases reciting that "Melchizedek was a man of faith, who wrought righteousness; and when a child he feared God, and stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire," and says that in the priesthood is the power "to put at defiance the armies of nations" and tells how Melchizedek's people "wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven," but also tells of Enoch and his city, of the laws governing the translation of the righteous, and of the return of Zion in "the latter days, or the end of the world." (JST, Gen. 14:25-40.)
[^3] "Moses," Paul says, as he tells things that are not recorded in our present Old Testament, "was ordained by the hand of angels to be a mediator of this first covenant, (the law.) Now this mediator was not a mediator of the new covenant; but there is one mediator of the new covenant, who is Christ." (JST, Gal. 3:19-20.)
[^4] The beginning point for those desiring to research this matter is found in the Book of Mormon references to the named individuals.
[^5] Jude also, in the brief twenty-five verses of his one-chapter New Testament book, speaks of Michael contending for the body of Moses (verse 9), which is an allusion to the pseudepigraphic book The Assumption of Moses. This book tells of Moses' translation and his ascent as a fiery angel into heaven. (R.H. Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament in English 2:407-24.) From the Book of Mormon and other sources we are led to believe that Moses was translated so he could return, in his body, before the day of resurrection, along with translated Elijah, to give the keys of the priesthood to our Lord on the mount of transfiguration. See Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 515-16.
[^6] Charles, op cit., 2:163-281, 425-69.
