Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 16

The Soil in Which the Root Was Planted

He shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground. (Isa. 53:2.)

Omnipotence Prepares the Way

A God is coming to earth to dwell as a mortal among men. His mission: to do that which he alone can do; to work out the infinite and eternal atonement and bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of the offspring of the Father on worlds without number; to do that which never again, in an eternity of time, shall ever occur among the mortals who dwell on this or any of the numberless earths of their creating.

A God is coming to earth, and all things incident to this birth and life and ministry and death and resurrection and ascension to eternal glory are foreknown and foreprepared. He is to be sired by an Immortal Father, to be conceived in a mortal womb, to be born in Bethlehem, to be cradled in a manger, to be the natural heir of David, upon whose throne he shall reign. A new star is to arise in the firmament to signal his birth, and heavenly choirs, composed of the harmonious voices of angels, are to herald his coming. His mother is to be a virgin, a holy and pure vessel of the house and lineage of Solomon and David and Jesse and Boaz. She is to live in Nazareth of Galilee, to travel to Jerusalem's environs for the birth, to go into Egypt with the young child, to return to her home village, and to have other sons and daughters from her carpenter husband.

A God is coming to earth. He is to be visited by the wise men from the East and to be preserved from Herod's sword, though all those two years of age and under in all the coasts of Bethlehem are to have their innocent blood poured out upon the arid soil of Caanan. He is to grow up in subjection to his earthly parents; to know, when twelve years of age, of his divine Sonship; to minister for three and a half years among his Jewish kinsmen; and then to die upon the cross for the sins of the world.

A God is coming to earth. He is to be baptized in Jordan at Bethabara by John, and the Holy Ghost is to descend upon him, as his Father acclaims that he is God's Son. He is to preach the gospel, heal the sick, raise the dead, and call apostles and seventies to carry his message to the world and to testify of his divinity. He is to be rejected, reviled, spit upon, scourged, and crucified. He is to stand dumb before his accusers, but to bear testimony of his own divine Sonship before the faithful. He is to give up his life voluntarily, to lie three days in a borrowed tomb, to preach to the spirits in prison, to come forth in glorious immortality, to perfect his work, and to ascend up on high.

A God is coming to earth and we can scarce record a thousandth or a ten thousandth of the things he was destined to do, the words he was destined to speak, the people he was destined to heal—all of which things were known in advance and were foretold by one prophet or another on one continent or on another. Zechariah said he would ride upon the colt of an ass into Jerusalem while being acclaimed by the multitudes; that he would be betrayed for thirty pieces of silver, which would be used to purchase a potter's field; that his hands and feet and side would be wounded; and that the Jews would look upon him whom they had pierced, while Isaiah said he would pour out his soul unto death and make his grave with the rich, and so on and so on, through literally hundreds and thousands of detailed prophecies that these and hosts of prophets foreknew and foretold—all of which must be fulfilled at the appointed time. The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ is a more than six hundred-page analysis of the Messianic prophecies and their fulfillment.

But what more particularly concerns us here is that a God is coming to earth to fulfill all that was promised by all of the prophets during four thousand years of prophetic utterances. All must be in readiness for his Advent. Nothing must be left to chance. There must be no failure, not so much as one jot or one tittle of the inspired accounts. No "T" must be left uncrossed; no "I" must be left undotted; every comma and period must be where it is designed to be. The divine life must conform to the divine and foreordained pattern.

A God is coming to earth and everything connected with his birth and life and ministry and resurrection and ascension to eternal glory—everything!—must be perfect. It must conform to what the prophets have foreseen, foreknown, and foretold.

Mortal Mary must be living in her Galilean home. Joseph must have his carpenter shop in Nazareth. Augustus Caesar must command the Jews to go to their homelands to be taxed. Mary and Joseph must go to Bethlehem; there must be no room in the inns; the angelic choirs must be trained and be in readiness; the whole sidereal heavens must be awaiting the rise of a blazing new star. And we speak not alone of the spiritual preparations, but of the bringing to pass of all the temporal circumstances that were needed. The Jewish culture must be at a low ebb, and the Jewish religion but a space away from the gates of hell. Palestine must wear a Roman yoke and the sword of Caesar must be in the hands of Herod and Pilate.

Can we suppose anything was left to chance? Were not the shepherds on the Judean hills chosen and prepared in advance so that their spiritually attuned ears could hear the angelic choirs? Did not the Spirit guide the wise men to travel from their eastern home with the gold and myrrh and frankincense? And what of Herod—was he not destined to reign as king of the Jews? Did not the Lord know in advance that this Idumean despot would have already shed so much blood, including that of wives and children, that the slaughter of all the babies near Bethlehem would scarce add more blood to his red hands or blacken any further the evil heart that kept his then degenerating body a step from its own grave?

Can we do aught but conclude that the people, the land, the government, the religious hierarchy, the evil rulers, the adulterous sign seekers, the priests and Pharisees and Rabbis, the Sadducees and Herodians—yes, and the sprinkling of truly spiritual people among that degenerate generation of Jews—can we do aught but conclude that all this was prepared in advance?

Mary and Martha and Lazarus were sent to earth at that time to be his friends, in whose house he could escape the barbs and revilings of his enemies. Peter and James and John were prepared from before the foundations of the world to be his chief apostles. Judas was where the betrayer must be. Caiaphas and Pilate and Herod and the Roman soldiers were all in their appointed places. The Caesars in Rome, the Rabbis in Jerusalem, the scribes in their schools, the priests before the altar, the Hellenists with their intellectual approaches, the common people, some of whom heard him gladly—all were in their appointed places. John, now conceived in Elisabeth's womb, would soon stand on the banks of Jordan crying repentance and baptizing the contrite.

Truly Omnipotent Wisdom had left nothing to chance. A God was coming into the world, and the world must be ready for his Advent.

From Cyrus to Herod

Brief mention must be made of the centuries of Jewish life in which the culture and religion of Jesus' day were molded and formed. From Abraham to the going down into Egypt, the Hebrew people had the light of the gospel. How dim that light became under the Pharaohs who knew not Joseph is seen by the spiritually sick state of the people who four hundred years later followed Moses out of Egypt, through the Red Sea, and who were then led by Joshua into the land of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites. Under the judges and kings, periods of rebellion and of righteousness followed each other as a pendulum swings from one extreme to the other. With the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, shortly after Lehi left that City of David, and with the taking of the Jews into Babylon, the Hebrew way of life that had prevailed for more than a thousand years came to an abrupt and final end.

The first group of exiles, some fifty thousand in number, returned in 536 B.C. under Zerubbabel, who built again the House of the Lord. This was a day when there were still prophets in Israel; Daniel was yet alive; Haggai and Zechariah were there to encourage completion of the temple. Nehemiah, Ezra, and Malachi would yet stand in the prophetic office. But with it all, the ex-exiles were no longer what they had once been as a people; they had brought back from Babylon much that was foreign and idolatrous. Worldly customs and dogmas would never again be thrown off in their entirety by the succeeding generations of the chosen people, and, with Malachi, prophetic guidance—at least of the kind and quality known among their fathers—would cease.

After Nehemiah's day, the Jewish nation became a province of Syria, although the people maintained a certain allegiance to Persia until that empire was overthrown by Alexander the Great in 332 B. C. The Syrian governors adopted the practice of ruling the nation by high priests whom they appointed. This placed both civil and ecclesiastical rule in the hands of priests who were chosen, not by the Lord, not because they were the sons of Aaron, but by foreign and worldly overlords whose interests were not spiritual but temporal. That the Levites as a priestly class continued to serve by right of lineage and to administer in sacrificial and other matters is clear, but the overlordship and civil rule of the nation was now vested in unclean hands; and it never again would escape from the clutches of those who served a different master than had the high priests of old. This means that the office of high priest was bought and sold; that one man murdered another to gain the coveted seat; and that it was gained and dispensed like any overlordship among the Gentiles, without any divine guidance or approval.

When Persia fell at the hands of Alexander, the Macedonians imposed their rule upon the Jews. After the death of Alexander, Palestine became subject to Egypt, then to Syria, and again to Egypt. These were days of sorrow and war and intrigue. Ungodly murderers ministered in priestly offices. They are important to our present purposes simply to show that for centuries the world and all that is wicked and evil had been imposed upon the Jewish people, and that those of Jesus' day were walking in the paths charted for them by generations of their fathers.

In the beginning of the second century B.C., the Syrian Antiochus IV (Epiphanes) became master of Palestine. If ever there were dark days for the Jews, this was the time. Jerusalem was twice overrun, and thousands were slaughtered and sold into slavery each time. The religion of the Jews was forbidden, a great swine was offered in sacrifice on the altar in the temple, the daily sacrifice was discontinued, the temple was dedicated to Jupiter Olympus, and pagan images and offerings defiled its courts. Antiochus forbade the reading of the law, and tortured and slew those who persisted in their form of worship, and by 168 B.C. Jerusalem was left nearly desolate.

At this dark hour, in the providences of the Lord, the house of Mattathias, called the Maccabees, began to rally their Jewish compatriots against the Syrian armies. One of the sons, Judas Maccabeus, routed the Syrians in one engagement after another, became a national hero, restored the daily sacrifice and the service of the temple, and became governor of Judea, thus starting a dynasty, the Asmonean, which ruled for 126 years.

The Feast of Dedication—attended by Jesus when he announced himself as the Good Shepherd, and said: "I and my Father are one. . . . I am the Son of God" (John 10)—was instituted in the days of Judas Maccabeus as the temple was rededicated after its vile desecration by Antiochus Epiphanes. And it was into the mouth of the Maccabean hero—"truly God's Hammer," Edersheim says of him—that Longfellow put these words:

Antiochus, At every step thou takest there is left A bloody footprint in the street, by which The avenging wrath of God will track thee out! It is enough. Go to the sutler's tents: Those of you who are men, put on such armor As ye may find; those of you who are women, Buckle that armor on; and for the watchword Whisper, or cry aloud, "The Help of God."

This Asmonean rule continued until Jerusalem was taken by Pompey and the Jews were made tributary to Rome. Then it was that Antipater of Idumea was appointed by Julius Caesar to be procurator of Judea, thus starting the new dynasty that was to lay its heavy hand upon Jesus and those who followed the new revelation that he brought from his Father. Herod the Great, the son of Antipater, through the influence of Mark Antony and his own hefty sword, which was wielded with zeal in many battles, acquired the Jewish throne upon which he sat, bathed in blood, until John was born to fulfill the old dispensation and Jesus came to give life to the new one. These two prophets were born shortly before Herod's death, and one of the last acts of madness of this then-demented ruler was the slaughter of the innocents in Bethlehem in a vain attempt to destroy the true King.

The World That Awaited Our Lord

God sent his Son to overcome the world—the world of carnality and evil; the world of lust and lewdness and license; the world of hate and sin, of war and murder, of wickedness and ungodliness. The Son of Righteousness came to bring righteousness and peace. And when he came, the world had sunk into a lower abyss than at any time since all flesh, being corrupt and evil, save eight souls only, had been drowned in the waters of Noah.

There had been pockets of wickedness and kingdoms of evil-doers in many places after Noah's day. Upon the cities of the plains—Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim—in order that their wicked practices should cease, the Lord rained fire and brimstone and salt and burning, so that all the people were slain and their lands left utterly desolate. The Amorites and their ilk—whose ways were ways of wickedness, of astrology, witchcraft, necromancy, and sexual debauchery—were destroyed to make way for the chosen seed. Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, and all the kingdoms of the world had ruled by blood and the sword, by torture and death. But always there had been a leaven of righteousness, a kingdom devoted to goodness, a few people who loved the Lord and sought his face. Abraham and his seed had been a leavening and preserving influence among the nations. As few as ten righteous souls in Sodom would have saved the city from the brimstone of death.

But now, in the time set apart for our Lord's coming, corruptions and evils were everywhere. A few righteous souls—a Zacharias here, an Elisabeth there—stayed, as it were, the plagues of destruction, but the wickedness of the world was everywhere and the stench of sin covered the earth. Even the covenant people, in the main, had gone astray. No longer were they a leaven to the worldly lump; subject to their priestcrafts, they would soon be in a state where they would crucify a God. Naught but a new day of righteousness and light, ushered in by one greater that the prophets, could bring hope again to men.

Such moral and ethical standards as are found among heathen people can only come from two sources: either they are remnants of gospel truths that have been handed down from those who possessed the light of heaven, or they come by the promptings of that Spirit, the light of Christ, which enlighteneth every man born into the world. Such intuitive guidance is called conscience. In the meridian of time the heathen nations were far removed timewise from ancestors who had the true standards of decency and morality, and the consciences of the people generally were so seared with the hot iron of wickedness that there were few, if any, moral standards among them.

As a summary of "the degraded morality taught by heathen sages, and legalized by the most enlightened heathen states" of ancient times, we quote these words of Edward Usher: "Socrates taught that Greeks should regard all mankind, except their own countrymen, as natural enemies; Aristotle and Cicero taught that the forgiveness of injuries is cowardly and mean; Zeno and Cato taught that there is no distinction of degree, aggravation, or heinousness in crimes; Plato taught that excessive drinking was allowable during the festival of Bacchus; Aristotle taught that deformed or infirm children ought to be destroyed; Cicero taught that fornication is in no instance wrong; Plato taught that a community of women would conduce to good, and that soldiers ought not to be restrained from even the grossest indulgence; Menander taught that a lie was better than a hurtful truth; and Zeno and Cato recommended suicide by their example, while other philosophers inculcated it in precept. And Solon enacted that sensuality was irreproachable, except when practised by a slave; several states of Greece legalized unnatural lust, and encouraged it by public statutes; philosophers and legislators sanctioned the grossest indecency, drunkenness, and lewdness during the festivals of Bacchus, Cybele, and Ceres; and Rome was distinguished by licentious divorces, and procuring of abortions, the exposing of infants, the nuisance of public stews, the sports of gladiators, the maltreatment of slaves, etc., all of which were sanctioned or connived at by both sages and legislators. Such was the state of morals among the ancient heathen." (John Fleetwood, The Life of Our Saviour Jesus Christ, 1862, p. 20.)

Writing of this same period, and viewing the same irreligious—even depraved—beliefs and practices, Geikie says: "The religions of antiquity had lost their vitality, and become effete forms, without influence on the heart. Philosophy was the consolation of a few—the amusement or fashion of others; but of no weight as a moral force among men at large. On its best side, that of Stoicism, it had much that was lofty, but its highest teaching was resignation to fate, and it offered only the hurtful consolation of pride in virtue, without an idea of humiliation for vice. On its worst side—that of Epicureanism—it exalted self-indulgence as the highest end. Faith in the great truths of natural religion was well-nigh extinct. Sixty-three years before the birth of Christ, Julius Caesar, at that time the Chief Pontiff of Rome, and as such, the highest functionary of the state religion, and the official authority in religious questions, openly proclaimed, in his speech in the Senate, in reference to Catiline and his fellow-conspirators—that there was no such thing as a future life; no immorality of the soul. He opposed the execution of the accused on the ground that their crimes deserved the severest punishments, and that, therefore, they should be kept alive to endure them, since death was in reality an escape from suffering, not an evil. 'Death,' said he, 'is a rest from troubles to those in grief and misery, not a punishment; it ends all the evils of life; for there is neither care nor joy beyond it.'

"Neither was there any one to condemn such a sentiment even from such lips. Cato, the ideal Roman, a man whose aim it was to 'fulfil all righteousness,' in the sense in which he understood it, passed it over with a few words of light banter; and Cicero, who was also present, did not care to give either assent or dissent, but left the question open, as one which might be decided either way, at pleasure.

"Morality was entirely divorced from religion, as may be readily judged by the fact, that the most licentious rites had their temples, and male and female ministrants. In Juvenal's words, 'the Syrian Orontes had flowed into the Tiber,' and it brought with it the appalling immorality of the East. Doubtless, here and there, throughout the empire, the light of holy tradition still burned on the altars of many a household; but it availed nothing against the thick moral night that had settled over the earth at large. The advent of Christ was the breaking of the 'dayspring from on high' through a gloom that had been gathering for ages; a great light dawning on a world which lay in darkness, and in the shadow of death." (Geikie, p. 20.)

The Roman Yoke on Jewish Religion

The Jewish religion, with its worship of one God; the faith of their fathers, as handed down to them from Moses and the prophets; the whole way of life of the chosen people—all these, in a dark day in 63 B. C., were placed forever under the yoke of Rome. No law in Israel was more strictly enforced than the one that closed the Holy of Holies to all but one man, the high priest, who could pass through the veil into that hallowed spot on one day only each year.

Then came Pompey and the conquering legions of Rome. He and his staff, defying the strictest decree of Jehovah, entered the Holy of Holies. These Godless Gentiles, who lived and died by the sword, desecrated the House of the Lord, profaned its most holy sanctuary, and let it be known thereby that from that hour Jewish worship was subject to Roman rule. And that rule, written in blood and enforced by one emperor and king after another, continued until Titus took the temple apart stone by stone and the whole Jewish nation was scattered in all the nations of the earth. Indeed, in the just over one hundred years from the accession of Herod the Great to the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, the Roman rulers appointed twenty-seven successive high priests to sit in Aaron's seat, in a priestly office that should have been hereditary and should have lasted in each instance for the whole lifetime of its occupant.

Herod was a Gentile who pretended to be a Jew. His ancestry stemmed back to Abraham through Esau, who is Edom, but his religious beliefs were Jewish, and his way of life worldly, even Satanic. His half-Jew, half-Gentile stance was a convenient one for him to take in controlling his kingdom. He built again the temple in Jerusalem, constructing it with a magnificence beyond that of either Solomon or Zerubbabel. But he also built a temple to Augustus in Caesarea, wherein was placed a statue of the emperor as Olympian Zeus. He placed over the great gate of the temple in Jerusalem a massive golden eagle as a symbol of Roman dominion. He built a number of towns, inhabited by Gentiles, as a means of tempering Jewish nationalism. At a later time Pilate introduced images of the emperor into Jerusalem, and even a statue of Caligula was placed in the temple itself.

It is true that under the Roman rule the Jews were granted numerous concessions, such as the right to observe the Sabbath as they chose, except that they could not (legally, that is) impose the death penalties for violations as Moses had once done. And it was to the Romans that they turned to have a Man crucified who, they said, according to their law, was worthy of death.

We shall not here particularize further as to the supremacy of the Roman world over the Jewish world. It suffices for the present to know that Caesar took precedence over Christ, through all Canaan and the civilized world, in all things both temporal and spiritual. Roman tolerance with all religions, however, was proverbial. The rulers from the land of the Tiber accepted and revered—nay, ofttimes worshipped—the gods of all the conquered lands. Caesar felt no compunction in granting freedom of religion to Christ so long as it did not hinder or deter the purposes of absolute autocracy as found in the hands of the emperor. The forces against free religion that led a Jew to Calvary were not of Roman origin, though it took the iron hand of Roman authority to drive the nails and raise the cross.

As occasion requires, we shall hereafter weave into our account of the life of a Jew who was born into both a Roman and a Jewish world—and who came to save them both—such commentary about social patterns, education, trade, agriculture, fishing, business and enterprises, and local customs and life as seems appropriate. We shall speak of Palestinian roads, of the Jewish Sanhedrin, of the levirate laws of marriage, and of the Mosaic manner of divorce. We shall concern ourselves with the Herodians, Hellenists, and Publicans; with the Galileans, Pereans, and Judeans; with the various Herods and their evil ways—all as the unfolding needs of the greatest story ever told seem to warrant. As we begin this story it suffices to know that Rome ruled Jerusalem and that worldly influence abounded in Judaism itself. It was the type of a world, the kind of a social structure, the very governmental arrangement, the level of decency among the people—and all else—that Omnipotent Wisdom chose as proper for the birth and ministry and death of his Son. It could not have been otherwise; all things were to be done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

The Signs of the Times

The signs of the times: what are they? It depends on what signs we are talking about and what times we are considering; it depends on what period of time is involved and what great event is being ushered in. When the signs of the times, for our day, are fulfilled and all things are come to pass which were of old foretold, the Son of Man will come in power and great glory to usher in millennial peace. When Jesus asked the Pharisees and Sadducees, "Can ye not discern the signs of the times," he referred to the signs and wonders attesting his divine Sonship, signs that were everywhere manifest before them. (Matt. 16:1-4.) In like manner we might say that the signs of the times, as pertaining to the birth of the Savior, were poured out upon the people to whom he was destined to come. Deity never sends a portentous or wondrous happening without heralding its coming and preparing the way for its occurrence. That the Jews of our Lord's day were to some extent reading the signs presaging his coming and ministry is clear from the universal ferment of Messianic expectancy to be found on every hand.

Not the least of the signs of Messiah's first coming were the religious, social, cultural, and governmental conditions existing in Palestine and elsewhere in the latter years of Herod's reign. The Messiah was to come as the Son of David, a Jew of the Jews, in a dark and dreary day; and his mission was to deliver his people, redeem the nation, triumph over the world, and reign as King of kings.

He was to be planted in arid soil; to grow up as a tender plant, as a root out of dry ground. Babylonia, Persia, Egypt, Syria, Greece, and Rome—each in turn—had ploughed in the fields of Palestine. Each had reaped harvests without dunging the land. The early rains of revelation and the latter rains of prophetic guidance had not watered the soil for centuries. The thistles and weeds and briers of sin encumbered the vineyards. There was a famine of hearing the word of the Lord.

The first Adam brought his own environment and was born into a garden of beauty and peace; the second Adam was born into an apostate world and a degenerate social order. He came to dwell among a people who drew near to the Lord with their lips, but whose hearts were far from him. He came to be a Jew in a day when the Jewish society could provide no nutrient for his soul.

Jesus was a Jew; he was of the tribe of Judah. David, the Jew, was his father, and Mary, the Jewess, his mother. He grew up in a Jewish home, spoke the Jewish Aramaic of his day, learned Jewish customs and traditions, studied in Jewish schools, read Jewish scripture, attended Jewish synagogues, and participated in Jewish worship. From Bethlehem to Calvary, he was a Jew of the Jews.

He ministered among the Jews, called Jews to repentance, baptized Jews, ordained Jews to priesthood offices, and left twelve Jews to carry on his work among men. From a mortal standpoint he was the product of the Jewish system, which in turn was the product, in large measure, of everything that had happened to that people from Nebuchadnezzar to Herod. As Jesus ministered and taught among his Jewish kinsmen, he did so with their background, using the colloquialisms with which they were familiar and the illustrations they understood.

How well he did we shall now see as we meet him in Bethlehem, as we stay at his side till he climbs the hill of Calvary, as we see him, on Olivet, ascend to his Father, there to reign with everlasting power until that great day—the year of his redeemed—when he shall come again in all the glory of his Father's kingdom.

Blessed be his holy name!
