Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 17

Gabriel Comes to Zacharias

Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision. . . .

Whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation.

And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, . . . I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding. (Dan. 8:16, 9:21-22.)

"He Shall Prepare the Way Before Me"

(Malachi 3:1) [^1]

One such as he must not come unannounced!

When God's own Son leaves his eternal throne and makes flesh his tabernacle, all the legates of the skies must herald his coming!

When the Promised Messiah takes upon himself the form of a man, so that he may abolish death, and bring life and immortality to light through his gospel, [^2] mortal men are entitled to receive the word from the lips of an authorized witness.

The Mortal Messiah must be identified to his fellow mortals. His servants must prepare the way before him—make ready the manger, prepare the bridal chamber, sweep clean the temple courts, frame the cross, prepare the tomb, and, above all, testify to the people of the divinity of the One sent among them by his Father.

The providences of the Lord do not call for the heavens to rend, or the mountains to melt, or the earth to shake. His way is to send living witnesses to testify: 'Behold, the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sins of the world. This is he of whom all the prophets have testified. Believe in him; hear his word; walk in his paths and be saved.'

His kinsman, John, must be in the appointed place, at the proper time, to bear the witness he was sent to bear. Faithful Anna and saintly Simeon must be in the court of the Holy House when the Consolation of Israel is presented before the Lord as Moses commanded. The voices of the forerunners and the witnesses, of the Eliases and those who prepare the way, must be heard. His word, given through Malachi, must be fulfilled: "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come." (Mal. 3:1.)

And how fitting that his chief forerunner—than whom there has been no greater prophet born of woman—should precede him in birth, precede him in his ministry, precede him in death, and precede him in his future Second Advent. As the voice of one crying in the wilderness of unbelief, John came to prepare the way before his Lord in this life; and then, laying down his life for the testimony of Jesus that was his, he went as a forerunner into the paradise of God to announce that He whose mission it was to free the captives would soon be there to open the prison doors. And with a divine fitness and propriety, the resurrected John has raised his voice again to mortals in our day, preparing the way for the coming of Him who shall this time rend the heavens, and melt the mountains, and shake the earth when his presence is again revealed.

And how fitting that the same angelic ministrant who came to the mother of our Lord came also to the father of John—in each instance proclaiming a miraculous conception and the birth of a foreordained prophet.

Zacharias—His Ministry and Mission

There were many widows in Israel when Elijah sealed the heavens for "three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land," but only to one—the widow of Zarephath—was Elijah sent, that he might command her "barrel of meal" to "not waste," and her "cruse of oil" to not fail, "until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth." And there were, no doubt, many widows whose children died, but she alone had her son raised from death by the man of God. (Luke 4:25-26; 1 Kgs. 17.)

There were also many lepers in Israel in the day of Elisha the prophet, "and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian," who swallowed his pride, believed the promise given him, and washed seven times in the dirty waters of Jordan, as Elisha commanded. (Luke 4:27; 2 Kgs. 5.)

So also was it with Zacharias, who fathered the forerunner of the Messiah. There were many priests in Israel in his day, many lineal descendants of Aaron—between twenty thousand and twenty-four thousand of them—whose right it was to offer temporal sacrifices in similitude of the eternal sacrifice of their expected Deliverer. But none of these saw the angelic face and none received the heaven-sent message of comfort and hope save only Zacharias of Hebron, who, with his wife, Elisabeth, walked blamelessly before the Lord.

It was a day when the priestly office, once held by Aaron's worthy sons, was now held by their unworthy descendants. Pride, disbelief, dishonesty, violence, immorality, and even the shedding of innocent blood—all these prevailed and were more common than not among those who should have been lights to the people. Few of the priests envisioned to any real degree the true significance of the sacred ordinances it was their privilege to perform.

David, a thousand years before, had divided the priests into twenty-four courses, or houses, or families. Only four of these had returned from Babylon, but the balance had been reconstituted, and they lived in thirteen towns, mostly near Jerusalem. Those of each course went up to that city twice a year, in rotation, for six days and two Sabbaths each time, to serve in the temple. While there they lived in the temple, their wives and families remaining in their home villages.

Priestly duties were many and varied. They were teachers of the law, instructors of the people, and the judges and magistrates of their communities. They examined all cases of ceremonial uncleanness and watched over all of the affairs of the temple. "It was their awful and peculiar honour to 'come near the Lord.' None but they could minister before Him, in the Holy Place where He manifested His presence: none others could 'come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary or the altar.' It was death for any one not a priest to usurp these sacred prerogatives. They offered the morning and evening incense; trimmed the lamps of the golden candlestick, and filled them with oil; set out the shewbread weekly; kept up the fire on the great altar in front of the Temple; removed the ashes of the sacrifices; took part in the slaying and cutting up of victims, and especially in the sprinkling of their blood; and laid the offerings of all kinds on the altar." (Geikie, p. 65.)

These duties, with all that they include and imply, plus the host of other normal functions applicable to all priests, were part of the ministry of Zacharias, and indeed it was in the performance of some of them that the Lord manifested to this son of Aaron his higher and more noble mission. Zacharias, like the son he was to sire, was foreordained to bring the Lord's forerunner into mortality. And Zacharias, in this life, walked uprightly before the Lord and manifested a faith in Jehovah not found among his fellow priests. As with the widow of Zarephath and as with Naaman of Syria, John's father was singled out from the thousand score and more priests for the work that was his. Angels do not minister unto carnal and godless souls; it is those who seek, by righteousness, the blessings of heaven who are permitted to see within the veil.

Zacharias's mission was to bear an even greater son and to endow that offspring with the talents and abilities that would enable him to prepare the way before the Lord. How well he did this is now written in the records of eternity. As it happens, both Zacharias and his son were called upon, in the providences of the Lord, to lay down their lives as part of the missions assigned them from on high; both died because of the mad anxieties of demented kings. "When Herod's edict went forth to destroy the young children," as the Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "John was about six months older than Jesus, and came under this hellish edict, and Zacharias caused his mother to take him into the mountains, where he was raised on locusts and wild honey. When his father refused to disclose his hiding place, and being the officiating high priest at the Temple that year, [he] was slain by Herod's order, between the porch and the altar, as Jesus said." (Teachings, p. 261; Matt. 23:35.)

Zacharias Ministers in the Temple

(Luke 1:5-10; JST Luke 1:8-9)

Twice each year, in April and October, the priests of the course of Abia, named for Abijah, traveled from their village homes to the House of the Lord in Jerusalem, there to take their week-long turns at performing those sacred rites and ordinances which for fifteen hundred years had been the center of Israel's worship. One of these priests, Zacharias, whose wife, Elisabeth, was both barren and past the childbearing age, dwelt in a village in the hill country of Judea, believed to be Hebron. It was the very locale where Abraham had lived with Sarah, who also was both barren and past the childbearing age when the Lord himself saw fit to tell the Father of the Faithful that his beloved Sarah would conceive and bear Isaac, through whom the blessings of the Abrahamic covenant would continue.

It was October, the autumn of the year, when Zacharias left his beloved Elisabeth—both of them being in the autumn of their lives—to travel the some twenty lonely miles to Jerusalem. At least it was the custom to leave family members at home, for the priests dwelt in the temple itself during their week-long ministry. But perhaps he went with other priests of his course, and if so, as was common among them in that era of great expectation, they would have discussed the Consolation of Israel who was to come and deliver his people.

As nearly as we can determine, the month was October and the year was 6 B.C. [^3] Herod the Great, who died in 4 B.C., was winding up his long and evil and bloody reign. Gentile by birth, Jewish by belief and ruling with Roman authorization, Herod lived in the day in which the scepter was departing from Judah to make way for the coming of Shiloh. And what would have been more natural than for the priests traveling to the temple to perform sacrifices in similitude of that Shiloh whom they expected, and longing for release from Roman rule, to discuss their long-expected Deliverer.

In any event, Zacharias arrived at the temple and walked worthily through its sacred portals, for both he and the daughter of Aaron who stood as his wife were "righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless." With his fellow priests, he then drew lots, as was the custom, so that each of the sons of Aaron serving that week might be assigned his duties. There was one service, favored above all others, that a priest to whose lot it fell might perform but once in a lifetime. It was the burning of incense on the altar of incense in the Holy Place, near the Holy of Holies where the very presence of Jehovah came on occasion. And, lo, this time the lot fell to Zacharias; he was chosen of the Lord to perform the great mediatorial service in which the smoke of the incense, ascending to heaven, would symbolize the prayers of all Israel ascending to the divine throne. That Zacharias was to be the central figure in the temple, through this service, all the assembled worshippers knew; and that heaven itself was to respond with divine approval shining forth, they would soon learn.

In the court of the priests stood the great altar of unhewn stones whereon the sacred sacrifices were offered; this was open to the view of the people. Entrance was gained to the Holy Place through two great gold-plated doors. In this sanctuary were the two tables—one of marble, one of gold—on which the priests laid the candlestick with its seven lamps and, most importantly, the altar of incense.

It was into this sacred sanctuary that Zacharias went, accompanied by another priest who bore burning coals taken from the altar of sacrifice; these he spread upon the altar of incense and then withdrew. It then became the privilege of Elisabeth's husband to sprinkle the incense on the burning coals, that the ascending smoke and the odor might typify the ascending prayers of all Israel. This performance is also but a type of what John saw in heavenly vision and recorded in these words: "And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the angel's hand." (Rev. 8:3-4.) [^4]

What prayers did Zacharias make on this occasion? Certainly not, as so many have assumed, prayers that Elisabeth should bear a son, though such in days past had been the subject of the priest's faith-filled importunings. This was not the occasion for private, but for public prayers. He was acting for and on behalf of all Israel, not for himself and Elisabeth alone. And Israel's prayer was for redemption, for deliverance from the Gentile yoke, for the coming of their Messiah, for freedom from sin. The prayers of the one who burned the incense were the prelude to the sacrificial offering itself, which was made to bring the people in tune with the Infinite, through the forgiveness of sins and the cleansing of their lives. "And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense"—all praying, with one heart and one mind, the same things that were being expressed formally, and officially, by the one whose lot it was to sprinkle the incense in the Holy Place. The scene was thus set for the miraculous event that was to be.

"Thou Shalt Call His Name John"

(Luke 1:11-13)

As the clouds of sweet incense ascend heavenward, and as the prayers of Zacharias come up into the ears of the Lord of the whole earth—and we cannot but feel that his prayers on this occasion were guided by the Spirit and uttered with a reverence, in an awe, and with a deep feeling of spirituality that is seldom equaled—as his expressions of thanksgiving and his petitions for blessings and good things reach their climax, just at this moment the veil is rent. Gabriel stands before him. [^5]

At the right of the altar, near the Holy of Holies, where Jehovah himself would stand if he came personally, there stands Gabriel, the archangel next in authority to mighty Michael.

After so many years, as a herald of things to come, an angel's voice is heard again. Once more in Israel, as it had been almost always in olden times, the angelic visage is clearly seen in vision. Soon angels will be coming to others, many others, and the long night of darkness will pass. And soon God's own Son will minister among men and have his person identified by a heavenly voice. Revelation is commencing anew in Israel; the prospects are bright for a great outpouring of gospel truth, and a humble priest, who has even been denied seed to bear his priesthood after him, is the recipient of the heaven-sent message. A new day is dawning in Israel.

Zacharias is troubled, fearful, but such is a normal reaction; so also were those of old in like circumstances. His reaction is simply that of Father Jacob, who, seeing the vision of the ladder reaching up into heaven, with angels ascending and descending, exclaimed: "How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven." (Gen. 28:10-22.) To calm his troubled mind, the angel speaks: "Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard." 'And the Lord shall grant thy petition: The Consolation of Israel truly shall come: he shall deliver and redeem his people; and, lo, the time is at hand, for thou hast been chosen to be the father of the one who shall prepare the way before him.' "And thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John."

Gabriel Announces the Mission of John

(Luke 1:14-25)

Gabriel continues to speak: 'Thou shalt have joy and rejoicing in thy son; and many shall rejoice at his birth, for what is done this day shall be in their hearts, and they shall remember it with gladness and tell it to others. And John shall be great in the sight of the Lord, of whom he shall testify; and he shall drink neither wine nor strong drink, for it shall be with him as though he were a Nazarite for life, for he shall be as one who has vowed a vow and been set apart for a special work all the days of his life.

'And he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from within his mother's womb, so that before he is born the Holy Ghost shall come upon him, and he shall leap as it were for joy at the presence of the mother of his Lord.

'And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God, for he shall cry repentance, and baptize for the remission of sins, and cause many to follow the Lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the world. And he shall go before the Lord, who is Christ, in the spirit and power of Elias, preparing the way, making the rough places smooth and the crooked straight. He shall even turn the hearts of those disobedient ones, who are the children of the prophets, back to their just fathers, who foresaw this day and prophesied of it, and the hearts of the fathers shall rejoice that their children on earth believe in that Messiah whose life and labors they foresaw.

'And through all that he does, he shall make ready a people prepared for the Lord, and this people shall then follow their Messiah and be saved.'

Gabriel ceased to speak. Zacharias in wonder and amazement—perhaps overwhelmed that all this could happen to persons as aged as he and Elisabeth, perhaps guided by the Spirit in what he asked—said to the heavenly visitant, as if in a spirit of unbelief: 'How shall I know that these things shall come to pass?'

Why did he need a sign? Does not the word of one who stands in the presence of God suffice? May it not be that the main purpose of his query was to provide an occasion for "the man Gabriel" to do the thing that would cause those then present, and all who heard the account thereafter, to know that the hand of the Lord was in the doings of the day? If Zacharias had come out of the Holy Place, given the usual benediction to the people, and then said that he had seen an angel and that his barren wife, though well stricken in years, should bear a son, and then had she in fact done so, it would have been a dramatic thing. But how much more impressive did it become when Zacharias came out both deaf and dumb, so that he could not speak or give the usual benediction to the people there assembled, and—be it noted—so that he could not hear what the others said, even more than nine months later, when the young John was brought on the eighth day in to the temple to be circumcised. On that occasion those who were present had to make signs to the deaf Zacharias before he could signify in writing what his son's name should be.

Immediately after the happenings of this unprecedented day—the day on which angelic ministrants commenced again to commune with their fellow mortals—Elisabeth conceived, and she rejoiced that the Lord had taken away the reproach of barrenness, for, from the day Rachel said "Give me children, or else I die" (Gen. 30:1), so it was considered in Israel.

Then Elisabeth retired from public view until the day that Mary, herself then also with child, visited her in the hill country village of Hebron.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See footnote 7 of chapter 2.
[^2] See footnote 3 of chapter 2.
[^3] It was the Prophet Joseph Smith who changed the word say to know in this verse. (Teachings, p. 223.)
[^4] Can we speak too highly of her whom the Lord has blessed above all women? There was only one Christ, and there is only one Mary. Each was noble and great in preexistence, and each was foreordained to the ministry he or she performed. We cannot but think that the Father would choose the greatest female spirit to be the mother of his Son, even as he chose the male spirit like unto him to be the Savior. This is not to say that we should give any heed or credence to the false doctrines that say that Mary has been assumed bodily into heaven; that she is an intercessor who hears prayers and pleads with her Son on behalf of those who pray to her; or that she should be esteemed as co-redemptrix with the Redeemer—all of which are part of a great system of worship that did not originate in the courts on high. As our spirits recoil from these perversions of true religion, we should nonetheless maintain a balanced view and hold up Mary with that proper high esteem which is hers.
[^5] Nor would Mary's story have been believed any more than was Joseph Smith's when he—about the same age as Mary was at the time—announced that the Father and the Son had visited him to usher in a new gospel dispensation. Visions and revelations (to the carnally minded) were things of the past; everyone knew that!
