Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 18

The Annunciation to Mary

Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. (Isa. 7:14.)

And I beheld the city of Nazareth; and in the city of Nazareth I beheld a virgin, and she was exceedingly fair and white. . . . [Yea], A virgin, most beautiful and fair above all other virgins. (1 Ne. 13-15.)

"Knowest Thou the Condescension of God?"

(1 Nephi 11:16)

John is now conceived in Elisabeth's womb; the son of Zacharias will soon be born; our Lord's forerunner, destined to be six months his senior, shall soon breathe the breath of life. The words of Gabriel are coming to pass, and soon the Son of God must be sired, conceived, born, and laid in a manger.

But how can a God be born into mortality? How can the Eternal One take upon himself flesh and blood, and let himself be fashioned as a Man? A child—any child, including the Child—must have progenitors; he must have parents, both a father and a mother. Gabriel will soon tell the Virgin of Galilee that she shall be the mother. As to the father—he is Elohim. The Son of God shall have God as his Father; it is just that simple, and it could not be otherwise. The doctrine of the divine Sonship lies at the foundation of true religion; without it, Christ becomes just another man, a great moral teacher, or what have you, without power to ransom, to redeem, and to save.

Having seen in vision—more than six hundred years before the events themselves transpired—the city of Nazareth and a gracious and beautiful virgin therein, Nephi was asked by an angel: "Knowest thou the condescension of God?" He responded by saying he knew of the Lord's love for his children, but not the full answer to the profound query framed by angelic lips. Then the angel answered his own question by saying: "Behold, the virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God, "after the manner of the flesh." That is to say, the condescension of God lies in the fact that he, an exalted Being, steps down from his eternal throne to become the Father of a mortal Son, a Son born after the manner of the flesh." Immediately after hearing these words, Nephi saw that the virgin "was carried away in the Spirit; and after she had been carried away in the Spirit for the space of a time," Nephi saw "the virgin again, bearing a child in her arms." Thereupon the angel said: "Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father!" To be "carried away in the Spirit" means to be transported bodily from one location to another, as witness the fact that Nephi, at the very time he beheld these visions, had been "caught away in the Spirit of the Lord" and taken bodily "into an exceeding high mountain," which he never "had before seen," and upon which he "never had before" set his "foot." (1 Ne. 11:1, 13-21.)

Without overstepping the bounds of propriety by saying more than is appropriate, let us say this: God the Almighty; the Maker and Preserver and Upholder of all things; the Omnipotent One; he by whom the sidereal heavens came into being, who made the universe and all that therein is; he by whose word we are, who is the Author of that life which has been going on in this system for nigh unto 2,555,000,000 years; [^1] God the Almighty, who once dwelt on an earth of his own and has now ascended the throne of eternal power to reign in everlasting glory; [^2] who has a glorified and exalted body, a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; who reigns in equity and justice over the endless billions of his spirit children who inhabit the worlds without number that roll into being at his word—God the Almighty, who is infinite and eternal, elects, in his fathomless wisdom, to beget a Son, an Only Son, the Only Begotten in the flesh.

God, who is infinite and immortal, condescends to step down from his throne, to join with one who is finite and mortal in bringing forth, "after the manner of the flesh," the Mortal Messiah.

"Who Shall Declare His Generation?"

(Matthew 1:1-17; Luke 3:23-38; JST Luke 3:30-31, 45)

If God, who is eternal, steps down from his high and holy place to beget an Only Begotten Son "after the manner of the flesh," who can know it? How can such wondrous knowledge be given to carnal men? It may be easy to find someone who would claim to be the mother, but how can her selection for such an exalted position of motherhood be known for sure? Who shall declare Messiah's generation?

True, he cometh in the fulness of his own time to fulfill all that has been spoken—concerning that coming and ministry—by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began; he cometh to merit all the praise and adoration and thanksgiving and reverence and worship that has foredwelt in the hearts of the righteous of all preceding ages; he cometh to make flesh his tabernacle, to take upon himself the form of men, and to do the will of the Father whose Son he is. But who shall declare his generation? Who knows his genesis? Or who can tell whence and how he came? Who are his parents? When God has a Son, how can this be known among mortal men?

Matthew identifies his Gospel as "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham." Then he gives a genealogy down to "Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ." Luke begins with this same Joseph and traces the genealogy back to "Adam, which was the son of God," or, as the Joseph Smith Translation has it, to "Adam, who was formed of God, and [was] the first man upon the earth."

Matthew's and Luke's accounts seemingly do not agree, though in fact the two of them taken together give a perfect picture of what is involved. Both purport to give the genealogy of Joseph, whose bloodline is not involved, but who was of the royal lineage. It is generally agreed that Matthew's account gives the royal lineage and therefore records names of those whose right it was to sit on David's throne, and that Luke's record contains the personal pedigree of Mary's husband. Matthew says Joseph was a son of Jacob, and Luke says that he was a son of Heli. It appears, however, that Jacob and Heli were brothers and that Heli was the father of Joseph and Jacob the father of Mary, making Joseph and Mary first cousins with the same ancestral lines. How fitting it is that the New Testament should preserve both a royal and a personal pedigree of these two, so that there could be no question, either by blood or by kingly right, as to the noble and exalted status of the Son of David. "Had Judah been a free and independent nation, ruled by her rightful sovereign, Joseph the carpenter would have been her crowned king; and his lawful successor to the throne would have been Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews." (Talmage, p. 87.)

But our question still remains: "Who shall declare his generation?" (Isa. 53:8.) And the answer is: Since we are dealing with spiritual things, which can only be known by the power of the Holy Spirit, no one can declare the generation of "Jesus, who is called Christ," except by the power of the Holy Ghost. "No man can say [know] that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." (1 Cor. 12:3.) [^3] There is no other way. When the theologians of our day deny the divine Sonship, they are thereby testifying that the Holy Ghost does not speak by their mouths, and that they are, as a consequence, false prophets.

And so it is that Matthew, who, in all the majesty of his apostolic office, took it upon himself to set forth our Lord's ancestry, proceeds to speak of his birth to a virgin, as we shall hereafter recite.

Gabriel Comes to Mary

(Luke 1:26-38; JST Luke 1:28-29, 34-35)

Angels, Alma says, come to men, women, and children to impart the word of God. (Alma 32:23.) And never was there a case when angelic ministration was more deserved, or served a greater purpose, or was manifest in a sweeter and more tender way, than when Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God, came to Mary to announce her divine call to be the mother of the Son of God. She at the time dwelt in Nazareth, a city of Galilee, located some eighty miles northward from the Holy City and the Holy Temple, where last the angelic form had been seen and the angelic voice heard.

Mary was espoused to Joseph, meaning she had made a formal contract of marriage with him that yet had to be completed in a second ceremony before they would commence living together as husband and wife. She was, however, considered by their law to be his wife; the contract could be broken only by a formal "bill of divorcement," and any infidelity on her part would be classed as adultery, for which Jehovah had of old decreed death as the penalty.

Faithful Jews prayed in their homes three times daily—at the time of the morning offering, at noon, and at the time of the evening sacrifice. Perhaps at such a time (for the veil grows thin when prayers flow from the heart) the man Gabriel "came in" to her humble home. She was alone; her spiritual eyes were open; and she saw the minister from heaven. He spoke: "Hail, thou virgin, who art highly favoured of the Lord. The Lord is with thee, for thou art chosen and blessed among women." [^4]

Understandably the humble, perhaps even shy and timid, Maid of Nazareth was troubled by such lavish praise from one sent from the other world and who spoke only the truth. Sensing her feelings, Gabriel continued: "Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus."

Jesus, blessed name—signifying Jehovah is salvation—her Son to be a Savior! Had she ever hoped or thought that the Messiah, expected by her people, would be born as her Son? Had the Spirit, even before Gabriel came, whispered any message of hope or comfort or expectancy to the soul of one so attuned to spiritual things as she was?

But there was more, telling her in plain words the status and mission and dominion of him who was to be her Son: "He shall be great and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end."

"The Son of the Highest"—the Supreme God shall be his Father! "The throne of his father David"—the symbol of all Jewish hope and triumph and glory and freedom and deliverance! An eternal kingdom—the kingdom of our God and of his Christ, and they shall reign forever and ever!

Mary asked, "How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?" Obviously she could, at the proper time, know Joseph, and he could be the father of all her children, not just those who would come after the Firstborn. She knew that. But already the concept was framed in her mind that the promised Son was not to originate from any power on earth.

This offspring was to be himself almighty—God's Almighty Son. How and by what means and through whose instrumentality does such a conception come?

Gabriel explains: "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing [better that holy child] which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God."

Again the answer is perfect. There is a power beyond man's. When God is involved, he uses his minister, the Holy Ghost, to overshadow the future mother and to carry her away in the Spirit. She shall conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost, and God himself shall be the sire. It is his Son of whom Gabriel is speaking. A son is begotten by a father: whether on earth or in heaven it is the same.

The great message has been spoken. One who stands in the Divine Presence has brought the great announcement to the one who will hold the Divine Presence in her bosom. Now Gabriel speaks to Mary of personal things: "And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren. For with God nothing shall be impossible."

This news was to be a sign to Mary of the truth of the greater message that had preceded it. Elisabeth, stricken in years and past the childbearing age, was to have a child, because with God nothing is impossible, even as Sarah, also stricken in years and past the childbearing age, was promised a son by the Lord, who said: "Is any thing too hard for the Lord?" (Gen. 18:14.) Gabriel's announcement about Elisabeth was unspoken counsel to Mary to go and receive comfort and help from her cousin, whom she no doubt loved and revered—the inference is that Mary's mother was dead—and who, being herself with child in a miraculous manner, could speak peace to the young virgin's heart as no other mortal could.

Then Mary gave the answer that ranks, in submissive obedience and divine conformity, along with the one given by the Beloved and Chosen One in the councils of eternity. When he was chosen to be the Redeemer and to put into operation the terms and conditions of his Father's plan he said: "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Moses 4:2.) Mary said simply: "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." Gabriel then departed.

Having so spoken Mary contented herself until the divine conception had come to pass, and then she arose and went in haste to her cousin Elisabeth, a hundred and more miles hence in Hebron of Judea.

Mary Visits Elisabeth

(Luke 1:39-45; JST Luke 1:43-44)

There is high drama here. We can scarce conceive how deep the emotions were, or what anxieties and fears bore in upon the tender feelings of Mary and Elisabeth. Nor can we envision how Joseph felt as he learned his betrothed was with child by another, or how subdued and chastened, yet how exalted and exulting, Zacharias was as he pondered what had happened to him in the Holy Place.

Zacharias could no longer speak or hear. He had doubted for a moment the angelic voice, and the penalty of his disbelief rested heavily upon him. For more than nine months he was shut out completely from the normal communion and the usual intercourse with his Judean friends. We suppose he went about his priestly duties as best he could, even journeying back to the temple after a six-month interval, for his assigned week of ceremonial service. No doubt he wrote, for Elisabeth to read, the account of the angel who stood between the golden altar of incense and the seven-branched candlesticks, and proclaimed that she and he would bring forth the one to prepare the way for the great Messiah. And now Elisabeth, with child in her advanced years, needed special care and attention. The trials of life and the testing and anxieties of mortality surely were increasing in the life of this pious priest who yet continued as theretofore to walk blamelessly before the Lord.

Elisabeth—a daughter of Aaron, highly endowed spiritually, rich in faith—she too was being tested and tried and purified. With child in her advanced years, facing problems foreign to younger women who bear children, emotionally troubled, fearing to face her friends of years, she "hid herself five months," to return to normal associations just before Mary's visit. That she was overwhelmed at the honor that was hers to bear the soul of him who would prepare the way for Israel's King, we can well imagine. That the fruit of her womb was so important in the Lord's plan, and that Gabriel himself came to announce the conception, was almost beyond human comprehension. Faithful Elisabeth was being tested and rewarded.

Joseph—a just man, one who loved the Lord and waited for the Consolation of Israel—what a refiner's fire he must have gone through during the weeks and months before Gabriel spoke peace to his soul! Mary—his beloved, the one to whom he had given a writing of espousement, the fairest and most spiritually endowed of all the virgins of the land—his espoused wife, she was with child by another! Joy and gladness, thanksgiving and the sound of melody—once these had filled his soul. Now there was despondency and despair. What should he do? Surely he could not make her a public example. She must not bear the onus of adultery. Yes, instead, he would put her away privily; he would ease her burden as best he could.

And Mary—what of her? Should her testing be any easier, her mortal trials lessened, because she carried in her womb the Son of the Highest? Should she be free from the burdens borne by Sarah and Miriam—whose very name in Hebrew she bore—and by the other great women of Abrahamic lineage? Nay, rather, should not her burdens be greater? Whenever was there a great prophet—Moses, Elijah, Isaiah, Nephi, Joseph Smith—who was not tested to the full? Whenever were the women who stood by their sides freed from the tests and trials of mortality? The greater the prophet, the more severe the test! The nobler the woman, the more she is called to bear! It was the Son of God who descended below all things that he might rise to heights unknown. It was his mother who was subjected to the most trying of all circumstances that she too might ascend the throne of eternal power, as had Rebecca and Rachel and her ancestors of old.

And so we find Mary, about fifteen years of age and inexperienced in meeting the trials of life, under contract to marry one she loved, but with child by the power of the Holy Ghost. We find her in a city of Galilee—rough, rugged, untempered Galilee—where a self-righteous people were quick to condemn, ever ready to punish; where the tongue of gossip would cut her tender feelings to the bone; where she would become a hiss and a byword among her friends and relatives, for she had (as they would view it) committed the sin next only in wickedness to murder. Those among whom she dwelt would no more believe her strange tale that an angel had come to her—angels no longer came to mortals, everyone knew that!—or that the Almighty himself was the Father of that which was in her womb; they would no more believe these claims than they would believe the testimony of the fruit of her womb when he testified in their own city that he was the Messiah of whom Isaiah had spoken. [^5]

What course, then, was open to the young virgin? Where could she go for the help and comfort and guidance she so much needed? Had not Gabriel pointed the way? 'Go to thy cousin Elisabeth,' he said. 'She will comfort and sustain thee. She also is with child in a miraculous way—she will understand. She is wise and experienced. She will counsel and help you, and the Lord will give you power to overcome.'

Thus we find Mary facing the trials of life—there would be others, as her Son ministered among men; as he hung on the cross, as he lay in a borrowed tomb; yes there would be others, and her present troubles were but the beginning of sorrows—but we find her facing her problems and, of her own choice, fleeing to the side of Elisabeth. The distance was more than one hundred miles. No doubt she walked; at least she was in poor circumstances and could have ill afforded other means of travel. Certainly she was accompanied—a sister and brother and other family members or relatives, perhaps; she would not, in wisdom, have gone alone, camping out, and facing the ever-present threat of thieves and robbers. But whatever the arrangements may have been, the journey was completed. Elisabeth was no longer in seclusion, and Mary "entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth."

Then came the miracle. When the trials are past and the humble suppliant has remained true to every covenant and trust, the Lord speaks. Thus, "it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost."

Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost—the same Holy Spirit who spake by the mouth of all the holy prophets; the same power from on high that fell on Peter in the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, when he said: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God" (Matt. 16:13-16); the same Comforter whose companionship would be offered to all the saints on the day of Pentecost—the Holy Ghost came upon Elisabeth! She became a living witness, by revelation, of what Gabriel had said to Mary.

And the Holy Ghost fell also upon the unborn baby, for Elisabeth's whole being was filled with that divine power. It is always a miracle when the Holy Ghost rests upon a mortal person, and that very fact makes the recipient a prophet. But it is more than a miracle when the Spirit enlightens the mind and quickens the intellect of a human soul who is yet in his mother's womb; and shall we not conclude that such a recipient of divine truth is more than a prophet? So the Baptist would be designated by our Lord in due course.

It was, on this sacred occasion, as though the unborn John—who in life would say: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world" (John 1:29)—was bearing testimony before birth, by the mouth of his mother, the only mouth that could then frame his words.

Then Elisabeth—speaking for herself and for her unborn infant, and echoing the sentiments in Zacharias's heart, for he too believed—repeated to Mary what she had already heard from the lips of Gabriel: "Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb." Then she asked, and the question itself was a testimony: "And why is it, that this blessing is upon me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?" By way of explanation, Elisabeth continued her prophetic words: "For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. [^6] And blessed art thou who believed, for those things which were told thee by the angel of the Lord, shall be fulfilled." Mary had believed Gabriel and all that he had told her concerning the divine conception of her Son, and relative to his birth, life, ministry, and mission.

Would it be amiss to here interject a pleasing historical fact: There were here assembled, as it were, the first Christians of Jesus' day, and they were holding their first meeting. Mary and Elisabeth, both true believers, were present, and they preached the sermons. John, in the flesh in his mother's womb, also a believer, let his witness be heard. We suppose Zacharias was there and that he could feel the spirit of the meeting, though for the moment and until John was born, his lips were sealed and his ears were stopped. Those who traveled with Mary—probably unbelievers and non-Christians, as it were—may also have witnessed the scene and felt the spirit of the participants. Needless to say, the account preserved for us by Luke—and his source must have been the blessed Virgin herself—is abbreviated and does not tell all that was spoken between the two cousins, whose sons were to change the history of the world.

Mary, however, was now in good hands. Elisabeth was wise and she could help, and what was more important, the Lord had now revealed to Elisabeth—and how often revelation comes to the woman Rebecca as well as to the man Isaac—that Mary was the one who should bear the Son of God. There was another witness; Mary no longer had to bear the burden alone. Now if only Joseph could also know—and that too was soon to be.

The Magnificat

(Luke 1:46-56; JST Luke 1:46, 48-49)

Elisabeth, as moved upon by the Holy Ghost, pays homage to Mary as the mother of the Son of God, an homage that was deserved and true and continues to this day as the perfect testimony of the goodness and grace of her who was foreordained to bear God's Son.

Then Mary responds. Her words are inspired from the same source; she also is filled with the Holy Ghost, and the utterance she makes, like that of her cousin before her, is the voice of the Lord heard through her lips. Mary's words—appropriately—pay homage to the Father, for it was by and through him that the conception of her Son had taken place, and that she, a virgin, should bear a Son. [^7]

Psalmic utterances of praise and thanksgiving had always been in the highest tradition of the Israelite people. The Psalms of David and Solomon and Moses and others, preserved in the Old Testament, are still read and sung in the churches of Christendom. Great psalmic utterances of Nephi are found in the Book of Mormon. Miriam, a prophetess, the sister of Aaron, led the women of Israel in a psalm of rejoicing after they had passed through the Red Sea. Deborah, a prophetess, who judged Israel in her day, sang a great hymn of praise when the Lord, through her instrumentality, slew Sisera and saved Israel from the king of Canaan. Hannah, the mother of Samuel, burst forth in a great accolade of praise when she delivered her son to Eli.

And now Mary, filled with the same Spirit and exhibiting a profound knowledge of Old Testament history and Hebrew idiom and concepts, gives forth one of the great psalms of praise of all time.

My soul doth magnify the Lord, And my spirit rejoiceth in God my Savior. For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: For, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. For he who is mighty hath done to me great things; And I will magnify his holy name, For his mercy on those who fear him From generation to generation. He hath shewed strength with his arm; He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. He hath put down the mighty from their high seats; And exalted them of low degree. He hath filled the hungry with good things; And the rich he hath sent empty away. He hath holpen his servant Israel, In remembrance of his mercy, And he spake to our fathers, To Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

The condescension of God has been manifest; our Lord's generation is declared. Gabriel has counseled Mary, and Elisabeth has comforted her. The Holy Ghost has fallen upon two great women and one unborn child. Wondrous things have been spoken, and now it remains but for Joseph, the carpenter of Galilee, to hear from heaven the divine message, and the heart of Mary will then be at peace.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It was a dream and yet the angel was there. The line between dreams and visions is not clearly drawn. Lehi said: "Behold, I have dreamed a dream, or, in other words, I have seen a vision." (1 Ne. 8:2.) In general, a vision comes when one is awake, a dream while one sleeps. They may be the same, or they may differ, as the case may be. In this instance the clear inference is that the angel was there in person, as he had been when he conversed, first with Zacharias and then with Mary. It is, of course, implicit in the whole account that the angel involved was Gabriel, he having the assignment, as we suppose, to transmit the knowledge of the Savior to those immediately involved.
[^2] Frank W. Gunsaulus, The Man of Galilee, p. 27.
[^3] It was the Prophet Joseph Smith who changed the word say to know in this verse. (Teachings, p. 223.)
[^4] Can we speak too highly of her whom the Lord has blessed above all women? There was only one Christ, and there is only one Mary. Each was noble and great in preexistence, and each was foreordained to the ministry he or she performed. We cannot but think that the Father would choose the greatest female spirit to be the mother of his Son, even as he chose the male spirit like unto him to be the Savior. This is not to say that we should give any heed or credence to the false doctrines that say that Mary has been assumed bodily into heaven; that she is an intercessor who hears prayers and pleads with her Son on behalf of those who pray to her; or that she should be esteemed as co-redemptrix with the Redeemer—all of which are part of a great system of worship that did not originate in the courts on high. As our spirits recoil from these perversions of true religion, we should nonetheless maintain a balanced view and hold up Mary with that proper high esteem which is hers.
[^5] Nor would Mary's story have been believed any more than was Joseph Smith's when he—about the same age as Mary was at the time—announced that the Father and the Son had visited him to usher in a new gospel dispensation. Visions and revelations (to the carnally minded) were things of the past; everyone knew that!
[^6] Our revelation, harking back to the sacred events here recited, describes Elisabeth's son as "John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb." (D&C 84:27.) From the scriptural accounts it is clear that this means, not alone from the time he came forth out of the womb, but from the time that he as a conscious identity, the spirit having entered the body, was yet encased therein.
[^7] The virgin birth must not be confused with the so-called immaculate conception. "From the moment of her conception, Mary, the mother of our Lord, in the false Catholic view of things, is deemed to have been free from the stain of original sin. This supposed miraculous event is called the doctrine of the immaculate conception. After reciting the universal prevalence of so-called original sin, Cardinal Gibbons says: 'The Church, however, declares that the Blessed Virgin Mary was exempted from the stain of original sin by the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ; and that, consequently, she was never for an instant subject to the dominion of Satan. This is what is meant by the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception.' (James Cardinal Gibbons, The Faith of Our Fathers, p. 220.) The virgin birth has reference to the birth of Christ and is a true doctrine; the immaculate conception has reference to the birth of Mary and is a false doctrine." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 375-76.)
