Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 19

The Annunciation to Joseph

And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, The Father of heaven and earth, The Creator of all things from the beginning; And his mother shall be called Mary. (Mosiah 3:8.)

"Whose Son Is He?"

(Matthew 1:18)

We have spoken of the condescension of God in begetting a Mortal Son; we have identified those Spirit-guided persons who have power to declare the generation of a Divine Being, one of whom is Matthew; and we now take up his witness as to whence and by what means our Lord obtained mortality. Having recited the generations of mortals from Abraham down to "Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ," a recitation that appears to be the royal line of Mary's husband, Matthew comes to the heart of the matter by saying: "Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost."

The issue is thus squarely set. Mary is the mother, a fact no one questions. But what does it mean to be "with child of the Holy Ghost"? Who is the Father of Mary's Son?

We suppose those in Christendom who believe the creeds are here faced with an insurmountable obstacle. Those creeds clearly recite—if such a word may be used to describe the maze of conflicting language found in them—and the doctrines based on those creeds clearly recite, that God is a spirit essence who or which fills the immensity of space, and who or which is everywhere and nowhere in particular present. They speak of an immanent, indwelling presence in all immensity; of three Gods in one, who are without body, parts, or passions; of a spirit being (if he may so be called), in whom we live and move and have our being; and, in saying that God is a spirit, the creeds intertwine the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost into one being, essence, or power, in which none of the three can be separated from the others. Each designation is said to be a variant manifestation of the same force or law or power or whatever. Those so asserting, and we suppose so believing, are at great pains to specify that there is nothing personal, in an anthropomorphic sense, about the God or Gods they worship; that all scriptural statements to the contrary are simply accounts that were so written for teaching purposes; and that their clear meanings must be spiritualized away in this more enlightened day.

We suppose, therefore, that those so believing have difficulty in determining the paternity of the Man of Galilee. We do know that they sometimes interpret the expression "with child of the Holy Ghost" to mean that the Holy Ghost was the Father of Christ, which from their standpoint presents no particular problem because they envision no difference between or among the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost anyway.

To those, however, who know that the Godhead is composed of three separate and distinct personages, who are one in spirit and power, the issue takes on quite a different aspect. The Father is a personage of tabernacle; he has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; he is in one place at one time; he lives and moves and has a being; his influence is spread through all immensity, but he is a personal Being in whose image man is created, and he is the Father of the spirits of all men. The Son was a personage of spirit, the firstborn of the Father, for that infinitely long period before he was born into mortality; since his resurrection he has been and will continue to be an exalted and perfected Holy Man, in form, appearance, and image like his Father, who also is a resurrected personage. The Holy Ghost is a personage of spirit, a spirit man, an individual, whose power and influence, however, is felt throughout all immensity, as is the power and influence of the Father and the Son. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are all male personages.

The Son, existing first as a spirit man, was born into mortality as a mortal man; and he has now risen in the resurrection as an immortal man. As far as this life is concerned, he was born of Mary and of Elohim; he came here as the offspring of that Holy Man who is literally our Father in heaven. He was born in mortality in the literal and full sense as the Son of God. He is the Son of his Father in the same sense that all mortals are the sons and daughters of their fathers.

Matthew's statement "with child of the Holy Ghost" means Mary was with child by the power of the Holy Ghost, not that the Holy Ghost was the parent of the fruit of her womb. Matthew's words have the same meaning as those used by Gabriel to Mary: "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee." (Luke 1:35.) They have the same meaning as those used by Alma in one of his great Messianic prophecies: "The Son of God cometh upon the face of the earth," he said. "And behold, he shall be born of Mary, . . . she being a virgin, a precious and chosen vessel, who shall be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost, and bring forth a son, yea, even the Son of God." (Alma 7:9-10.)

As far as those who understand the scriptures and the plan of salvation are concerned, the issue is not "Whose Son is he?"—for that is well established: he is the Son of God, born in the manner we have set forth. The issue is, Was the child in Mary's womb the Son who had been sired by the Father? Had Elohim and Mary joined together to bring into mortality the One who would abolish death and bring life and immortality to light through the gospel? Was this child to be the Savior, the Redeemer, the Deliverer, the King of Israel?

This was the problem that confronted Joseph, the carpenter of Galilee. To it he must find the answer—for his own sake, for Mary's, and for the sake of all who would thereafter hear his witness.

Gabriel Comes to Joseph in a Dream

(Matthew 1:19-25)

When Mary told Joseph that she was with child by the power of the Holy Ghost, his reaction was one not only of shock, of sorrow, and of dismay, but also of disbelief. His soul had yet to feel the flames of the refiner's fire before so great a spiritual truth could rest easily in his heart; as with all men, his faith and his willingness to submit to the divine will in all things must be tested.

For Mary it was no easy thing to tell the man she loved that their relationship was different from that of other faithful couples. And yet Gabriel himself had brought the word! When she recited to Joseph what the aerial ambassador had told her, great and wondrous as the promises were, it must yet have been as a sword piercing her soul, a sword that would wound her feelings time and again, until that day when she, at the foot of a cross, would weep for the Son whom she had brought into the world.

For Joseph it was the beginning of a period of agony and uncertainty. That he wanted to believe Mary, but did not, is shown by his determination "to put her away privily" with as little embarrassment as possible. He planned to give her a letter of divorce in the presence of two witnesses only, as the law permitted, rather than to make the dissolution of their contract to marry a matter of public knowledge and possible gossip. It must have been at this point that Mary sped hastily to Hebron to find comfort in the arms of Elisabeth.

Joseph pondered and prayed. Was Mary with child by the power of the Holy Ghost or in some other way? As to the true father of the unborn child, Mary knew; Elisabeth knew; Zacharias knew. They all gained their testimonies by revelation, and Joseph must now learn for himself in the same way. As we have seen, there is no way for anyone—neither Joseph, nor Mary, nor any living soul—to know and declare the generation of the Son of God, except by the whisperings of the Holy Spirit. Joseph must learn by powers beyond those exercised by mortal men that Mary's child was God's Son. Until this happened, their marriage could not be completed and their union consummated; until this occurred the Holy Family could not be perfected according to the divine plan. This knowledge must come to Joseph to prepare him to provide proper paternal influence in Mary's home during the infant and maturing years of the Son whose Father is above.

It was at this point of hope and faith that Joseph prevailed with the Lord. His prayers were answered. "The angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream." [^1] His message: "Joseph, thou son of David"—for Joseph, like Mary, was of the house and lineage of Israel's greatest king—"Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is [by the power] of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins."

Joseph now knew! Doubt fled. The circle of true believers was growing. He had the same testimony, from the same source, as did Mary and Elisabeth and Zacharias; and, according to their law, in the mouths of two or three witnesses shall every word be established. The Lord was providing his witnesses, and soon the whole nation and the whole world would be bound to believe, and that at the peril of their salvation. How often Joseph bore the special witness that was his we do not know, but that he remained true to every trust and that he performed the mission assigned him by the Lord, there can be no doubt.

At this point Matthew—whose habit it was to note the fulfillment of the Messianic prophecies—says that all these things were done to fulfill Isaiah's promise that a virgin would bring forth a son named Emmanuel, which means "God with us," or in other words that the Son would be God in mortal flesh. "Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife: And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name Jesus."

We may well suppose that Mary told Joseph of her condition; that she then went to Elisabeth; that Joseph struggled with his problem for nearly three months, being fully tested; that Gabriel brought the word; that Joseph sent word to Mary of his conversion; that she returned again in haste and joy; that immediately the second part of the marriage ceremony was performed; and that Joseph, to preserve the virginity of the one who bore God's Child, refrained from sexual association with her until after Jesus came forth as her child.

John Is Born

(Luke 1:57-63)

Zacharias is tiring of the curse he bears; Elisabeth's time has come; Mary, in her condition, to avoid the spotlight that would attend John's birth—because of his miraculous conception in Elisabeth's old age—and to be again with her beloved Joseph, has returned to Nazareth, and so now John the Baptist is born. Elisabeth's cousins and neighbors, knowing of the heavenly visitant who announced the coming of the Lord's Elias, and knowing of the great mercy the Lord had poured out upon Zacharias's wife, rejoiced with her at the blessed birth. The man child who would join Moses and the prophets, among earth's greatest souls, was now on earth. It but remained for his Lord to come, and soon the glory of the new dispensation would begin to shine forth in Israel and in all the world.

John, than which man a sadder or a greater Not till this day, has been of woman born, John, like some iron peak by the Creator Fired with the red glow of the rushing morn— This when the sun shall rise and overcome it Stands in his shining desolate and bare, Yet not the less the inexorable summit Flamed him his signal to the happier air. [^2]

Now the man child must be circumcised; it is God's law, in force since Abraham, a token, written in the flesh, of his people. "And I will establish a covenant of circumcision with thee," he had said to Abraham, "and it shall be my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations; that thou mayest know for ever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old." (JST Gen. 17:11.) Little children are not accountable, but they must be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, so that when they become accountable, they will continue to walk in his paths and be saved. Circumcision is the token, cut into the flesh so that it can never be removed or forgotten, that their parents have subjected them, in advance and by proxy as it were, to the Abrahamic covenant, the covenant that assures the faithful of eternal increase, of a progeny as numerous as the sands upon the seashore or as the stars in heaven for multitude.

"By circumcision," Edersheim says, "the child had, as it were, laid upon it the yoke of the Law, with all of duty and privilege which this implied. . . . It was, so tradition has it, as if the father had acted sacrificially as High-Priest, offering his child to God in gratitude and love; and it symbolized this deeper moral truth, that man must by his own act complete what God had first instituted." The rite itself probably commenced with "a benediction," and after it had been performed "the child received his name in a prayer," offered along these lines: "Our God, and the God of our fathers, raise up this child to his father and mother, and let his name be called in Israel Zacharias, the son of Zacharias. Let his father rejoice in the issue of his loins, and his mother in the fruit of her womb," all in harmony with the various scriptures, such as: "Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice," which scriptures were recited, along with other petitions and expressions of thanks, as part of the prayer. (Edersheim 1:157-58; Prov. 23:25.)

It was a common practice to name a firstborn son after the father. When the officiators attempted to do so in this case, Elisabeth said: "Not so; but he shall be called John." They remonstrated with her: surely she wanted to follow the custom and pattern of their fathers; surely she wanted to honor the name of the sire. "There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name," they said. "And they made signs to his father"—indicating he was deaf as well as dumb—"how he would have him called." The child's father then wrote on a tablet: "His name is John," Jochanan, meaning "the grace or mercy of Jehovah," in John's case the one who would go forth to proclaim the goodness and grace of the Lord and the great plan of mercy that made salvation available to the penitent.

The Benedictus

(Luke 1:64-80; JST Luke 1:67-78)

Struck dumb at Gabriel's word, Zacharias was unable to give the blessing and benediction to the waiting worshippers on that fateful day in the temple in Jerusalem. Now, with the naming of John, probably in his own home in Hebron, the tongue of the dumb is loosed, and his first words are cries of praise and exultation and benediction. He picks up where he left off more than nine months before, only this time the Holy Spirit rests mightily upon him, and his hymn of praise rises to glorious heights of grandeur. Zacharias's old-words were expressions of doubt and unbelief; his new-words come forth in tones of rapture and faith. In the interval, he has mellowed; he has confessed his sin of unbelief; he has communed with the Lord; and he is now pliantly submissive.

Filled with the Holy Ghost, speaking as with the tongue of angels, using language and thoughts found in the numerous Jewish benedictions that he had learned as a priest—thus showing how one dispensation slips easily into the next—the ancient priest burst forth with these words:

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; For he hath visited and redeemed his people, And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us In the house of his servant David, As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, Ever since the world began, That we should be saved from our enemies, And from the hand of all who hate us; To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, And to remember his holy covenant; The oath which he sware to our father Abraham, That he would grant unto us, That we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, Might serve him without fear, In holiness and righteousness before him, All the days of our lives. And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest, For thou shalt go before the face of the Lord To prepare his ways, To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, By baptism for the remission of their sins, Through the tender mercy of our God; Whereby the day-spring from on high hath visited us, To give light to them who sit in darkness And the shadow of death; To guide our feet into the way of peace.

And so, even before the old dispensation died, the first dawning rays of the new day were beginning to pierce the darkness of the past. Miracles had come again: the wondrous miracle of angelic visitation; of miraculous births; of the gift of prophecy; of God's Holy Spirit dwelling again in the hearts of men; of the Shekinah seeking entrance, as it were, to the Holy of Holies.

Gabriel had come to Zacharias, and he knew it and Elisabeth knew it and the worshippers in the temple knew it. Gabriel had come to Mary and been seen by Joseph and they knew it. One child was born and another was already in a virgin's womb.

He was coming! The way was being prepared even before the forerunner—who must still grow and wax strong in the Spirit and wait in the deserts of Hebron for his showing to Israel—before he should cry out in Bethabara, before he should introduce the Lamb of God.

The glad tidings so far received were being heralded forth; fear was falling on those who heard the accounts, and the whole hill country of Judea, to say nothing of the mountains and valleys of Galilee—all were ablaze with the new knowledge at the doings of the Almighty among his people.

Men were laying up the happenings of the hour in their hearts. As to John they were saying: "What manner of child shall this be!" As to the Promised Messiah, they were asking: 'When will he come?' There was an aura of expectancy. Things were building up to a climax. The forerunner had come; when would the Messiah show himself? When would the Dayspring from on high visit his people, to give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, and to guide their feet in the way of peace?

"Surely I come quickly."

"Even so, come, Lord Jesus." (Rev. 22:20.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These words, spoken in the name of the Lord Jesus, are sometimes used, erroneously, as an argument that the Spirit Christ was not in the body being prepared in Mary's womb, and that therefore the spirit does not enter the body until the moment of birth, when the mother's offspring first breathes the breath of life. This is not true. As amply attested by the writings and teachings of President Brigham Young and others, the spirit enters the body at the time of quickening, whenever that is, and remains in the developing body until the time of birth. In a formal doctrinal statement the First Presidency of the Church (Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, and John R. Winder) have said: "The body of man enters upon its career as a tiny germ or embryo, which becomes an infant, quickened at a certain stage by the spirit whose tabernacle it is, and the child, after being born, develops into a man." (Cited, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 17.) With reference to the words here spoken by the Lord Jesus on the night of his birth, we must understand that someone else, speaking by what is called divine investiture of authority, is speaking the words in the first person as though he were the Lord, when in fact he is only speaking in the Lord's name. In many revelations the Son speaks in this same way as though he were the Father. For an extended analysis of this matter, see The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ, chapter 4.
[^2] For an explanation of the word katalyma, which was translated inn in the King James Version but was rendered as inns in the Joseph Smith Translation, see chapter 95. In the only other place where this word is found in the New Testament, it was translated as guestchamber. There is no real English equivalent.
