Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 20

Jesus Is Born

Upon Judea's Plains

I stood upon Judea's plains And heard celestial sounds and strains; I heard an angel, free from sin, Announce the birth of David's kin. On shepherds watching sheep by night There came a shining, glorious light, As holy choirs from heaven's dome Saw God's own Son make clay his home. And voices sweet sang this reprise: "To God on high, let praise arise; And peace, good will to men on earth; This is the day of Jesus' birth." To me there came this witness sure: He is God's Son, supreme and pure, To earth he came, my soul to save, From sin and death and from the grave. —Bruce R. McConkie

Joseph and Mary Go to Bethlehem

(Luke 2:1-5; JST Luke 2:1)

Mary—in whose womb the Child was growing, within whose flesh the Eternal One was in process of making flesh his tabernacle—dwelt in love and peace in Nazareth of Galilee. She was sheltered and steadied by the kind arm of Joseph, her husband, for the marriage was now completed; Joseph had obeyed the command of Gabriel and taken the young virgin as his wife. His name and his influence now gave comfort to the one who would soon be a mother, to the one who would bear a Son, conceived under the most unusual circumstances ever known on earth. With Joseph's name and comforting assurances she no longer feared the gossip and shame that otherwise might have attended her forthcoming ordeal.

But Bethlehem, more than eighty dusty, dreary miles away, was the destined place for the birth of the great Deliverer. So it was written by the prophets; so it must be. Out of this small place, insignificant among the villages of Judea, must come Him whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting. Mary knew this and Joseph knew it; both had seen an angel; both knew, by means beyond mortal comprehension, that the Holy Thing that was in her was to "be called the Son of the Highest," who should rule on the throne of David his father forever. They must go to Bethlehem and there attend to the coming forth of a Son, lest any of the Messianic prophecies, by so much as a hair's breadth, should fail.

And so to Bethlehem they went. Was it to be taxed? Yes, for Octavian—the great Caesar Augustus—had so decreed all the world must be taxed; Rome is supreme; even the chosen people must bow to the rod of Rome, silence their hatred, swallow their pride, and obey the imperial will. Caesar speaks and the world trembles. For the Palestinian part of the world, Herod will attend to the details. He is the sycophant who licks Caesar's boots for that part of the earth; he will humor the Jews in their traditions and let them be counted and enrolled on the taxing lists in their own cities; he will decree that they return for this purpose to the tribal areas of their ancestors. Joseph and Mary—both descendants of David, both of the tribe of Judah—must enroll in the land of Judah and in the City of David, in Bethlehem.

They went to Bethlehem because they had no choice: Caesar had spoken, and Herod was echoing the word. But this was only the occasion, the vehicle, the excuse, as it were. They would have moved heaven and earth, if need be, to place themselves in the City of David when the hour arrived for the coming of the Son of David. We cannot suppose that a considerate and loving husband, having a wife big with child, would cause her to walk, or ride a slow stepping donkey, or traverse in any manner the dusty roads of Palestine, camping out overnight as they traveled—all as the hour of her confinement approached—unless there was a reason. Joseph and Mary were going to Bethlehem for a purpose. It was the one and only place where the Messiah could be born, and we cannot but suppose that they knew it and acted wittingly.

As to why they did not reside in this city of Judah in the first instance, we can only say that the providences of the Lord called for them to live in Nazareth where Joseph carpentered for a living. Jesus was to be a Nazarene; so also was it written. And as to why they did not leave Nazareth earlier, we are left to assume that Divine Providence planned a late arrival, an arrival when there would be no room in the inns, when the new baby would be brought forth under the most humble circumstances.

Jesus Is Born in a Stable

(3 Nephi 1:4-14; Luke 2:6-7; JST Luke 2:7)

As Caesar was shuffling souls around in the Old World, and as Herod was carrying out the whims and fiats of the Roman tyrant—both unwittingly preparing the way for the birth of a King whose kingdom would break in pieces all other kingdoms and bring the whole world under righteous rule—as these things went forward in the lands of which we speak, other like commotions were in progress in the New World.

Among the Nephites in the Americas the same anxieties and expectancies prevailed as to the coming of the Son of God in the flesh as were found in the home country of the Jews. The Nephite prophets had told them plainly that the Messiah would come in six hundred years from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem. According to their calculations, the time was at hand; but among them, as among their Old World kindred, there were unbelievers who opposed and fought the truth. It is the way of the wicked to shut out light and truth and to reject the Author of them.

Unbelieving Nephites were saying that the time of the Messiah's coming was past, that the signs promised by the prophets had failed, and that the beliefs of the members of the church were pious nonsense. These rebellious and spiritually illiterate persons made "a great uproar throughout the land; and the people who believed began to be very sorrowful, lest by any means those things which had been spoken might not come to pass." The saints fasted and prayed and watched; the unbelievers set a day apart on which they would slay the saints unless the signs were manifest; and Nephi prayed mightily all the day long for the safety and deliverance of his people.

Then, in wondrous glory, the voice of the Lord came unto him, speaking these words: "Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfill all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of my holy prophets. Behold, I come unto my own, to fulfill all things which I have made known unto the children of men from the foundation of the world, and to do the will, both of the Father and of the Son—of the Father because of me, and of the Son because of my flesh. And behold, the time is at hand, and this night shall the sign be given." [^1]

And that night the sign was given, as we shall hereafter note; and that night the Son of God came into the world in Bethlehem of Judea. Of this most important of all births, Luke says simply: "And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was none to give room for them in the inns." [^2]

No room in the inns! Hospitality was universal, freely extended, and everywhere to be found. People in all walks of life took strangers into their homes, fed them, washed their feet, and cared for their beasts of burden. It was a way of life. No one can fault the Jewish practice of caring for travelers, whether they were kinfolk or strangers. Had Joseph and Mary come days earlier, they might have found lodgment in the home of a relative, a friend, or a hospitable stranger, any one of whom would have summoned a midwife and prepared a cradle for the Coming One. Had they even arrived earlier in the day, there would have been a place in the rooms or inns rather than in the court, where those beasts were tethered among whom the Coming One came.

No room in the inn—not an inn of western or modern make, but a kahn or place of lodgment for strangers, a caravanserai or place where caravans or companies of travelers bedded down for the night. It may have been a large, bare building, built of rough stones, surrounding an open court in which animals could be tied up for the night. A foot or two above this courtyard were the small recesses or "low small rooms with no front wall" where the humans tethered themselves. [^3]

Of these rooms Farrar says: "They are, of course, perfectly public; everything that takes place in them is visible to every person in the kahn. They are also totally devoid of even the most ordinary furniture. The traveller may bring his own carpet if he likes, may sit cross-legged upon it for his meals, and may lie upon it at night. As a rule, too, he must bring his own food, attend to his own cattle, and draw his own water from the neighbouring spring. He would neither expect nor require attendance, and would pay only the merest trifle for the advantage of shelter, safety, and a floor on which to lie. But if he chanced to arrive late, and the leewans [rooms] were all occupied by earlier guests, he would have no choice but to be content with such accommodation as he could find in the court-yard below, and secure for himself and his family such small amount of cleanliness and decency as are compatible with an unoccupied corner on the filthy area, which he would be obliged to share with horses, mules, and camels. The litter, the closeness, the unpleasant smell of the crowded animals, the unwelcome intrusion of the pariah dogs, the necessary society of the very lowest hangers-on of the caravanserai, are adjuncts to such a position which can only be realized by any traveller in the East who happens to have been placed in similar circumstances." (Farrar, p. 4.)

In the area of Bethlehem, sometimes the whole kahn, sometimes only the portion where the animals were kept, was located within a large cave, of which there are many in the area. But unless or until some of the saints—and such a thing is by no means improbable or beyond the realm of expectancy—see in a dream or a vision the inn where Joseph and Mary and Jesus spent that awesome night, we can only speculate as to the details.

For the present also, we have no way of knowing how or in what manner the Babe of Bethlehem was delivered. Was there a midwife among the travelers who heard the cries of travail and came to Mary's aid? Did Mary alone wrap the swaddling clothes around her infant Son, or were there other hands to help? How were her needs cared for? Needless to say, the Gospel narratives are silent on these and a lifetime of personal matters relative to the greatest life ever lived. All we can now know—perhaps all we need to know—is that he was born in the lowest conceivable circumstances.

Though heaven was his habitation and earth his footstool, he chose to lie as an infant in a manger, surrounded by horses and camels and mules. Though he laid the foundations of the earth, and worlds without number had rolled into orbit at his word, he chose to come into mortality among the beasts of the field. Though he had worn a kingly crown in the eternal courts on high, he chose to breathe as his first mortal breath the stench of a stable. Though he would one day come forth—born then in glorious immortality—with all power in heaven and on earth, for now, as the helpless child of a peasant girl, he chose to begin the days of his probation as none of Adam's race had ever done before. And there, even in such a birth, he was rejected by his people, symbolically at least, for none in the recesses and rooms of the inn had seen fit to make room for a weary woman, great with child, who needed above all at that hour the kind hands and skill of those who had attended her cousin Elisabeth in more fortuitous circumstances.

But with it all, a God had come into mortality, inheriting from his mother the power of mortality and from his Father the power of immortality. Soon the infinite and eternal atonement—sought and desired by the righteous for four thousand years—would be a living reality. Soon all that had been hoped and promised and foreseen would come to pass. Is it any wonder that angelic choirs, even now, were awaiting the cue to sing forth great anthems of praise, some of which would be heard by shepherd ears on the nearby Judean hills!

Heavenly Manifestations Attend His Birth

(Luke 2:8-20; JST Luke 2:12; 3 Nephi 1:15-20)

The Messiah has come, not yet to minister among men, but first to grow up as a Tender Plant in the dry ground of Palestine. When he applies to John for baptism, his forerunner will tell all Israel who he is, and apostolic witnesses will shortly thereafter begin to proclaim his divine Sonship in every city and village of that land which shall be called holy because he was born in it. But even now, while he yet lies in a manger in a stable, shall not the word begin to go forth? Is it not requisite that his fellow mortals begin to hear of his birth and to ponder its eternal import in their souls? If the infant's birth is divine, no doubt his ministry three decades later will also measure up to heaven's standards.

And Divine Providence so decreed. The birth in Bethlehem shall be known; the coming of God's Son is no secret; as soon and as often as men can receive the word, it will be given to them. For scattered Israel, separated by half a world from the sacred happenings of that hour, the word will come with sidereal majesty, so that every man among them must believe it or face the loss of his soul. For homebound Israel, found in the surrounding fields and villages and cities, the word will come—as all gospel truths come—by the mouths of messengers who have first received their errand from the Lord, and have then been sent to tell it to their fellowmen. Those in the land where he is born and shall minister are to hear the message in the normal way because the day in which it comes to them is the day of their salvation. Those who live on the isles of the sea will see the sign of his birth written in the heavens, and they will then be expected to turn to the living oracles among them to hear the message of salvation designed for their ears. But for both the Jews and the Nephites, and for all Israel, and for all men, since he came from heaven, naught but heaven can herald the message. And such, as we shall now see, was the case.

In the Americas, Nephi had heard the voice—"the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world"—and on that night the sign was given, "for behold, at the going down of the sun there was no darkness." The people were astonished. Fear fell upon them, and many fell to the earth "and became as if they were dead. . . . And it came to pass that there was no darkness in all that night, but it was as light as though it was mid-day. And it came to pass that the sun did rise in the morning again, according to its proper order; and they knew that it was the day that the Lord should be born, because of the sign which had been given."

There was no excuse for any of the inhabitants of the New World not to know of the coming of their Messiah. Samuel the Lamanite had prophesied that there would be no darkness during the night of his birth, and the promised sign had now been seen by all. When else was there ever a night when the brightness of noonday prevailed over whole continents from the going down of the sun on one day to its rising on the next?

In the Old World the message came from heaven in a different way. In the fields of Bethlehem, not far from Jerusalem and the Temple of Jehovah, there were shepherds watching their flocks by night. These were not ordinary shepherds nor ordinary flocks. The sheep there being herded—nay, not herded, but watched over, cared for with love and devotion—were destined for sacrifice on the great altar in the Lord's House, in similitude of the eternal sacrifice of Him who that wondrous night lay in a stable, perhaps among sheep of lesser destiny. And the shepherds—for whom the veil was then rent: surely they were in spiritual stature like Simeon and Anna and Zacharias and Elisabeth and Joseph and the growing group of believing souls who were coming to know, by revelation, that the Lord's Christ was now on earth. As there were many widows in Israel, and only to the one in Zarephath was Elijah sent, so there were many shepherds in Palestine, but only to those who watched over the temple flocks did the herald angel come; only they heard the heavenly choir. As Luke's idyllic language has it: "And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid."

"The glory of the Lord!"—a part of that ancient glory, the Shekinah, which had of old rested in the Holy of Holies and which soon would shine forth on the Holy Mount where Peter, James, and John, and Jesus would be the only mortals present!

"Sore afraid!"—holy fear; the fear of the Lord; the fear felt by Mary and by Zacharias when Gabriel came to each of them from the presence of God; the fear that leads to spiritual progression; the fear that enlarges the soul, as it is written: "The glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, . . . and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged." (Isa. 60:1, 5.)

And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.

His message delivered, the angel—was it Gabriel again?—ceased to speak; the shepherds must heed the heavenly voice, find the Savior, and then commence the infinitely great and eternally important work of taking the "good tidings of great joy . . . to all people." How they will tell the message to their wives and children! How they will explain it to their neighbors and friends, and even to strangers! How they will gather the people in the courts of the temple, at the time of the morning and evening sacrifice—when the very sheep they had cared for so tenderly are attaining their divine destiny on the holy altar—and tell their fellow Jews what they have heard from heaven! And how Anna and Simeon and other devout souls, who also wait for the Consolation of Israel, will rejoice!

But wait—the heavens are still opened to them. There is now not one angel, but many. The whole heavens resound. The music, written by celestial souls for a celestial choir and sung by celestial voices with celestial fervor, rings from one end of heaven to the other. They praise the Lord; they sing of his goodness and grace; they tell of what his arm hath done; they speak of the tree upon which he shall hang; they exult at the open door of an empty tomb; they tell of prison doors being opened, and of ransomed souls rising to eternal glory. Then in a crescendo of climax comes this glorious benediction:

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

Then the shepherds find the Child and begin to make known what God has revealed to them. "But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart," awaiting the day when she too will bear witness of all that she feels and believes and knows concerning the Son of David, who was born in the city of David, and who came to reign on the throne of David forever.

Footnotes

Jesus Is Born (Chapter 20) footnote: What is the date of our Lord's birth? This is one of those fascinating problems about which the wise and the learned delight to debate. There are scholars, of repute and renown, who place his natal day in every year from 1 B.C. to 7 B.C., with 4 B.C. being the prevailing view, if we may be permitted to conclude that there is a prevailing view. How much the answer really matters is itself a fair question since the problem is one, in part at least, of determining whether there have been errors made in the creation of our present dating system.

We do not believe it is possible with the present state of our knowledge—including that which is known both in and out of the Church—to state with finality when the natal day of the Lord Jesus actually occurred. Elder James E. Talmage takes the view that he was born on April 6, 1 B.C., basing his conclusion on Doctrine and Covenants 20:1, which speaks of the day on which the Church was organized, saying it was "one thousand eight hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ in the flesh." April 6 is then named as the specific day for the formal organization. Elder Talmage notes the Book of Mormon chronology, which says that the Lord Jesus would be born six hundred years after Lehi left Jerusalem. (Talmage, pp. 102-4.)

Elder Hyrum M. Smith of the Council of the Twelve wrote in the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary: "The organization of the Church in the year 1830 is hardly to be regarded as giving divine authority to the commonly accepted calendar. There are reasons for believing that those who, a long time after our Savior's birth, tried to ascertain the correct time, erred in their calculations, and that the Nativity occurred four years before our era, or in the year of Rome 750. All that this Revelation means to say is that the Church was organized in the year commonly accepted as 1830, A.D." Rome 750 is equivalent, as indicated, to 4 B. C.

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in Our Lord of the Gospels, a scholarly and thoughtful work, says in his preface that many scholars "fix the date of the Savior's birth at the end of 5 B.C., or the beginning or early part of 4 B.C." He then quotes the explanation of Doctrine and Covenants 20:1 as found in the Commentary, notes that it has been omitted in a later edition, and says: "I am not proposing any date as the true date. But in order to be as helpful to students as I could, I have taken as the date of the Savior's birth the date now accepted by many scholars,—late 5 B.C., or early 4 B.C, because Bible Commentaries and the writings of scholars are frequently keyed upon that chronology and because I believe that so to do will facilitate and make easier the work of those studying the life and works of the Savior from sources using this accepted chronology." This is the course being followed in this present work, which means, for instance, that Gabriel came to Zacharias in October of 6 B.C.; that he came to Mary in March or April of 5 B.C.; that John was born in June of 5 B. C.; and that Jesus was born in December 5 B.C., or from January to April in 4 B. C.

To illustrate how the scholars go about determining the day of Christ's Nativity, we quote the following from Edersheim: "The first and most certain date is that of the death of Herod the Great. Our Lord was born before the death of Herod, and, as we judge from the Gospel-history, very shortly before that event. Now the year of Herod's death has been ascertained with, we may say, absolute certainty, as shortly before the Passover of the year 750 A.U.C., which corresponds to about the 12th of April of the year 4 before Christ, according to our common reckoning. More particularly, shortly before the death of Herod there was a lunar eclipse which, it is astronomically ascertained, occurred on the night from the 12th to the 13th of March of the year 4—before Christ. Thus the death of Herod must have taken place between the 12th of March and the 12th of April—or, say, about the end of March. Again, the Gospel-history necessitates an interval of, at the least, seven or eight weeks before that date for the birth of Christ (we have to insert the purification of the Virgin—at the earliest, six weeks after the Birth—The Visit of the Magi, and the murder of the children at Bethlehem, and, at any rate, some days more before the death of Herod). Thus the birth of Christ could not have possibly occurred after the beginning of February 4 B.C., and most likely several weeks earlier." (Edersheim 2:704.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Children are counted as being two years of age until they attain their third birthday. Apparently the decree of slaughter included all those who were two years of age and younger. Since Matthew expressly states, twice in the account, that the age of slaughter was determined by the time the wise men saw the star, which event coincided with the birth of the King, it appears the young Jesus could have been as old as two years and some months at this time. The usually accepted chronology makes him two or three months old. If his birth were placed a year or more back from December, 5 B.C, it would mean that the Holy Family stayed in Nazareth for the added period before returning to Bethlehem, which of course is a distinct possibility.
[^2] For an explanation of the word katalyma, which was translated inn in the King James Version but was rendered as inns in the Joseph Smith Translation, see chapter 95. In the only other place where this word is found in the New Testament, it was translated as guestchamber. There is no real English equivalent.
[^3] It was the Prophet Joseph Smith who changed the word say to know in this verse. (Teachings, p. 223.)
