Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 21

From Bethlehem to Egypt

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given. (Isa. 9:6.)

He is thy Lord; and worship thou him. (Ps. 45:11.)

Jesus Is Circumcised and Named

(Luke 2:21)

Mary's son was a Jew of the tribe of Judah into whose flesh the sign of Abraham must be cut. He must be circumcised. When eight days old, neither before nor after, this sacred rite must be performed. The Seed of Abraham must have written in his flesh the token of the covenant that he himself, as Jehovah, had made with Abraham his father. As the Giver of the covenant he must also be the heir of its obligations and of its blessings; and as we noted at the circumcision of John, the Abrahamic covenant is one of eternal increase and exaltation for all of the faithful.

Through circumcision the in male children in Israel become subject to the law. And Jesus, one of these children, though he came to fulfill the law, came also to obey all of its requirements; even he will conform to the law, as each event in his life requires, until that day when it shall be nailed with him to the cross, there to die, so that a new law can rise with him as he comes forth from the tomb in a newness of life. We might even be permitted to indulge the thought that Christ's blood, first shed at circumcision, was to keep the old Mosaic law, while that same blood, shed in Gethsemane and at Calvary, was to abolish the old law and bring in the new—the new law that would ever thereafter govern all men.

We do not know where or under what circumstances Jesus was circumcised. It could have been in the house in Bethlehem where Joseph and Mary now lived, or, sensing a need to gain the inspiration of a hallowed place, they could have gone the six miles to the temple in Jerusalem. But following the rite our Lord was given his mortal name. "Thou shalt call his name Jesus," were the words of Gabriel to Joseph. 'Thou, Joseph, shall give Mary's son the name Jesus, for thou art the head of the house.'

Why this name? It was a common name among the Jews then, and it has become a sacred and holy name now among all the faithful. It derives from Hoshea, which means salvation; from Joshua, meaning salvation is Jehovah, from Jeshua (Jesus), meaning Jehovah is salvation. Our Lord was so named because, as Gabriel said, "he shall save his people from their sins."

Jesus Is Presented in the Temple

(Luke 2:22-24, 39)

Jesus is now at least forty-one days old; the Holy Family are yet living in Bethlehem; and Joseph and Mary and "their" Son go to Jerusalem to the temple. They have two reasons: The child Jesus, as the firstborn son, must be redeemed; and Mary, having borne a son, must be purified. Such was the law, to which in all points the Holy Family conformed.

When Jehovah slew the firstborn in all the homes in Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh in his palace to the firstborn of the basest serf in the lowliest hovel in the land, and when he saved alive the firstborn in every family in Israel, on whose door the saving blood had been sprinkled, he took in payment, that his goodness might be remembered to all generations, the firstborn of all the Israelites. These would be his ministers; when the sacrificial rites and other holy ordinances were performed, it would be the firstborn in every family who would minister before Jehovah. Had this provision remained in force, Jesus would have been, like Zacharias, a priest in the temple.

But later, the Levites, as a reward for special devotion and valiance, were chosen, as a tribe, to serve in the place and stead of the firstborn in all of the families of all of the tribes. These latter were to be redeemed, each individually, from their obligation of a life of priestly service by the payment of five shekels of the sanctuary. This sum Joseph paid to redeem "his" Son, and thus was accomplished the first purpose for their visit to the Holy House.

Now Mary must undergo the rite of purification; she must become ceremonially clean. For this the law requires the offering of a lamb for a burnt offering (that is, a sacrifice of service and devotion, of worship and self-surrender to the Lord) and also the offering of a turtledove or young pigeon as a sin offering (that is, as its name implies, a sacrifice for the remission of personal sins that had been committed through ignorance). Those too poor to pay for a lamb—and such was the case with Mary—could substitute another turtledove or young pigeon.

On this occasion Mary entered the Court of the Women; dropped the price of her sacrifice into one of the thirteen trumpet-shaped chests; heard the sound of the organ, announcing that incense was about to be kindled on the Golden Altar; made her way, as one for whom a special sacrifice was being offered, to a place near the Sanctuary; and there, while the ordinance was performed, offered up the unspoken prayers of praise and thanksgiving of a grateful heart. Thus she became Levitically clean.

And so Luke says: "And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city of Nazareth."

Simeon and Anna Testify of Christ

(Luke 2:25-38; JST Luke 2:35-36)

One by one—one of a city and two of a family, as it were—the circle of living witnesses of the Lord's Christ is enlarging. Others besides those involved in the birth of Jesus and of his forerunner are receiving the divine witness and being called to share the burdens always imposed upon those who know truth by the power of the Holy Spirit. Simeon and Anna are now added to the list of true believers. Had they, forty days before in those same temple courts, heard the excited words of the shepherds who saw the angel and heard the heavenly choir? Had they, "waiting for the consolation of Israel," hoped to see him in the flesh, perhaps even when his "parents" came to redeem him from the priests and to purify his mother as the law required?

This much we know: "It was revealed" unto Simeon "by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the temple." This makes Simeon a prophet; he is receiving revelation; he knows what none can know except they gain it from the same Source. Luke says he was "just and devout, . . . and the Holy Ghost was upon him." He took the Child "in his arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people; A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel." Even now, as the first recorded testimony borne by mortal lips is heard in the courts of the Lord's Holy House, the announcement is made that salvation comes through Christ for all people; true, he is the glory of his people Israel, but he also came to bring light to the Gentiles and salvation to all people.

Then Simeon blessed Joseph and Mary, and said to Mary: "Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against; (Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed." Would that we knew all else that he spoke, including the words of blessing pronounced upon the couple in whose custody the Child was placed. Always—as we shall see throughout this whole work—there was more uttered orally to those who then lived, usually far more, than was recorded and preserved for those who should thereafter hear the accounts. At least we know that Simeon foresaw that Jesus and his message would divide the house of Israel; that men would rise or fall as they accepted or rejected his words; that he was a sign or standard around which the righteous would rally; and that Mary, who now had joy in the growing life of the infant Son, would soon be pierced with the sword of sorrow as she saw him during his waning hours on the cross of Calvary.

At this instant, Anna, a faithful widow of great age, who like the widow of Zarephath had been set apart from all the widows of Israel, came in. She bore a like testimony, for women are not one whit behind men in the receipt of spiritual gifts. She knew that Jesus was the Lord. This knowledge she would take to her grave, and this knowledge would still be with her when she saw his face again, as he ministered among the righteous in the paradise of God; there he would greet her and bless her for the witness she bore when he was yet in Mary's arms. But for now, while she yet dwelt on earth, she gave thanks unto the Lord, "and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem." The witness of truth was going forth, and the seeds were being planted, from which a crop would yet be harvested, when some thirty years later his voice would call men to the kingdom he was then establishing among men.

"And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of him." Though they had both seen Gabriel, and though they both knew of the divine Sonship of the Child, yet the magnitude and glory of his mortal ministry and the greatness of the work he would do among men would dawn upon them gradually.

Wise Men from the East Seek Christ

(Matthew 2:1-12; JST Matthew 3:2-6; 3 Nephi 1:21-22)

We know that Joseph's family stayed in Bethlehem until Jesus, then more than forty days old, was presented in the temple, where Simeon and Anna acclaimed his divine Sonship. Luke, who makes no mention of the coming of the wise men from the East nor of the flight into Egypt, tells us that immediately after the temple appearance the Holy Family went to Nazareth. According to the chronology we are following—and it is the same followed by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in Our Lord of the Gospels—Jesus was born in December of 5 B.C., he was circumcised in January of 4 B.C., he was presented in the temple in February, 4 B.C., and the family probably returned to Nazareth that same month. The visit of the Magi, the flight into Egypt, and the slaughter of the Innocents, also, are all presumed to have been in February of 4 B.C. The events incident to them, of course, took place in Bethlehem.

No reason is given why Joseph took his family the 180 miles or so—on foot, by donkey, or however—from Bethlehem to Nazareth and back. Perhaps they had decided to live in the land of their ancestors, near the sacred events that already had become so much a part of their very being. Their brief return visit in Nazareth may have been to close the carpentry shop and to take leave of friends and loved ones. We have already noted the view that Zacharias was slain by Herod's order when he refused to reveal the hiding place of the child John. Since we have no reason to believe that Herod's assassins were slaying children as far away as Hebron, this gives rise to the thought that Zacharias and Elisabeth may also have chosen Bethlehem for their home. Perhaps Mary and Elisabeth desired to be near each other. It does appear that when the Holy Family returned from Egypt, Joseph intended to settle again in Bethlehem, but was sent instead by angelic decree to Nazareth.

But whatever their immediate plans were, eternal purposes were at work. There was a planned and programmed course for the newborn Messiah to follow; there was a foreordained destiny as to where he lived, and what he did, and how he was received by those among whom he had made flesh his tabernacle. From the eternal perspective, those of whom we speak must be in Bethlehem so that Jesus might be worshipped by the wise men from the East; so that the Innocents of Bethlehem might be slaughtered, at Herod's word; and so that the custodians of the Child might take him into Egypt, at an angel's word—all with a view to fulfilling the Messianic prophecies about the new star that should arise, about Rachel's weeping for her children, and about the Lord calling his Son out of Egypt.

There has been more speculation about, and more legends created concerning, the so-called Magi who visited Joseph and Mary in their house in Bethlehem than about almost any other biblical event. There is an air of mystery here that appeals to the speculative mind, and the fictional accounts—as to who they were, whence they came, and the symbolical meaning of all that they did—fill many volumes.

They are presumed to be kings because of the richness of their gifts; it is said they were Gentiles, showing that all nations bowed before the newborn King; it is thought they were masters of some astrological cult that could divine great happenings from the stars. They are even named, identified and described; their ages are given, and the color of their skin; and one can, or could in times past, at least, even view their skulls, crowned with jewels, in a cathedral in Cologne. They are thought to have dealt in magic, to be magicians of a sort, and they have become great heroes of the mystical and unknown.

And the type of speculation that surrounds the men themselves applies in a degree to the star they followed. It is supposed to be a comet or a blazing new light coming from a conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in the constellation of Pisces, or something else. Astronomers, tinged somewhat with astrology, have a field day here. And then all of it is tied back into Balaam's prophecy—"There shall come a Star out of Jacob" (Num. 24:17)—he, Balaam, being assumed to be one of the greatest Magi of them all.

As to the wise men and their stated purpose, all we learn from Matthew—and he alone records the account—is that "there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem." Their question was: "Where is he that is born King of the Jews?" Why did they ask? "We have seen his star in the east," they said, "and are come to worship him."

Who were they? We do not know, nor does anyone. How many were there? Two or more; perhaps three, perhaps twelve, or twenty; maybe a whole congregation. They may have come together; they may have come alone, or in groups.

As to the men themselves, one thing is clear. They had prophetic insight. It was with them as it had been with saintly Simeon: the Lord had revealed to them, as it were, that they should not taste death until they had seen and worshipped the Christ. They knew the King of the Jews had been born, and they knew that a new star was destined to arise and had arisen in connection with that birth. The probability is they were themselves Jews who lived, as millions of Jews then did, in one of the nations to the East. It was the Jews, not the Gentiles, who were acquainted with the scriptures and who were waiting with anxious expectation for the coming of a King. And that King was to come to them first; he was to deliver his message to them before it went to the Gentile world, and his first witnesses were to come from his own kinsmen, from the house of Israel, not from the Gentile nations, not from the nations composed of those who knew not God and who cared nothing for the spirit of prophecy and revelation found among the Lord's people.

As to the star, there is nothing mysterious about it. The Magi, if so they are to be designated, were not reading portents in the skies nor divining the destinies of men by the movement of celestial bodies in the sidereal heavens. The new star was simply a new star of the sort we are familiar with. No doubt it exhibited an unusual brilliance, so as to attract special attention and so as to give guidance to those who walked in its light, but it was, nonetheless, a star. There was among the Jews of that day a prophecy that such a star would arise at the time of Messiah's coming, and these men who came to Jerusalem in search of that Holy Person had seen and identified the star by the spirit of inspiration. Edersheim quotes from the ancient Jewish writings relative to the prophetic knowledge then had as to such a Messianic star. One such writing says: "A star shall come out of Jacob. . . . The star shall shine forth from the East, and this is the Star of the Messiah." Another said that "a Star in the East was to appear two years before the birth of the Messiah." (Edersheim 1:211-12.)

That these traditions were true, we know from the Book of Mormon account. Samuel the Lamanite prophesied that at our Lord's birth "great lights in heaven" should appear; that during a whole night it should remain light, "And behold, there shall a new star arise, such an one as ye never have beheld; and this also shall be a sign unto you." (Hel. 14:2-6.) The fulfillment of this prophecy is stated in these simple words: "And it came to pass also that a new star did appear, according to the word."

The appearance of these wise men, whose credibility was not questioned, sent a tide of concern through all Jerusalem that grew into a flood of paranoiac proportions in the palace itself. "Herod the Great, who, after a life of splendid misery and criminal success, had now sunk into the jealous decrepitude of his savage old age, was residing in his new palace in Zion, when, half maddened as he was already by the crimes of his past career, he was thrown into a fresh paroxysm of alarm and anxiety by the visit of some Eastern Magi, bearing the strange intelligence that they had seen in the East the star of a new-born king of the Jews, and had come to worship him. Herod, a mere Idumaean usurper, a more than suspected apostate, the detested tyrant over an unwilling people, the sacrilegious plunderer of the tomb of David—Herod, a descendant of the despised Ishmael and the hated Esau, heard the tidings with a terror and indignation which it was hard to dissimulate. The grandson of one who, as was believed, had been a mere servitor in a temple at Ascalon, and who in his youth had been carried off by Edomite brigands, he well knew how worthless were his pretensions to an historic throne which he held solely by successful adventure. But his craft equalled his cruelty, and finding that all Jerusalem shared his suspense, he summoned to his palace the leading priests and theologians of the Jews—perhaps the relics of that Sanhedrin which he had long reduced to a despicable shadow—to inquire of them where the Messiah was to be born. He received the ready and confident answer that Bethlehem was the town indicated for that honour by the prophecy of Micah. Concealing, therefore, his desperate intention, he dispatched the wise men to Bethlehem, bidding them to let him know as soon as they had found the child, that he too might come and do him reverence." (Farrar, pp. 19-20.)

Guided by the light of the star, but guided even more surely by the light of that Spirit which had directed their steps from the beginning, the wise men found "the young child with Mary his mother" in the house where the Holy Family then dwelt. There is no indication whether Joseph was present, although it is presumed he was. There they worshipped the Lord Jesus, gave him "gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way." They were still receiving revelation and guidance from on high.

And thus ends our sure knowledge of the wise men from the East. The Lord guided them to Jerusalem; they bore a witness before Herod that would not have been heeded had it come from a Simeon or an Anna, or from simple shepherds, claiming to have seen an angel and to have heard angelic choirs; and they returned to their homeland, still guided from beyond the veil and basking in the light of Him in whose presence they had knelt. We can assume they went back to their own people to testify—as Simeon and Anna had gone out among their own people—that the King of Israel, the Light to lighten the Gentiles, now dwelt upon earth. Truly, there is a divine providence attending the witness that is now beginning to go forth of the birth of a King who three short decades hence shall ask, first, Israel, and then all men, to let him reign in their hearts.

Herod Slays the Innocents

(Matthew 2:13-18; JST Matthew 3:13-14)

We come now to one of the crowning acts of infamy and evil of Herod's infamous and evil reign, and yet the blood he is now to shed will scarce add to the crimson pool that stinks and smells at his palace door. "His whole career was red with the blood of murder. He had massacred priests and nobles; he had decimated the Sanhedrin; he had caused the High Priest, his brother-in-law, the young and noble Aristobulus, to be drowned in pretended sport before his eyes; he had ordered the strangulation of his favorite wife, the beautiful Asmonaean princess Mariamne, though she seems to have been the only human being whom he passionately loved. His sons Alexander, Aristobulus, and Antipater—his uncle Joseph—Antigonus and Alexander, the uncle and father of his wife—his mother-in-law Alexandra—his kinsman Cortobanus—his friends Dositheus and Gadias, were but a few of the multitudes who fell victims to his sanguinary, suspicious, and guilty terrors. His brother Pheroras and his son Archelaus barely and narrowly escaped execution by his orders. Neither the blooming youth of the prince Aristobulus nor the white hairs of the king Hyrcanus had protected them from his fawning and treacherous fury. Deaths by strangulation, deaths by burning, deaths by being cleft asunder, deaths by secret assassination, confessions forced by unutterable torture, acts of insolent and inhuman lust, mark the annals of a reign which was so cruel that, in the energetic language of the Jewish ambassadors to the Emperor Augustus, 'the survivors during his lifetime were even more miserable than the sufferers.' . . . Every dark and brutal instinct of his character seemed to acquire fresh intensity as his life drew towards its close. Haunted by the spectres of his murdered wife and murdered sons, agitated by the conflicting furies of remorse and blood, the pitiless monster, as Josephus calls him, was seized in his last days by a black and bitter ferocity, which broke out against all with whom he came in contact." (Farrar, pp. 32-33.)

Augustus Caesar himself said of Herod: "It is better to be Herod's pig than his son," which in the language spoken was a pun, and meant that since Herod was a Jew, he could not kill and eat his pig and it would therefore be safer than his son. Truly, it is as though the most fiendish and bloody occupant ever to sit on David's throne was its occupant in the very day when He came whose throne it was, and who would in due course reign in righteousness thereon.

And so, in this setting, the angel commanded Joseph: "Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him."

They fled by night. Then Herod in his hate and bitterness, acting as though Satan himself possessed his soul, went forth "and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the wise men." [^1]

How the work of slaughter went forward we do not know. Recognizing Herod's penchant for intrigue and secrecy, and recalling that the soldiers slew Zacharias because he would not reveal the desert hiding place of the infant John, we assume that the children were ferreted out by assassins and informers, who went as Judases in disguise. Both Edersheim and Farrar conclude that the number slain did not exceed twenty. But whatever the number, the cries of weeping parents, relatives, and friends—in fulfillment of Jeremiah's prophecy concerning Rachel and her children—ascended up to the Lord, by whom they will be replayed in Herod's ears when he is brought before the bar of the Great Jehovah to give account of the deeds done in the flesh.

"Out of Egypt Have I Called My Son"

(Matthew 2:15, 19-23; JST Matthew 3:19, 22)

How wondrous are the similitudes and the shadows used by the Lord to teach the great truths of his eternal plan!

How aptly he has chosen the ordinances and guided the historical happenings that testify and bear record of those things upon which the minds of men should dwell!

Lehi says to Laman: "O that thou mightest be like unto this river, continually running into the fountain of all righteousness!" and to Lemuel: "O that thou mightest be like unto this valley, firm and steadfast, and immovable in keeping the commandments of the Lord!" (1 Nephi 2:9-10)—hoping that his eldest sons, as they drink from the river and dwell in the valley, will remember the eternal truths for which they have been made a symbol.

Jacob gives his son Joseph a coat of many colors; a blood-stained coat remnant is later taken to Jacob with the false tale that its owner has been destroyed by wild beasts; and Jacob, as he handles the part of the garment that "was preserved and had not decayed," prophesies: "Even as this remnant of garment of my son hath been preserved, so shall a remnant of the seed of my son be preserved by the hand of God, and be taken unto himself, while the remainder of the seed of Joseph shall perish, even as the remnant of his garment" (Alma 46:24)—all to the end that whenever the seed of Joseph think upon the coat, upon the sale of their ancestor to the Ishmaelites, and upon the wondrous work he wrought in Egypt, they will rejoice also in the goodness of the Lord to his seed in the latter days.

Moses raises a brazen serpent on a pole before all Israel, even as the Son of God shall be lifted up, so that "as many" of those bitten by the poisonous serpents "as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal" (Hel. 8:13-15)—all with a purpose of centering the hearts of the people upon the atoning sacrifice of the Son of God.

Abraham takes Isaac, his only begotten son, up upon Mount Moriah, there to sacrifice him at the Lord's command; and Isaac, reputed by Jewish tradition to be thirty-seven years of age at the time, submits willingly to his father's will—all as "a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son." (Jacob 4:5.)

And now Joseph, as directed by an angel, takes Jesus into Egypt for a short season, "that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son"—all to the end that whenever Israel remembers how God had delivered them with a mighty hand from the bondage of Egypt, they will think also that the Son of God was called out of Egypt to deliver them from the bondage of sin.

All Israel went down into Egypt to save themselves from death by famine, even as the infant Jesus was taken down into Egypt to save him from an assassin's sword. As the Lord's chosen people came out of Egypt into a land of promise to receive his law and walk in his paths, so his Beloved and Chosen came out of Egypt into that same promised land to dispense the new law and invite the chosen seed to walk in the appointed course.

In the minds of ancient Israel there was no greater miracle than their mighty deliverance from Egypt: a deliverance made possible by an outpouring of plagues upon Pharaoh's people; a deliverance assured by the saving power of a wall of water on the right hand and a wall of water on the left, as Moses led them through the Red Sea; a deliverance made effective because the Lord rained bread from heaven upon them lest they die from famine.

But now, in the minds of all men, there should be the thought of an even greater deliverance: a deliverance from the chains of sin; a deliverance from death, hell, the devil, and endless torment; a deliverance from mortality to immortality; a deliverance from spiritual death to eternal life—all through the great Deliverer, who like Israel of old overcame the Egypt of the world to dwell in the promised land.

And so Joseph, having saved Jesus by taking him into Egypt, now brings him back to Palestine that he might bring salvation to all men. Again it is at angelic direction. Herod the wicked king is dead; that much Joseph learns from the angel. He returns to Palestine, with the apparent purpose of settling in Bethlehem. Then he learns what the angel had not divulged: Archelaus reigns in Judea, "in the room of his father Herod." And so, warned again in a dream—and how providential it was that Joseph was spiritually attuned to the Infinite—he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene."

Jesus, the Lord of Life, has now taken upon himself mortal life. His conception, his birth, his circumcision, his flight into Egypt, his return to Nazareth—all have followed the foreordained plan. His forerunner is now growing up in the deserts of Judea. His witnesses—Zacharias, Elisabeth, Mary, Joseph, the shepherds, Simeon, Anna, the wise men from the East, and many who have believed on their words—all are letting it be known, "to all them that look for redemption," that the day of the Deliverer is at hand. It now remains but for him to mature and prepare, in Nazareth or elsewhere as his Father intends.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] J. Reuben Clark, Wist Ye Not That I Must Be About My Father's Business? (Salt Lake City: Relief Society Magazine, n.d.), pp. 9-17.
