Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 22

From Infancy to Manhood

Jesus . . . made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. (Philip. 2:5-8.)

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness. (D&C 93:13.)

Jesus Grows from Infancy to Manhood

(JST Matthew 3:24-26; Luke 2:40, 51-52.)

Jesus walked the same road from infancy to manhood that has been trod by every adult mortal, from first to last, who ever breathed the breath of life. There is only one way for a mortal to be born, to grow to maturity, to pass into the great beyond; and we are left to suppose that every law of mortal life applied to the mortal Son of the mortal Mary.

Our Lord's physical body, conceived in Mary's womb, partook of Mary's nature; mortal genes, if you will, passed from mother to Son. His features, stature, and general appearance were passed on as much by his mortal mother as by his immortal Father. He was as much the product of the mother who bare him as were her other children. As a babe he began to grow, normally and naturally, and there was nothing supernatural about it. He learned to crawl, to walk, to run. He spoke his first word, cut his first tooth, took his first step—the same as other children do. He learned to speak; he played with toys like those of his brothers and sisters; and he played with them and with the neighbor children. He went to sleep at night and he awoke with the morning light. He took exercise, and his muscles were strong because he used them. During his ministry we see him walk long dusty miles, climb mountains, drive evil men—with force—from his Father's House.

We cannot do other than believe he was subject to disease and illness on the same basis as we all are. We know he was hungry, weary, and sorrowful; that his eyes were keen, his ears alert, and his tongue fluent. We know he seemed to his enemies as but another man, that he had to be singled out and identified with a traitor's kiss, and that he felt the stabbing pain of the Roman nails in his hands and feet the same as any mortal would. We cannot state too plainly that as a man he felt what other men feel, did what other men do, had the same appetites and passions as others have—all because he had been sent into mortality by his Father to be a mortal.

And as with our Lord's physical growth and development, so with his mental and spiritual progression. He learned to speak, to read, to write; he memorized passages of scripture, and he pondered their deep and hidden meanings. He was taught in the home by Mary, then by Joseph, as was the custom of the day. Jewish traditions and the provisions of the Torah were discussed daily in his presence. He learned the Shema, reverenced the Mezuzah, and participated in prayers, morning, noon, and night. Beginning at five or six he went to school, and certainly continued to do so until he came a son of the law at twelve years of age.

On Sabbaths and on week days he attended the synagogue, heard the prayers and sermons, and felt the spirit of the occasion. He participated in the regular worship during the feasts, particularly at Passover time. Indeed, the whole Jewish way of life was itself a teaching system, one that made the Jews a unique and peculiar people, a people set apart from all the nations of the Gentiles. It is also apparent that Jesus learned much from nature—from observing the lilies of the field, the birds of the air, and the foxes that have holes for homes.

It seems perfectly clear that our Lord grew mentally and spiritually on the same basis that he developed physically. In each case he obeyed the laws of experience and of learning, and the rewards flowed to Him. The real issue of concern is not that he grew and developed and matured—all in harmony with the established order of things, as is the case with all men—but that he was so highly endowed with talents and abilities, so spiritually sensitive, so in tune with the Infinite, that his learning and wisdom soon excelled that of all his fellows. His knowledge came to him quickly and easily because he was building—as is the case with all men—upon the foundations laid in preexistence. He brought with him from that eternal world the talents and capacities, the inclinations to conform and obey, and the ability to recognize truth that he had there acquired. Mozart had musical ability at the age of six that only a handful of men have ever gained in a whole lifetime. Jesus, when yet a child had spiritual talents that no other man in a hundred lifetimes could obtain.

Further: In his study, and in the learning process he was guided from on high in a way that none other has ever been. Being without sin—being clean and pure and spotless—he was entitled to the constant companionship of the Holy Spirit, the Spirit that will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle, the Spirit that, conversely, always and everlastingly dwells with the righteous. The Holy Ghost is a revelator and a sanctifier. Anyone who receives the Holy Ghost receives revelations; anyone who obtains the companionship of the Holy Spirit is sanctified. Of the Lord Jesus the scripture says: "God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him" (John 3:34), which is to say that he enjoyed, at all times, the fulness of that light and guidance and power which comes by the power of the Holy Ghost to the faithful.

With reference to Jesus' early years—those before he went to the temple at the age of twelve to discuss the doctrines of salvation with the Rabbis—Luke tells us: "And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him." We shall glimpse the wisdom here named when we assay to determine what was in the mind of the young lad as he traveled to Jerusalem, as he participated in the Passover, and as he, remaining behind, conversed with the learned of the land. As our discussion shall then show, we cannot escape the conclusion that the knowledge then manifest in the temple had been gained gradually during the years that went before.

With reference to Jesus' latter years of preparation—those between twelve and thirty—Luke says: "And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." Of the developing and maturing years of our Lord's life, Matthew tells us:

And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come. And he served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him. And after many years, the hour of his ministry drew nigh.

This wondrous exposition—"he needed not that any man should teach him"—applies to a degree to all of the prophets of all of the ages. They are taught from on high. A single glimpse beyond the veil reveals more of heaven and its laws than all the sermons of uninspired preachers combined. One flash of inspiration is worth more than all the casuistry of the Mishnah. All the traditions of the Talmud sink into darkness before one ray of revealed truth. There is no substitute for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

One day soon, the people of Nazareth, among whom he matured and by whom he was known, will ask: "Whence hath this man this wisdom?" And the answer, though not then given, will be: 'In the same way as all the prophets. He labored and studied and struggled; he treasured up words of light and truth; he pondered the scriptures—all under the influence of the Holy Spirit of God, which came to him without measure and without limit, because he was clean and pure and upright.'

The Passover Journey to Jerusalem

(Luke 2:41-42)

Jesus, now twelve, a son of the law, goes with Joseph and Mary from Nazareth to Jerusalem to keep the Passover. It is April of A.D. 8. His parents went every year, and Jesus may have been with them on some or all of these prior occasions. But this year is different: he is now a son of the law; his voice can legally be heard, and he is about to raise it among the doctors of the law, whose self-assumed wisdom knows no bounds, as they suppose.

This appearance in the temple is the sole New Testament record of any of our Lord's acts in the thirty years from Bethlehem to Bethabara. The Gospels are not biographies of Jesus; they are a collection of faith-promoting accounts from the Savior's ministry that, if believed, will induce receptive souls to come unto Christ and partake of his goodness.

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.—than whom the Church has produced no greater scholar on all matters pertaining to the life of our Lord—has written a small booklet, less than one hundred pages, Wist Ye Not That I Must Be About My Father's Business, in which he traces Jesus' steps from Nazareth to Jerusalem and tells of the sacrifices in the temple; of the slaying of the Paschal lamb; of the eating of the Passover meal; of the Feast of Unleavened Bread; and of the doings of Jesus in the temple courts with the doctors. We have heretofore discussed the offering of sacrifices and the keeping of the feasts, and it is now our purpose, through the eyes of President Clark, to place Jesus in the sacrificial and festive setting of the Passover, in order to determine how much he then knew of his divine mission and the extent of the spiritual insight that already was his.

Joseph, Mary, Jesus, and their fellow worshippers from Nazareth begin their pilgrimage to Jerusalem. "As we think of them moving slowly down into the valley with their donkeys laden with necessary supplies," President Clark says, "picking their way among the boulders that strewed the path, we cannot escape wondering what were the thoughts of Jesus. That He was exceeding wise, the experience in the Temple shows. But was this wisdom earthborn from His studies, or did He have also a spiritual memory that brought to Him a recollection of all that had before happened, and a vision to show what was thereafter to happen along this road to Jerusalem, a road richer in incidents of God's dealings with His children, than any other road on the face of the earth? . . .

"One wonders if as He came to Nain, He saw a vision of His future miracle of kindness there. . . .

"When He came to the neighborhood of Jezreel, did He see in vision the disastrous defeat of Josiah on the plain of Esdraelon by Pharaoh Necho, at Megiddo, a defeat so terrible and worked so deeply into the Hebrew heart, that John speaks of the great last battle as Armageddon—'the Hill of Megiddo?' Or did He see the earlier conflict in the time of the Judges, when Barak, Deborah the prophetess guiding, defeated Sisera, leading the forces of Jabin, on that same plain of Esdraelon, and did He see again the deed of Jael afterwards? And did there also come before Him the iniquities and tragic fate of Ahab and Jezebel, and the Lord's vengeance worked through Elijah against the priests of Baal, and the flight of Elijah to Carmel, the passing of the Lord before Elijah in the 'still small voice'? For Jesus was the Lord who spoke to and commanded His ancient prophets."

Then, in the course of a recitation of many other great events in Israel's history, President Clark—no longer using questions, but making affirmative declarations—says: "What must have been the feelings of the young Jesus as he looked at this present magnificence and then recalled the past, and (it seems it must be) visioned the future! . . . for we must believe there was with Him a spiritual recollection, a divine knowledge, of the past . . . As Jesus looked at all these, . . . there must have crowded in upon his consciousness the scenes of the actual events."

As the pilgrims pass Jacob's Well, the question is asked: "As at twelve He now beheld the well, did He vision the future meeting with the woman [of Samaria] and His sermon on the living water?" And finally, as they come near to their destination, President Clark says: "We must believe that Joseph and Mary, and the youth Jesus, of the royal lineage of David, had awaiting them somewhere a joyous welcome from friends honored in the chance to give them food and shelter. One cannot escape the question whether they went on to Bethany, eastward of Jerusalem, for their lodgings, to the home where in the years to come Jesus spent so many happy hours in a home that loved and honored Him.

"Did the youth Jesus know the youth Lazarus, and the maidens, Mary and Martha?

"Or did they go to Bethlehem, where twelve years before the Messiah was born in a manger?" [^1]

Jesus Participates in the Passover

In chapter 8 we considered the Mosaic sacrificial performances of Jesus' day, and in chapter 9 the Jewish feasts of that day, including the Feast of the Passover. We need not here repeat the rites and performances—intricate and detailed almost beyond belief—that appertain to their sacrifices and feasts. President Clark, of course, summarizes them in the work from which we now quote. From time to time in the course of his summary, he comes again to the concept, which seems to weigh heavily upon him, that even then, the deacon-age Jesus—scarce younger, however, than Joseph Smith, or Moroni, or Nephi, and perhaps not any younger at all than Samuel, when the Lord used these youths for his purposes—even then he was heir to the visions of eternity on a continuing basis. From various places out of long recitations about the sacrifices and the Passover, we take these words of President Clark:

"One can but ponder what the thoughts of Jesus were as He watched all this preparation for the sacrifice. Had He then the foresight of the preparation for His Last Supper, preceding His own crucifixion, such foresight as He had in the garden when He prayed: 'Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.' Did He recall the day, generations before, that He gave commandment to Adam to offer sacrifice, when, under His direction, the angel told Adam the purpose of sacrifice: 'This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.' . . .

"Again the thought thrusts itself upon us—what could have been the Youth's thoughts as He came into all this? As He crossed the Royal Bridge, did He see the morning of His arraignments; as He came in among the money changers, did He see how He cleansed the Temple of them, first at the beginning and again at the end of His public ministry? . . .

"Again, we can but wonder what thoughts passed through the mind of the divinely begotten Youth as He saw all this, and realized, as He must, that all of it was, in some measure, symbolic of the sacrifice He Himself was to make. His mortal eyes must have been dazzled by the pomp and splendor of it all; His mortal mind could hardly have escaped some confusion. But His spiritual eyes and intelligence must have looked through it all, and have seen to the very foundations of all its meanings—the Fall, the death, spiritual and temporal, the Gospel plan to redeem from the spiritual death, His own atonement to redeem from the temporal death. He knew the truth: 'For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.' . . .

"So Joseph and Jesus, tired after a long day of standing on the marble pavement of the Temple—it would be particularly wearisome for country folk—and laden with the lamb for the evening Paschal supper (which Joseph would carry on his shoulder) would prepare to wend their way through the city streets, and it may be out into the country, back to where Mary and the friends with whom they would later eat the Paschal meal were awaiting their return.

"So Jesus, bodily wearied by the long day during which he too may have fasted, trudged alongside Joseph as they left the Temple enclosure on their way to eat the Paschal supper. . . .

"Scholars believe that this was Jesus’ first visit to the Passover; but there is nothing in the scriptural record specifically so stating, and the conclusion is apparently founded upon the fact, already alluded to, that at twelve years a boy became 'a son of the law' subject to the fasts and under obligation to attend the feasts.

"On the other hand, we have the fact that Jesus’ 'parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover,' and if they were so faithful in performing this commandment, one may well assume they would follow the other command of the Lord to instruct their children [more children than Jesus would be involved], at the Paschal supper, in the meaning of the ceremony, and this they could not do if Jesus [and the others] were not present at the Paschal feast.

"So, with all deference to the scholars, one may be bold to suggest that Jesus had several times before partaken of the Paschal meal in Jerusalem, and so, as He now went wearily to their lodgings, He looked eagerly forward to the eating of the satisfying supper, with its accompanying spiritual experiences. For nothing must be eaten after the offering of the evening sacrifice until the Passover meal.

"But here also, as at every incident in this whole ceremonial, one cannot escape pondering how much of the past was in Jesus’ mind. . . .

"One cannot forego again wondering what might have passed through the mind of the youth Jesus. Did He know that this day was the pre-anniversary of the day, some twenty-one years thence, when He should be again in parts of these precincts, that He would be hurried and harried from Annas to Caiaphas, then to the illegal gathering of the elders, to the Sanhedrin, to Pilate, to Herod, and back to Pilate, and then to Calvary and crucifixion; did He now know the scorn, the envy, the malice, the murderous hate that drove forward the High Priest, the chief priests, the elders, and all the Council, and indeed the whole maddened multitude in their demand for His crucifixion; did He see Pilate wash his hands before the seething, cursing mass, and hear Pilate say: 'I am innocent of the blood of this just person,' and hear the people shout their own terrible penalty in reply: 'His blood be on us, and on our children'; did He now sense the agony of spirit in the Garden, and of His body on the cross—did He know and see all this which twenty-one years thence was to happen on this very day and, in part, in these very purlieus? Did His own mission, His own destiny, His own sacrifice, His own atonement rise before Him as a vision of Himself, the Son of God? . . .

"Still again we must wonder whether, as the shadows lengthened and the sun sank in the west, while the full moon rose from the Jordan, as Joseph and Jesus again plodded, after another long day, to their lodgings in the city, in Bethany, or it may be in Bethlehem, did the Youth see and know, on this pre-anniversary of a day yet to come, the grief He was to suffer, the spiritual and physical agony He was to endure, the death that was to come to Him, as He was sacrificed as the Lamb of God to atone for the transgression of Adam, for, by the Fall and through the Atonement man was to meet his destiny?" [^2]

In their original setting, these quotations from President Clark are interlaced with long descriptions and explanations of the festive procedures followed at the Passover, and the Feast of Unleavened Bread that followed and was in large measure part of the Paschal feast itself. In more than a dozen instances President Clark asks whether or asserts positively that we must believe that the young Jesus—even then, and though but twelve years of age—had past- and pre-vision of those things which had been in Israel and would be in the life of Israel's Chief Citizen. This approach, so ably followed by Him whom we are quoting—though necessarily speculative, as so many of the biographical pronouncements concerning Jesus must be—is an ideal pattern. We shall feel free to walk in the same path as we consider the mortal doings of the Son of an immortal Father.

Jesus, Now Twelve, Teaches in the Temple

(Luke 2:43-50)

After the first two days of the feast the pilgrims were free to return to their villages and cities and resume their temporal pursuits. Either then, or when the whole week was past, Joseph and Mary, with their other children and kinsmen, their friends and fellow worshippers, began the journey back to Nazareth. The spirit of rejoicing and exultation poured out through the Passover period rested upon them; there was thanksgiving in their hearts for the testimonies that were theirs, and for the goodness of Jehovah to his people Israel.

But Jesus was not with them. He, now a son of the law—with deliberation; stirred by the spirit of Passover worship of which he had been a part; recognizing in the sacrificial similitudes his own coming sacrifice; knowing his divine destiny; moved upon by the Holy Spirit, who was his monitor and guide—Jesus, unbeknown to his parents, remained behind. Thinking he was in the company, his parents did not miss him until nightfall. Then, anxious, troubled, worried for his well-being, they hastened back to the Holy City. For three long, wearisome days, days of prayer and self-reproach, they sought him—perhaps in Bethlehem and Bethany, and in all the places and among all the people known to him in Jerusalem—and then, in the one place where they should have looked first, in his Father's house, they found him. He was seated among the doctors, the Rabbis, the scribes, the learned teachers, "both hearing them, and asking them questions. And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers."

Jesus was at home in his Father's House. He felt at ease; the spirit of wisdom and understanding rested mightily upon him. We suppose he had many conversations with many people within the sacred walls of the temple. He was on his own home ground, and in these very courts he would yet make some of the most profound and soul-saving declarations ever to fall from mortal lips. And it was now, as it would be then, he was master of the situation.

We wonder what subjects he talked about. The Paschal celebration was on everyone's mind. Did he speak of the Paschal lambs slain in similitude of the sacrifice of the Lamb of God who should take away the sins of the world? Surely Mary, by now, had told him of his birth and of the miracles that attended. Did he ask the wise men of Israel about the Son, born of a virgin, who should reign forever on the throne of David? Surely he felt the divine necessity to begin to let people know of his divine mission. Did he then inquire as to when the Messiah should come and how he should be known?

Truth is sent forth line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little. We cannot doubt that the youthful—Jesus—as Simeon and Anna and the wise men of the East, and all the others, had already done—was himself now beginning to teach and to testify. His formal and legal ministry cannot begin for another eighteen years. For the time being he is to go back to Nazareth and be subject to Joseph and Mary. He is to mature and grow in the Spirit and find favor with God and man. He is to partake of the normal life of Jewish men, doing what they did, enjoying the familial associations that were part of their culture, and gaining all the experiences he would need for the arduous hours of his formal ministry.

We do not even know that he lived all those intervening years in Nazareth; he was surely not subject to Joseph and Mary, eating at their table and sleeping in their house, during his more mature years. Perhaps he dwelt in Bethany, in the city of Mary and Martha and Lazarus, for a time, or in Bethlehem where he first came into this life.

We cannot believe that he was silent all those years. He spoke at twelve; was his tongue then tied until he was thirty? If he felt the need to be about his Father's business as soon as he became a son of the law, would he feel that urgency any less as he continued to mature and grow in wisdom and stature and learn even more of his Father's will?

But back to the temple. Finding Him among the learned, teaching and being taught, his parents, strangely, were amazed. Had they forgotten the miracle of his birth, and had they not observed the talents and abilities that so precociously were his? Mary, not Joseph, gently chided: "Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing." In the family circle, subject to the family discipline of the day, Joseph was deemed to be the father of all Mary's children, Jesus included. Mary here so says; others at a later time will call him, derogatorily, the carpenter's son. There is a sweet family tenderness here in Mary's reference to Joseph as the father of Jesus.

Jesus, however, is now ministering in the temple as his real Father's Son, not as a member of Joseph's household. "How is it that ye sought me?" he asks. "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" His Father's business is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, both of which will come to pass through the atoning sacrifice that Jesus will make as the climax of his ministry. But that is twenty-one years away; for now he must return to Nazareth and be subject to those into whose custody he has been placed. Luke says these custodians "understood not the saying which he spake unto them, meaning that even they, though they knew the miracle of his birth and had full knowledge of his true Father, found it difficult to comprehend the greatness of his wisdom and his rapid growth toward the full stature of that man-God status that was his. He was going from grace to grace, from one level of intelligence to another, from a lesser to a higher degree. Soon he would inherit all power in heaven and on earth. His growth, even at twelve, had attained such proportions that it is little wonder Joseph and Mary were amazed and could not comprehend the full significance of his sayings.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This matter of whether John set up the kingdom and started the Church is so fundamental so basic to an understanding of how the Lord and his servants operated in the meridian of time, and so little known and understood in the world, that we take occasion here to quote the following extracts from a sermon of the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Some say the kingdom of God was not set up on the earth until the day of Pentecost, and that John did not preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. But I say, in the name of the Lord, that the kingdom of God was set up on the earth from the days of Adam to the present time, whenever there has been a righteous man on earth unto whom God revealed His word and gave power and authority to administer in His name. And where there is a priest of God—a minister who has power and authority from God to administer in the ordinances of the gospel and officiate in the priesthood of God—there is the kingdom of God. . . . "Where did the kingdom of God begin? Where there is no kingdom of God there is no salvation. What constitutes the kingdom of God? Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the kingdom of God is not. . . . "As touching the Gospel and baptism that John preached, I would say that John came preaching the Gospel for the remission of sins; he had his authority from God, and the oracles of God were with him, and the kingdom of God for a season seemed to rest with John alone. . . . "But, says one, the kingdom of God could not be set up in the days of John, for John said the kingdom was at hand. But I would ask if it could be any nearer to them than to be in the hands of John. The people need not wait for the days of Pentecost to find the kingdom of God, for John had it with him, and he came forth from the wilderness crying out, 'Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is nigh at hand,' as much as to say, 'Out here I have got the kingdom of God, and you can get it, and I am coming after you; and if you don't receive it, you will be damned;' and the scriptures represent that all Jerusalem went out unto John's baptism. There was a legal administrator, and those that were baptized were subjects for a king; and also the laws and oracles of God were there; therefore the kingdom of God was there; for no man could have better authority to administer than John; and our Savior submitted to that authority Himself, by being baptized by John; therefore the kingdom of God was set up on the earth, even in the days of John. . . . "It is evident that the kingdom of God was on the earth, and John prepared subjects for the kingdom, by preaching the Gospel to them and baptizing them, and he prepared the way before the Savior, or came as a forerunner, and prepared subjects for the preaching of Christ; and Christ preached through Jerusalem on the same ground where John had preached; and when the apostles were raised up, they worked in Jerusalem." (Teachings, pp. 271-75.)
[^2] "I went into the woods to inquire of the Lord, by prayer, His will concerning me," the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "and I saw an angel, and he laid his hands upon my head, and ordained me to a Priest after the order of Aaron, and to hold the keys of this Priesthood, which office was to preach repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, and also to baptize. But I was informed that this office did not extend to the laying on of hands for the giving of the Holy Ghost; that that office was a greater work, and was to be given afterward; but that my ordination was a preparatory work, or a going before, which was the spirit of Elias; for the spirit of Elias was a going before to prepare the way for the greater, which was the case with John the Baptist. He came crying through the wilderness, 'Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.' And they were informed, if they could receive it, it was the spirit of Elias; and John was very particular to tell the people, he was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. "He told the people that his mission was to preach repentance and baptize with water; but it was He that should come after him that should baptize with fire and the Holy Ghost." (Teachings, p. 335.)
