Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 23

John Prepares the Way

Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me. (Mal. 3:1.)

Prepare ye the way of the Lord, . . . And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed. (Isa. 40:3, 5.)

John Receives the Word of God

(Luke 3:1-2)

As the dawn comes before the day, so John comes before Jesus. The long night of rituals and rites; of performances; of sacrifices and blood; of bleating sheep cringing near an altar, awaiting the sacrificial knife; of a law that decrees an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth—the long night of Mosaic formalisms is drawing to its close.

Faint rays of morning light break forth in the eastern sky. John is coming from the deserts of Hebron. A voice is crying: 'Prepare ye the way; make His paths straight; the time is at hand; soon He, whose the kingdom is, shall walk among us. I, John, am his Elias.' Soon the sun in its splendor shall rise over the mountains, and the valleys of life shall be ablaze with that Light which is the glory of Israel, and which shall also lighten the Gentiles.

It is summer time. We are in Judea. The year is A.D. 26. In six months Jesus will begin his ministry, but for now the day belongs to John. All eyes focus on him; for a brief period the kingdom will rest with him alone. He will prepare the way. Six months older than Jesus, John is now about thirty years of age. He will preach and teach and cry repentance for half a year, and then in January, A.D. 27, he will baptize the Son of God in the murky waters of a river that flows from the Sea of Galilee to the Sea of Death and Desolation.

After so doing, he will continue to teach. A month later we shall hear him say he is not the Christ, and still later that Jesus is the Lamb of God. Indeed, for nearly a year after, until November or December of A.D. 27, his voice will still be heard, inviting all who will to follow his cousin who now, in the full blaze of his Messiahship, is everywhere teaching and working miracles. Then he will be imprisoned by Antipas, the evil Herod who had married his brother Philip's wife, and been condemned therefor by the son of Zacharias. Seven or eight months later, in the summer of A.D. 28, John, still in Herod's prison, will send messengers to Jesus to ask, "Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?" (Luke 7:20)—having in mind that those messengers will be converted and thereafter follow Him whose shoe's latchet the Baptist felt unworthy to unloose.

Finally, after languishing for a full year in prison, and in the winter of A.D. 29, we shall see the headsman's ax sever the Baptist's head so that it can be carried on a charger and given to an evil woman, while his spirit goes to the Paradise of God and his innocent blood joins the innocent blood of all the martyrs, to unite with theirs in crying unto the Lord until he avenges that blood on earth.

John came in a day of spiritual darkness and apostasy. The world was ruled by Rome, and Rome was the world. Everything that was carnal, sensual, and devilish was enshrined—it is not too strong a statement to say worshipped—as part of the imperial way of life. Adultery, incest, abortion, all were a way of life among the Romans. There were no accepted standards of morality and decency, and little or no belief in the immortality of the soul. All the gods of all the nations of the empire were reverenced and worshipped in the capital city, and the emperor and others were deified and adored as gods. Sacrifices were offered on the great altar in Herod's Temple to the emperor and for the well-being of the empire. The Jews themselves—in general and as a people—no longer walked in the light that once was theirs. If ever there was a need for a voice to cry out in the wilderness of wickedness, calling upon all men to repent and turn to the Lord, this was the day. If ever there was a voice—prepared in preexistence, schooled in the home of faithful Levites, and tested and made ready in the deserts of Judea—that was prepared to proclaim the word, to mark the way, to say to all, 'This is the path, come and walk therein; here is the Messiah, follow him,' that voice was John's.

Luke identifies the time and describes the day by the simple expedient of naming those who held temporal and spiritual rule over the people:

Tiberius Caesar, an evil and wicked wretch who walked in all the ways of the Caesars who went before and the Caesars who came after, and who ruled with all the despotism of Augustus and reveled in all the vices of Caligula, sat securely on the throne of the world. Rome ruled the world, and the world was wickedness.

Pontius Pilate, an evil Roman underling who chose, knowingly, to send an Innocent Man to the cross, lest Tiberius hear the rumor that Jesus claimed to be the King of the Jews, was governor of Judea. The scepter, now departed from Judah, left the chosen people in Gentile hands, and the Gentile hands strangled the Jewish religion.

Herod Antipas, an evil ruler whose lusts and incestuous life fitted the pattern of the Herods, and who chose to slay the innocent forerunner of the Lord rather than be embarrassed before his court, was Tetrarch of Galilee, and he, ruling in lust and evil, invited a satanic gloom of spiritual darkness to cover his kingdom.

Philip the tetrarch, though a milder and more humane ruler than Antipas, yet carried in his veins the blood of Herod the Idumean, and was a symbol of the worldliness that lay upon Jewish Israel. Though less evil than his brother, his rule was far from that which is inspired from above.

Luke speaks also of "Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests," which is itself an announcement of the spiritual degeneracy of the nation. In olden times high priests were called of God; not so in these days. Annas had been appointed by Quirinius, and we may suppose he had such influence with the Lord as Quirinius was able to confer, which was not enough, however, to keep him from being deposed by Valerius Gratus (Pilate's predecessor), who then named Caiaphas to the presiding position. He was deposed in due course by Vitellius in A.D. 37. Caiaphas was the son-in-law of Annas, and both of them exercised power and influence with the people.

What concerns us above all else as to the coming of John, however, is that he came with power and authority. He first received his errand from the Lord. His was no ordinary message, and he was no unauthorized witness. He was called of God and sent by him, and he represented Deity in the words that he spoke and the baptisms he performed. He was a legal administrator whose words and acts were binding on earth and in heaven, and his hearers were bound, at the peril of their salvation, to believe his words and heed his counsels.

Luke says: "The word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness." Later John is to say: "He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me," such and such things. (John 1:33.) Who sent him we do not know. We do know that "he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood [meaning, when he was eight years of age], and was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power [note it well, not to the Aaronic Priesthood, but] to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power." (D&C 84:24.) We do not know when he received the Aaronic Priesthood, but obviously it came to him after his baptism, at whatever age was proper, and before he was sent by one whom he does not name to preach and baptize with water.

We know John was in the desert, for a period of trial and testing and training—perhaps not much different from Jesus’ forty days of fasting and testing in the wilderness, as he began his ministry—but we do not know much else about his early life. The New Testament is not a biography of Jesus, let alone of John. The idea that our Lord's forerunner was a Nazarite for life, had never cut his hair or married, and that he lived always in the deserts is speculation that cannot be true.

We can think of no good reason why the Lord would send one of his servants off into the deserts for thirty years to prepare him for the ministry. Men are prepared to serve their fellowmen by associating with them and by learning of their foibles and idiosyncracies and how they will react to spoken counsel and proffered help.

It is true John did not drink wine or strong drink; that he went into the desert for a testing period before his ministry; that while there he ate locusts and wild honey; and that he came forth among the people wearing what was in their minds the prophetic garb, raiment woven from camel's hair, held in place by a leather girdle. We suppose this mode of dress was simply to alert the people to his prophetic status, for the period of his ministry was to be short, and he needed to attract as much attention as possible. That he was married, had children, and lived as normal a life as his ministerial assignments permitted, we cannot doubt.

John Preaches Repentance and Baptizes

(Matthew 3:1-6; JST Matthew 3:29, 32; Mark 1:1-6; JST Mark 1:4; Luke 3:3-6)

And so John came as come he must. He came before the Lord, "in the spirit and power of Elias," as Gabriel promised, "to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." (Luke 1:17.) His coming, as Mark has it, was "the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God"—meaning that John proclaimed the good news about Christ and salvation; that he laid the foundation and started the work; that he called the first group of true believers; and that, in reality, he set up the kingdom of God—meaning the Church of Jesus Christ—again on earth. [^1] John brought the first converts into The Church of Jesus Christ of the Meridian of Time. He laid the foundations upon which the Lord Jesus and the apostles built. He was the messenger, promised by Malachi, who should go before the Lord's face to prepare the way before him. His was the voice, promised by Isaiah, that should say, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight."

What does a forerunner or an Elias do to prepare a people for Him who shall come after? He calls people to repentance and baptizes them in water "for the remission of sins," which freedom from sin is actually obtained when the repentant person receives the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost. This was the mission of John. He acted in the power and authority of the Aaronic Priesthood. [^2] A forerunner preaches "the preparatory gospel"; the One who comes after preaches the fulness of the gospel. "The preparatory gospel . . . is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins." (D&C 84:26-27.) This is the gospel administered by the law of Moses; it was as far as John's authority went.

No one is ever prepared for the Lord while he remains in his sins. The Lord does not save people in their sins, but from their sins. The plan of salvation is designed to enable men to free themselves from sin so they can, as clean and spotless beings, enter the presence of Him who is without sin. No one is ever prepared for the Lord until he confesses and forsakes his sins, until he repents, until he is baptized for the remission of sins. And the fact that John was to prepare "a people" for the Lord means that a people—composed of a host of individuals—had to set their houses in order, be baptized by him, and await patiently the coming of Him who would give them the Holy Ghost. When they received the baptism of the Holy Ghost, sin and evil would be burned out of their souls as though by fire, and being thus clean, they would be fit candidates to be with the Lord—they would be prepared for the Lord.

John, Preaching in Power, Prepares a People

(Luke 3:7-14; JST Luke 3:12-14, 17-20; Matthew 3:7-10; JST Matthew 3:35-37)

No voice like John's had been heard in Israel since the days of the prophets. Isaiah and Lehi had thundered forth such damning imprecations and spoken with such divine finality. But who for centuries had come forth, as the voice of one crying in the wilderness of wickedness, with such a call for repentance as came from the tongue of John? Here at last was a man who spoke with authority. He came in the Lord's name, speaking as he was moved upon by the Holy Ghost. The Spirit gave him utterance. So persuasive were his words, so compelling his logic, so sound his doctrine, that all Israel flocked together to hear the message. They came from Jerusalem; they assembled from all Judea; they gathered from all the regions round about Jordan. Here was a man, a voice, a message—spoken in the Spirit and with power—that sank into the hearts of men with convincing and converting power. Great hosts confessed their sins and were baptized in Jordan.

Among his hearers, among those who fell under the spell of his voice, were many of the Pharisees and Sadducees." Even they, feeling the great swell of emotion that accompanied his words, and being swept along by a great tide of popular approval, came to be baptized. But an inspired priest does not baptize an unrepentant person. Baptism is of no avail without repentance, and contrition, and confession, and a compelling determination to walk ever after in a newness of life.

"O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?" demanded the voice that read the hearts of men and knew of the damning influence of these leaders of the people. His words were scarcely less of a rebuke than would be those of another voice in another day, which would say to the same hypocrites: "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?" (Matt. 23:33.) But even for these there was this hope: "Repent, therefore, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance," John commanded. 'Repent first, be baptized second, and then will you be fit candidates to receive the Spirit from him who cometh after me.'

And further: 'Think not that ye are above the law of repentance; that ye keep the law of Moses and need not change your lives; that ye will be saved by the rituals and performances to which you have bound yourselves.' "Think not to say within yourselves, We are the children of Abraham, and we only have power to bring seed unto our father Abraham." Think not to say, "We have kept the commandments of God, and none can inherit the promises but the children of Abraham; for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham." Know this: God is able "of these stony Gentiles—these dogs—to raise up children unto Abraham." (Teachings, p. 319.)

Having invited these self-sufficient, self-righteous, self-saving souls to repent, the incisive and blunt-speaking John then gave them this warning: 'Even if you do not repent and save yourselves, know this: The ax is laid at the root of the trees—the tree of formalism and Mosaic performances; the tree that saves only the seed of Abraham; the tree of dead and evil works; all the trees that cumber the vineyard of the Lord—and every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.'

Hearing John's denunciation of their self-appointed leaders, perhaps fearing lest they too might be hewn down and cast into the fire, those who were repentant and had been baptized asked: "What shall we do then?" 'What course is expected of us? How shall we conduct our affairs, lest these evils come upon us also?'

He answers: 'Bear one another's burdens; help the poor; feed the hungry; clothe the naked; live as becometh saints—this is all part of your baptismal covenant. He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none, and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.' And to the soldiers, many of whom must have been the Gentile troops garrisoned among them, he counseled: 'Your military rank does not give you the right to be cruel or inhuman to your fellowmen. Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely; and be content with your wages.'

Truly, here was a prophet again in Israel.

John Announces the Coming of Christ

(Luke 3:15-18; JST Luke 3:4-11; Matthew 3:11-12; JST Matthew 3:34, 38-40; Mark 1:7-8; JST Mark 1:6)

With such a man and such a message, at this time of Messianic expectancy, it comes as no surprise to read in Luke that "all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not." What greater words would one expect from the lips of the Deliverer of Israel than were here being spoken by this John? What more could any man do to set in order the affairs of the earthly kingdom than was being done by this prophet-garbed preacher from the wilderness of Judea? Was he, indeed, the Promised Messiah?

And yet he had said he was a forerunner, an Elias, a voice, one coming before to prepare the way for one greater. He must say it again, and again and again and again. He was not the Messiah, but he was his kin, and he would become his friend. And as of now, he would do the assigned work: he would prepare the way; cost what it might in time and toil and sacrifice, he would prepare the way. No man must mistake him for the Messiah.

But he must be accepted for what he was; otherwise men would not accept the one of whom he came to testify. "Why is it that ye receive not the preaching of him whom God hath sent?" he asked. "If ye receive not this in your hearts, ye receive not me; and if ye receive not me, ye receive not him of whom I am sent to bear record; and for your sins ye have no cloak."

"I indeed baptize you with water; but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose." "He shall not only baptize you with water, but with fire, and the Holy Ghost." 'I am not the Messiah, for the Messiah shall baptize with fire; he it is who shall cleanse and perfect the lives of men; he shall sanctify their souls and prepare them for eternal life. He is Christ, the great Judge.' "He shall reap the earth and harvest the ripened sheaves. With the winnowing fan of judgment, he shall separate the wicked chaff from the righteous wheat, gathering the wheat into the celestial garner and burning the chaff in the depths of hell; his threshing-floor is the whole earth." (Commentary 1:121.)

John's voice was one of doctrine and of testimony. He proclaimed the divine Sonship of the Coming One, testified that He was to be the Holy Messiah, and invited all men to come unto Him and be saved. And these are the words which he spake:

The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight. For behold, and lo, he shall come, as it is written in the book of the prophets, to take away the sins of the world, and to bring salvation unto the heathen nations, to gather together those who are lost, who are of the sheepfold of Israel; Yea, even the dispersed and afflicted; and also to prepare the way, and make possible the preaching of the gospel unto the Gentiles; And to be a light unto all who sit in darkness, unto the uttermost parts of the earth; to bring to pass the resurrection from the dead, and to ascend up on high, to dwell on the right hand of the Father, Until the fulness of time, and the law and the testimony shall be sealed, and the keys of the kingdom shall be delivered up again unto the Father; To administer justice unto all; to come down in judgment upon all, and to convince all the ungodly of their ungodly deeds, which they have committed; and all this in the day that he shall come; For it is a day of power; yea, every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low; the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways made smooth; And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.

These words, inserted in the ancient record by the Prophet Joseph Smith as the spirit of revelation rested upon him, contain such a wondrous outpouring of light and understanding that they give an entirely new perspective as to how and in what manner the gospel was preached in the meridian of time. John was not, as our King James Version leaves us to assume, taking Isaiah's Messianic utterances relative to the Second Coming and applying them to the First Coming. Rather, he gave an inspired summary of the mission and ministry and work of the Promised Messiah as it pertained to both of his comings and as it affected all men of all nations. The Deliverer will come, not as a Temporal King, but to atone for the sins of the world, to bring salvation to Jew and Gentile alike, to gather Israel, to make possible the preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles, to bring to pass the resurrection, to return in glory to his Father, and to reign with almighty power. Then in the fulness of time he shall come again to administer justice and judgment unto all and to condemn the ungodly for all their evil deeds; and this shall be the day when every valley shall be exalted and every mountain shall be made low.

"And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people," for he was indeed a prophet—yea, more than a prophet—and He who followed after, according to the promises, was the Messiah, the very Christ, the One in whom all fulness and perfection dwells. Blessed be John who prepared the way, and blessed be He who came to fulfill all things spoken of him by his forerunner.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] To signify his humility before the Father; to show that "according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father." He is God's Almighty Son; he made the worlds; the sidereal heavens rolled into existence at his word; he has all power in heaven and on earth—and yet, as a perfect pattern of humility, he wades out into a dirty stream, whose waters are scarcely fit for human consumption, and permits a rugged, unpolished man from the desert to immerse him in baptism, because such is the law of the Lord. A somewhat analogous situation existed in the early days of this dispensation. Some new converts, having been baptized in other churches, felt they did not need to be baptized over again as members of the newly established kingdom of God on earth. In language that is applicable, in large measure, to the Jewish situation, the Lord said: "Behold, I say unto you that all old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing; and this is a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning. Wherefore, although a man should be baptized an hundred times it availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of Moses, neither by your dead works. For it is because of your dead works that I have caused this last covenant and this church to be built up unto me, even as in days of old. Wherefore, enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded, and seek not to counsel your God." (D&C 22:1-4.)
[^2] As a covenant of obedience; he "witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments." He came not to do his own will, but the will of the Father, who sent him. He was no more free of constraint and control than is any man. He walked the course set out for him because it was his Father's will, and he was under covenant, made in the waters of baptism, to do the will of the Father. In this same cathedral, in the stained-glass portrayal behind the altar, may be seen Mary, our Lord's mother, sitting as it were on a throne. On either side, with outstretched arms toward her, and holding jointly a crown, stand the Father and the Son. They are placing the crown on Mary's head. About the Holy Virgin flutters a dove, which is, no doubt, intended to be the Holy Spirit.
