Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 24

John Baptizes Jesus

And I looked and beheld the Redeemer of the world; . . . and I also beheld the prophet who should prepare the way before him. And the Lamb of God went forth and was baptized of him; and after he was baptized, I beheld the heavens open, and the Holy Ghost come down out of heaven and abide upon him in the form of a dove. (1 Ne. 11:27.)

Baptism Anciently

We cannot understand "the baptism of John"—why multitudes flocked to him to receive the sacred ordinance; why even the Lord Jesus insisted on immersion at his hands—unless we know how the law of baptism operated both anciently and among the Jews in his day.

It is commonly believed, as we suppose, that baptism originated with John; that fired with heavenly zeal, he cried repentance, and baptized—by immersion, sprinkling, pouring or what have you—for the remission of sins; that such was a new beginning, a new ordinance, a new rite that was then accepted by the so-called first Christians, and by them made a part of the new dispensation. Such a concept has little comparison to the truth. There was a man called John; he did preach with heavenly zeal, and he did baptize repentant persons. But he did not originate the ordinance of baptism; it neither began nor ended with the son of Zacharias.

Baptism is an eternal ordinance, an everlasting rite, a continuing requirement in God's kingdom, and it was practiced by the Jews before John ever came on the scene to minister for a short season among men. He was no more the originator of baptism than he was of faith or repentance or sacrifice or any of the other laws in which he believed or the ordinances in which he participated. It is true that the Jews today no longer perform baptisms, just as they have ceased their sacrificial rites, but it was not so anciently, and it had not been so from the beginning.

Baptism and sacrifice both began with Adam. We have seen how the angelic ministrant revealed to him that his sacrificial performances were in "similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father." (Moses 5:7.) We must also remember that God, "by his own voice," taught Adam about faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and "that Adam cried unto the Lord, and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water. And thus he was baptized, and the Spirit of God descended upon him, and thus he was born of the Spirit, and became quickened in the inner man. And he heard a voice out of heaven, saying: "Thou art baptized with fire, and with the Holy Ghost." (Moses 6:51-66.)

From that day onward baptism was the great initiatory ordinance into the earthly kingdom. All of the prophets of all of the ages both baptized others and were themselves baptized. Isaiah tells of the whole "house of Jacob" coming forth "out of the waters of Judah, or out of the waters of baptism." (1 Ne. 20:1.) Paul says "all our fathers" were "baptized unto Moses." They "did all eat the same spiritual meat," he says, "and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." (1 Cor. 10:1-4.) From the time Lehi left Jerusalem until the resurrected Lord ministered among his seed six hundred years later, we find the whole Nephite people performing baptisms for faithful and repentant souls.

Whenever the Lord's people on either continent enjoyed the fulness of the everlasting gospel this means that they had faith in Christ, repented of their sins, were baptized for the remission of sins, and had the gift of the Holy Ghost. Whenever they were restricted to the lesser law, the law of Moses, and thus had only the preparatory gospel, they still exercised faith, sought repentance, and subjected themselves to baptism in water, but were unable to obtain the right to the constant companionship of the Holy Spirit.

Baptism Among the Jews in John's Day

Baptism was an established way of life among faithful Jews in John's day. We do not suppose that all of the Jews of that day were baptized, for apostasy was rife and rebellion was common. But among the chosen seed there certainly were many faithful people who were baptized on the same basis as they offered sacrifices. "The Levitical Priesthood is forever hereditary—fixed on the head of Aaron and his sons forever, and was in active operation down to Zacharias the father of John." (Teachings, p. 319.) This is the priesthood that has power to baptize in water. "Zacharias was a priest of God, and officiating in the Temple, and John was a priest after his father, and held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, and was called of God to preach the Gospel of the kingdom of God." (Teachings, p. 273.) John himself "was baptized while he was yet in his childhood." (D&C 84:28.) It goes without saying that Zacharias and his fellow priests were baptized. We cannot do other than believe that Elisabeth, Mary, Joseph, Simeon, Anna, the shepherds who heard the heavenly choirs, and hosts of others who waited patiently for the Consolation of Israel had also partaken of this sacred ordinance, all before the ministry of John ever began.

Edersheim says that the baptismal ordinance administered by John was not new. "Hitherto the Law had it," he says, "that those who had contracted Levitical defilement were to immerse before offering sacrifice. Again, it was prescribed that such Gentiles as became 'proselytes of righteousness,' or 'proselytes of the Covenant,' were to be admitted to full participation in the privileges of Israel by the threefold rites of circumcision, baptism, and sacrifice—the immersion being, as it were, the acknowledgment and symbolic removal of moral defilement, corresponding to that of Levitical uncleanness." Our knowledge of the real purpose of baptism lets us know that it was not simply to remove Levitical defilement, as such had been defined by the Rabbis, but was in fact for the remission of sins. What the Edersheim statement does is establish the fact that baptism was common among the people before the ministry of John. In this connection, Edersheim quotes this significant passage from the Talmud: "A man who is guilty of sin, and makes confession, and does not turn from it, to whom is he like? To a man who has in his hand a defiling reptile, who, even if he immerses in all the waters of the world, his baptism avails him nothing; but let him cast it from his hand, and if he immerses in only forty seah of water, immediately his baptism avails him." (Edersheim 1:273.) That is to say: Baptism without repentance is of no avail. Even those who wrote the Talmud knew that.

As to how baptisms were performed for proselytes, Edersheim says: "The person to be baptized, having cut his hair and nails, undressed completely, made fresh profession of his faith before what were designated 'the fathers of the baptism,' and then immersed completely, so that every part of the body was touched by the water. The rite would, of course, be accompanied by exhortations and benedictions. . . .

"It was indeed a great thing when . . . a stranger sought shelter under the wings of the Shekhinah, and the change of condition which he underwent was regarded as complete. . . . As he stepped out of these waters he was considered as 'born anew'—in the language of the Rabbis, as if he were 'a little child just born.' . . . The past, with all that had belonged to it, was past, and he was a new man—the old, with its defilements, was buried in the waters of baptism." (Edersheim 2:745-46.)

The issue with reference to baptisms performed in the day of John was not whether people should be baptized—no one was questioning that; people everywhere had been and were being immersed in water by priestly administrators for the remission of sins. The issue was: Is John the one sent of God to baptize and thereby to prepare a people for the Promised Messiah. Any baptisms performed by the priests of Aaron, according to the patterns of the past, were ordinances of the old dispensation. And a new day was now dawning, a forerunner of the future was baptizing, an Elias of the Messias was immersing people in water—and the issue was, in Jesus' words: "The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men?"

Jesus answered his own question by saying: "John came unto you in the way of righteousness." (Matt. 21:25-32.) And of John, Luke records: "And all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him." (Luke 7:29-30.)

John came as the last legal administrator of the old dispensation; he overthrew the kingdom of the Jews, and he ushered in a new day. He was, as pertaining to the new kingdom, "the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned by their own law." (Teachings, p. 276.) It was now his baptism—"the baptism of John"—that counted, not any other. As it was among the Nephites when the Lord took a new dispensation to them, the Jews had to be baptized over again. John was the new head, for the moment, of the earthly kingdom; they must turn to him. He was now baptizing, and it was his baptism that was binding on earth and in heaven. [^1]

The Baptism at Bethabara

(Matthew 3:13-17; JST Matthew 3:42-46; Luke 3:21-23a; JST Luke 3:28; Mark 1:9-11; JST Mark 1:9)

All Christendom believes, as we suppose, that Jesus was baptized by John with water taken from Jordan. How and why and in what manner the ordinance was performed is a matter of the widest speculation, and, in many quarters, of almost total misunderstanding. In a great cathedral in Curitiba, Brazil, for instance, there is a stained-glass window depicting the baptism by John of the Lord Jesus. John is standing on dry ground on Jordan's bank; Jesus is standing ankle deep in the water itself; and John is pouring a handful of water from a cup onto the divine head. [^2] How much nearer the truth it would be if the picture had been chosen from the following:

Comes now John to Jordan on the crowning day of his life, the day when he, called and appointed and foreordained so to do, shall baptize the Son of God. Jesus is nearing the close of his long journey from Nazareth to Bethabara, to the spot on Jordan where John is preaching and baptizing. It is a clear, calm day; none of the storm clouds that will one day overshadow the Divine Presence have made their appearance; this is a day of peace and divine acceptance, a day when even the Father's voice will be heard by mortal man. Multitudes throng the banks of the Jordan. John preaches, as was his wont; he cries repentance and the Spirit of the Lord leads confessing and contrite souls to ask for baptism. John stands waist deep in the water, in a cove, where the current is quiet and the water calm. The new converts make their way to him, and one by one he immerses them in the water. He speaks to each soul a few words signifying his authority and the sacred nature of the holy ordinance here performed. The Lord is pleased with the foundations of the kingdom that are being laid.

Other activities occupy their time for a season. John, again on the bank, picks up the train of thought found in his earlier sermons. There are questions and answers. Believers feel fed by the Spirit; their souls are enlarged; it is good for them to be there. Unbelievers feel hate and resentment in their hearts, and animosity and bitterness show forth from their countenances. The crowd is smaller than it was—some have departed for their homes—but a faithful few still hang on every word. There is a momentary lull in the continuing expressions of doctrine and of testimony. One of dignity and majesty appears on the bank; he has come unexpected and unheralded. He steps forth from the throng. John stands still, and a wave of recognition floods his soul. It is He; this is the day; the hour has arrived. All eyes are on the two inspired men. The Holy One speaks: 'I am he of whom thou hast borne witness. I have come to be baptized.'

John is overwhelmed, subdued. In reverential awe he feels unworthy of the honor to baptize such a one. "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" he says, not quite having prepared himself for the privilege and the vision that are about to be.

Jesus answers: "Suffer me to be baptized of thee, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness."

Then John goes down into the water; Jesus follows. John, probably raising his right arm to the square, speaks some such words as these:

Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God: Having authority given me by him who called me and sent me and said unto me, Thou shalt baptize the Holy Messiah, even the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sins of the world, I now baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. [^3]

Then carefully, reverentially, he places Jesus under the water, and brings him forth out of the water—the immersion in the murky waters of Jordan is complete—and, lo, John sees the heavens open and the Holy Ghost descend in bodily form, in serenity and peace, like a dove. [^4] The sign of the dove is given, and the voice of the Father—graciously pleased that his Son has been baptized—speaks, and is heard by John's spiritually attuned ears and by the ears of all present who are in tune. It says:

This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him.

"Hear ye him!" The Father testifies of the Son; he introduces him to the world; and he commands: "Hear ye him!"

Why Jesus Was Baptized

He who was holy—who did no sin, in whose mouth was no guile, whose every thought and word and deed was perfect—even he came to John to be baptized. Why? Not for the remission of sins, for he had none; not to court popularity with the people who revered John, for his message was to stand or fall on its own merit; not because he needed spiritual regeneration, for the Spirit he had with him always—but he came to be baptized "to fulfil all righteousness," that is, to accomplish all that was required of him according to the terms and conditions of his Father's plan.

"And now, if the Lamb of God, he being holy, should have need to be baptized by water, to fulfil all righteousness," Nephi acclaimed, "O then, how much more need have we, being unholy, to be baptized, yea, even by water!"

Then Nephi asks how the Lamb of God, he being holy and needing no remission of sins, fulfilled all righteousness by being immersed in Jordan by John. His answer falls into five parts, and Jesus was baptized for these reasons:

And so it is that the Lord Jesus is baptized—to save himself and to mark the path in which all others must walk to gain the same salvation. And so it is that the miraculously born son of Zacharias, fresh from communing with the Lord in the desert, leads the Mortal Messiah down into the Jordan and immerses him in the murky water, from which watery womb he shall come forth, receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and go forth preaching and teaching. And so it is that he shall tread his way up the Holy Mount, on which his Father's voice shall once again be heard to say: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him" (Matt. 17:5); and so it is that he shall descend from the mount and continue his ministry, finally submitting to crucifixion at the hands of evil men—all "to fulfil all righteousness."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] To signify his humility before the Father; to show that "according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father." He is God's Almighty Son; he made the worlds; the sidereal heavens rolled into existence at his word; he has all power in heaven and on earth—and yet, as a perfect pattern of humility, he wades out into a dirty stream, whose waters are scarcely fit for human consumption, and permits a rugged, unpolished man from the desert to immerse him in baptism, because such is the law of the Lord. A somewhat analogous situation existed in the early days of this dispensation. Some new converts, having been baptized in other churches, felt they did not need to be baptized over again as members of the newly established kingdom of God on earth. In language that is applicable, in large measure, to the Jewish situation, the Lord said: "Behold, I say unto you that all old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing; and this is a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning. Wherefore, although a man should be baptized an hundred times it availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of Moses, neither by your dead works. For it is because of your dead works that I have caused this last covenant and this church to be built up unto me, even as in days of old. Wherefore, enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded, and seek not to counsel your God." (D&C 22:1-4.)
[^2] As a covenant of obedience; he "witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments." He came not to do his own will, but the will of the Father, who sent him. He was no more free of constraint and control than is any man. He walked the course set out for him because it was his Father's will, and he was under covenant, made in the waters of baptism, to do the will of the Father. In this same cathedral, in the stained-glass portrayal behind the altar, may be seen Mary, our Lord's mother, sitting as it were on a throne. On either side, with outstretched arms toward her, and holding jointly a crown, stand the Father and the Son. They are placing the crown on Mary's head. About the Holy Virgin flutters a dove, which is, no doubt, intended to be the Holy Spirit.
[^3] To receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; that is to say, to conform to the law that gave him the right to the constant companionship of that member of the Godhead. As we are aware, this was a formality only in his case, for he being holy and without sin, the Spirit was his companion always. At baptism he simply went through the form that is required for all men, and that he should have done so is manifest by the fact that "the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove." The words of the baptismal prayer have not been the same in all dispensations and for all people. It appears that the words spoken fit the needs and circumstances of the moment. When Alma took Helam into the waters of Mormon, he first cried out, "O Lord, pour out thy Spirit upon thy servant, that he may do this work with holiness of heart." Then, "the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and he said: Helam, I baptize thee, having authority from the Almighty God, as a testimony that ye have entered into a covenant to serve him until you are dead as to the mortal body; and may the Spirit of the Lord be poured out upon you; and may he grant unto you eternal life, through the redemption of Christ, whom he has prepared from the foundation of the world." (Mosiah 18:12-13.)
[^4] To gain an inheritance in the celestial kingdom; that is, his baptism "showeth unto the children of men the straightness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them." In other words, though he is the King of the kingdom, though he authors and proclaims his Father's plan of salvation, though he ordains and establishes the laws governing all things, yet he cannot enter the kingdom of heaven without baptism. All four Gospel authors record that the Spirit descended "like a dove"; Luke adds that he also came in "bodily shape"; and the Book of Mormon accounts say he came "in the form of a dove." (1 Ne. 11:27; 2 Ne. 31:8.) Joseph Smith said that John "led the Son of God into the waters of baptism, and had the privilege of beholding the Holy Ghost descend in the form of a dove, or rather in the sign of the dove, in witness of that administration." Then the Prophet gives this explanation: "The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of the dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence." (Teachings, pp. 275-76.) It thus appears that John witnessed the sign of the dove, that he saw the Holy Ghost descend in the "bodily shape" of the personage that he is, and that the descent was "like a dove."
