Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 25

The Temptation of Jesus

I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. (D&C 98:14.)

Lucifer and the Law of Temptation

Jesus, as our evangelical authors tell us, was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. As we shall see, however, he went into the wilderness, as guided by the Spirit, to be with God. Then, after forty days of fasting, prayer, and divine communion—and in connection with certain great spiritual experiences that then came to him—he was visited by the devil who came tempting, enticing, seeking to destroy the house of faith in which Jesus dwelt.

These recitations—that Jesus, the Son of God was tempted—give rise to speculation and wonderment as to how and why and whether he, a divine being, could be tempted. Theologians speculate as to whether he was peccable, that is, capable of being tempted and liable to commit sin, because of his human nature, or whether he was impeccable, that is, not liable to sin and thus one who was free from sin or stain, because of his divine nature. In reality there neither is nor should there be any great mystery here. Our Lord, as a mortal, was subject to the same laws of trial and testing that govern all mortals. An understanding of the laws governing temptation, and the reasons trials exist, will show why, after Jesus went into the wilderness to commune with God, who is the Author of all righteousness, he then came out to face Lucifer, the enemy of all righteousness.

This mortal life is a probationary estate; one in which every accountable soul must be tried and tested; one in which every man must be subject to the wiles and enticements of Lucifer; one in which all men must choose to worship the Lord, by keeping his commandments, or to follow Satan, by living after the manner of the world. Worship God or submit to Satan—succinctly stated, that is all that life is about. The Lord is worshipped when men adhere to his standards and emulate his way of life. "Be holy, for I am holy," saith the Lord. (Lev. 11:45.) The devil is worshipped when men adhere to his standards and emulate his way of life; when they are carnal, sensual, and devilish; when they forget the Lord and live after the manner of the world; "for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Ne. 2:27.)

Men must have a choice; they must be able to choose; there must be opposites; they must have agency; they must be free to worship the Lord or to follow Satan. All this is imperative. It is inherent in the whole plan of salvation. And unless men have the agency to choose to do good and work righteousness—and, in fact, do so—they cannot be saved. There is no other way.

"It must needs be"—that is, it is mandatory; it must be; it is part of the whole system of progression and salvation, and there is no other way to bring salvation to pass—"It must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." So says Lehi. "If not so," he continues, "righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad." If there were no opposites, nothing could exist. There can be no light without darkness; no life without death; no heat without cold; no virtue without vice; no sense without insensibility. There can be no righteousness without wickedness; no joy without sorrow; no reward without punishment; no salvation without damnation. If these things did not exist—that is, if there were no opposites; if there were no opposition in all things; if there were no agency; if men were not free to choose one course or another—such would, as Lehi says, "destroy the wisdom of God and his eternal purposes," and, indeed, should such be the case, and it is impossible that it could be, then "all things must have vanished away." (2 Ne. 2:11-13.)

If there is a God, there is also a devil. It is the Lord who invites and entices men, by his Spirit—the light of Christ—to choose the right; it is the devil who invites and entices men to choose evil works rather than good. The enticements of the devil are temptation, and temptation is, and "must needs be," an essential part of the plan of salvation. Through it are provided the allurements and worldly things that men must overcome in order to progress and gain that eternal life which is the opposite of eternal damnation.

Hence, there is—and must be—a devil, and he is the father of lies and of wickedness. He and the fallen angels who followed him are spirit children of the Father. As Christ is the Firstborn of the Father in the spirit, so Lucifer is a son of the morning, one of those born in the morning of preexistence. He is a spirit man, a personage, an entity, comparable in form and appearance to any of the spirit children of the Eternal Father. He was the source of opposition among the spirit hosts before the world was made; he rebelled in preexistence against the Father and the Son, and he sought even then to destroy the agency of man. He and his followers were cast down to earth, and they are forever denied mortal bodies. And he, here on earth, along with all who follow him—both his spirit followers and the mortals who hearken to his enticements—is continuing the war that commenced in heaven.

There is, then, a law of temptation. It involves the Eternal Christ, by whose power Lucifer fell as lightning from heaven, and it involves the mortal Jesus, who was subject to the wiles of the spirit Lucifer as he dwelt as a man among men. And that our blessed Lord came off triumphant on earth as he did in heaven, we all know, for which ministry of triumph and glory we praise his name forever.

Jesus Communes with God in the Wilderness

(Matthew 4:1-2; JST Matthew 4:1-2; Mark 1:12-13; JST Mark 1:10-11; Luke 4:1)

After his baptism by John in Jordan at Bethabara, two things happened in the life of our Lord that always come to pass in the lives of those faithful people who find their own Bethabaras and are immersed in their own Jordans by the legal administrators of their day: (1) the Spirit of God descended upon him with power though in his case that Spirit had ever guided his thoughts and words and acts, and (2) greater temptations confronted him than had ever been the case before.

After baptism of water comes the baptism of fire. After baptism—when converted souls commit themselves to the Lord's cause; when they covenant to forsake the world and serve the Lord—the devil tries even harder to lead them astray. Then it is that they are tested in all things to see if they will abide in the gospel covenant, even unto death, that they may be found worthy of a celestial inheritance.

Also, after his baptism Jesus did what every person who is born of the Spirit should do: he withdrew from the thronging masses of humanity to a place apart to commune with God. Matthew's account, as he originally wrote it, says: "Then"—that is, following his baptism—"Jesus was led up of the Spirit, into the wilderness, to be with God. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, and had communed with God, he was afterwards an hungered, and was left to be tempted of the devil." Mark tells us he "was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him." Nothing more of this forty-day period is recorded, but we cannot do other than conclude it was a time of rejoicing and spiritual refreshment beyond anything ever experienced by mortal man on earth.

Enoch "was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father, and of the Son of Man," and he beheld marvelous visions beyond anything that the mind of man can conceive. He saw all the spirits that God had created, the nations of mortal men, the coming of Christ and his crucifixion, the Second Coming of the Son of Man, the millennial era, and many other things that are not recorded. (Moses 6 and 7.) The brother of Jared talked for three hours at one time with the Lord and learned many of the wonders of eternity, which are so far beyond mortal comprehension that the Lord has not permitted them to be translated in our day. (Ether 2-4.) Moses saw worlds without number and their inhabitants, and confronted and withstood Satan face to face. (Moses 1.) Paul was caught up into the third heaven and saw wondrous things, "and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter." (2 Cor. 12:1-4.) Joseph Smith saw the Father and the Son and the vision of the degrees of glory. (JS-H 1; D&C 76; 137.) Great hosts of faithful people, in tune with the Infinite, have seen and heard the mysteries of the kingdom, things that are "only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him; To whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves; That through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh, they may be able to bear his presence in the world of glory." (D&C 76:114-18.)

If all these things, and more, happened in the lives of the prophets, what should we expect to find in the life of the greatest Prophet? If there are eternal laws by obedience to which men see visions and commune with the Infinite, what glorious communion with heaven should we find in the life of the one who obeyed all the laws ever given to mortals? If the veil has been rent for lesser men, and they have seen inconceivable glories and heard unspeakable words, what should we suppose was seen and heard by the greatest Man? Surely the spiritual stature of the Man Jesus was such that for forty days the lions and wild beasts treated him as they did Daniel. Surely the visions of eternity were opened to his view as they were to Paul and Joseph Smith. Surely he saw all that was seen by Enoch and Moses and Moriancumer. Surely there was purpose and preparation, refinement and testing, growth and development, during this period when our Lord's body was made subject to his spirit. Fasting and prayer and pondering and visions and revelations prepare men for the ministry, and it was no different, except in degree, where the preparation of the Lord Jesus was concerned.

The Temptation

(Matthew 4:3-11; JST Matthew 4:5-6, 8-9; Luke 4:2-13; JST Luke 4:2, 5-6, 9)

When man is communing with his Maker, he is not subject to temptation; when angels are ministering to him and he is under the spell of their angelic influence, he is not subject to temptation; when the Holy Spirit rests mightily upon him and the visions of eternity are open to his view, he is not subject to temptation. For forty days Jesus pondered upon the things of the Spirit, poured out his soul to his Father in prayer, sought diligently to receive revelations and see visions, was ministered to by angels, and was enwrapt in the visions of eternity—during all of which time he was not subject to temptation. We may also suppose that during this period he was "with God" in the literal sense of the word, and that the Father visited him.

As the period of edification and spiritual enlightenment drew to its close, as the visions and spiritual experiences ceased—except for two that we shall note shortly—and as Jesus prepared to go back into the normal mortal way of life, with angels no longer at his side and his eyes not open to the unending visions of eternity, then the devil came to entice, to trap, to tempt. Three times he tried and three times he failed, after which "he departed from him for a season," or, as it may be rendered, "till a fitting opportunity."

Jesus was "an hungered." For forty days and forty nights no morsel of food entered his mouth, no drop of water wet his parched lips or dripped down his throat. His extended fast left him weak physically. His body cried out for food, and he needed the strength that comes from a full stomach. His spiritual experiences were, for the moment, drawing to their close. The Divine Providence that calls upon men to fast and pray also expects them to end their fasts and cease their prayers and to take care of their physical needs. Men must eat bread or die, and the time had now come for Jesus to break his fast and to eat, perhaps the berries or locusts or wild honey that was available, and to drink refreshing draughts, perhaps from the nearby spring.

But first "the tempter came to him"—and we must assert that this was a personal appearance, one in which the spirit Lucifer, who was cast out of heaven for rebellion, came in person and spoke to Jesus face to face. It was no mere placing of thoughts in his mind, but an open and spoken conversation; "the tempter came to him" and said: "If thou be the Son of God, command these stones be made bread."

Why not? Had not Jehovah provided manna—which is bread from heaven—to all Israel, six days each week, for forty years, lest they die of hunger in the wilderness? Was it not the will of the Father that his Son now eat and regain his physical strength? And if Israel was fed by bread from heaven, when no other food was available, why would not Israel's Chief Citizen receive food in the same way? What would be wrong with duplicating for one day a miracle that had occurred on more than twelve thousand days when Moses and Aaron led Israel from Egypt to the very Jordan in whose waters he had but recently been immersed?

Actually there was no reason, save one, why food should not have been provided miraculously, which shows how devilishly devised the tempting challenge was—and for aught we know it may have been so provided at a later time. The one reason was: Lucifer had made the providing of food for Jesus' hungry body a test of his divinity. "If thou be the Son of God," do this thing. It was as though he had said: "Cut off your arm and restore it and then I will believe you are the Son of God and have the power you seem to think you have." Of course he could turn stones into bread; in less than two months he would turn water into wine in Cana; and not long thereafter, on two separate occasions, he would multiply loaves and fishes so that thousands could eat, which is to say, he would make food out of the elements that surround us.

But here Lucifer was challenging him to glory in his divinity and to prostitute his powers. He was demanding that he prove something that needed no proof. Jesus knew and Satan knew—both had perfect knowledge on the point—that our Lord was the Son of God. There was no need to prove it by turning stones into bread, even though he had the power, and even though the time was at hand when it was proper for him to eat and be filled. Indeed, if he had yielded to Lucifer, turning the stones into bread, it would have indicated a doubt in his own mind of his divinity; it would have shown he felt a need to prove that which needed no proof.

Jesus answered: "It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." Of all the inspired words ever recorded by the prophets who preceded him, these few constituted the perfect rebuke to the rebel Lucifer. They are taken from the very sentence in which Moses reminded Israel of the bread from heaven, as it were, with which they had been fed for forty years. "Thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness," Moses said, "to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no"—all of which is a type of the fasting and struggle of Jesus for forty days in the wilderness of his fast. Then came to Israel, by the mouth of Moses, the divine pronouncement: "And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live." (Deut. 8:2-3.)

That is, even as Israel relied upon Jehovah for their daily bread, lest they die physically, so they must rely upon him for the word of God, which is spiritual bread, lest they die spiritually. Neither temporal nor spiritual bread, standing alone, will suffice; man must eat of both to live; and in the eternal sense, the word of God, which is the bread from heaven in the full sense, is the more important. Those who make the search for earthly bread their chief concern lose sight of eternal values, fail to feed their spirits, die spiritually, and lose their souls. By choosing from the whole Old Testament the very words that show the relative worth of bread from the earth and bread from heaven, Jesus' triumph over Lucifer is complete. He, as the Son of God, chooses the bread from heaven and will find earthly food when his circumstances permit. He is master over the flesh; his appetites will be kept within the bounds set by divine standards.

We now come to one of the two remaining great spiritual experiences that were part of the period of fasting and testing to which Jesus was subject. "Then Jesus was taken up into the holy city, and the Spirit setteth him on the pinnacle of the temple," we learn from the Joseph Smith Translation. The Spirit did it, not the devil; how unthinkable it is that Lucifer would have power to transport the Son of God, or anyone for that matter, to a place of his choosing! He has no such power! Jesus was placed on the appointed pinnacle by the Spirit!

Other prophets had been and would be transported bodily from place to place by the power of the Spirit. Ezekiel was lifted up and carried by the Spirit. (Ezek. 8:2-3.) Nephi "was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceeding high mountain," upon which he "never had before" set his "foot." (1 Ne. 11:1.) Mary herself "was carried away in the Spirit" at the time of the conception of Jesus. (1 Ne. 11:19-21.) Nephi the son of Helaman "was taken by the Spirit and conveyed away out of the midst" of those who sought to imprison him, and thus "he did go forth in the Spirit, from multitude to multitude, declaring the word of God." (Hel. 10:16-17.) After Philip baptized the eunuch, "the Spirit of the Lord caught [him] away," and he was carried to Azotus. (Acts 8:39-40.) It is not an unheard of thing for the Lord, by the power of the Spirit, to transport mortals from place to place; and it would appear that Jesus was to have all the experiences enjoyed in mortality by any of the prophets who went before or who came after, excepting only that he was not translated and taken into heaven without tasting death as some had been and would be.

Why the Spirit took him to the pinnacle of the temple is not stated. Perhaps it was to show him the throngs of worshippers and let him see anew the sacrifices being offered in similitude of his coming sacrifice. In any event, "Then the devil came unto him and said, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down, for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone."

Here was a new temptation, more subtle than the first. Lucifer was now quoting scripture, a Messianic prophecy, which must be fulfilled. Perhaps Jesus could control his appetites and overcome the flesh, so be it; but would he dare refuse to conform to a Messianic prophecy? Jesus had chosen, by refusing to turn stones into bread, to put spiritual things ahead of temporal things, and so now Lucifer tempts him with reference to a spiritual matter: If our Lord is choosing to put the things of God's kingdom ahead of the things of this world, then let him cast himself down, for he will then fulfill a scripture and triumph before the people in a spiritual field.

"If thou be the Son of God," the tempter says, "then cast thyself down in the midst of the worshipping throng. If thou art the Messiah, surely thou wilt fulfill this Messianic prophecy; how else can it be fulfilled but by you on this occasion? And what a beginning for thy ministry! All men shall hear of the marvelous thing thou hast done! They will flock to hear your message, and you will be able to accomplish what you were sent to do! This is the very thing the Messiah must do to prove his divinity, and it must be done to commence your ministry. If thou be the Son of God, thou wilt surely cast thyself down. Now, do it now; this is the time; this is your great hour!"

Jesus replied: "It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." And again the answer was perfect. First, it was his witness that he was the Son of God: "Thou shalt not tempt me, for I am the Lord thy God. I am the God of Israel; I am the Messiah; I am the Son of God." Next, his quotation came from a context that forbids asking the Lord to perform miracles to prove he is the true God. Moses said: "Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in Massah." (Deut. 17:1-7.) And it was at Massah that the children of Israel, dying of thirst and perishing for want of water, as they supposed, demanded of Moses that he prove that the Lord was with them by providing water for them and their cattle. It was then that Moses smote the rock and the water gushed out, "because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not?" (Ex. 17:1-17.) For the second time our Lord's victory over Lucifer was total and triumphant. Seductive as the appeal was, he would not yield; his divinity was not to be proved by a plunge from the temple pinnacle, nor was his ministry to be announced by any such dramatic occurrence. He was his own witness, and the people, as in all ages, must come and hear a prophet's voice and choose for themselves whether to believe or to rebel.

After this, "again, Jesus was in the Spirit"—in the second spiritual experience to which we made reference—"and it taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them. And the devil came unto him again, and said, All these things will I give unto thee, If thou wilt fall down and worship me. Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." Thereupon Satan left him for a season.

In theory this should have been the least of all the temptations Lucifer could make to the Messiah. So here is the great Roman empire with Tiberius at its head; here are armies and navies and palaces and stately buildings; here are legions of men ready to bow the knee or draw the bow at a word from their ruler; here are the cattle and crops and vineyards on a thousand hills and in ten thousand valleys; here is the whole wealth of the whole world, plus all the power that goes with it—what of it?

Why offer a handful of dust, as it were, to him who created the earth, the universe, and the sidereal heavens, and whose destiny is to inherit, possess, and receive all things, and to have all power in heaven and on earth? Why should the Creator of all things be tempted, when a usurper who has momentary control over a few of them offers his handful back in return for obeisance and worship? But this is only the theory.

In practical reality this must have been the crowning test of the three. Jesus was a mortal man, and every mortal has planted in his heart the desire for wealth and power. One of the great purposes of mortality is to bridle this desire and to keep it under control.

Cain slays Abel to gain his flocks and herds; Esau sells his birthright for a mess of pottage; Joseph's brothers sell him to the Ishmaelites for a few pieces of silver; Judas plants the traitor's kiss for thirty pieces of silver; Ananias and Saphira hold back a part of the price of their property, and lose their souls in the process—such has always been the way with mortals. Women sell their virtue for a few baubles; politicians sell their souls to be elected to office; generals sell the lives of their soldiers to satisfy their vanity; merchants sell their integrity for a few paltry pence—such is the way of the world. And since our Lord's temptations were real and a part of his necessary trials and tests, we cannot do other than suppose that all the kingdoms and wealth and power of Satan's world must have seemed desirable to him. Men have the potential of becoming joint-heirs with him of all that his Father hath, and yet they sell their souls for naught. Why should he be subject to any less testing?

How apt are these words, quoted from Andrewes by Farrar: "There are some that will say that we are never tempted with kingdoms. It may well be, for it needs not be, when less will serve. It was Christ only that was thus tempted; in Him lay an heroical mind that could not be tempted with small matters. But with us it is nothing so, for we esteem more basely of ourselves. We set our wares at a very easy price; he [Lucifer] may buy us even dagger-cheap. He need never carry us so high as the mount. The pinnacle is high enough; yea, the lowest steeple in all the town would serve the turn. Or let him but carry us to the leads and gutters of our own houses; nay, let us but stand in our windows or our doors, if he will give us so much as we can there see, he will tempt us thoroughly; we will accept it, and thank him too. . . . A matter of half-a-crown, or ten groats, a pair of shoes, or some such trifle, will bring us on our knees to the devil." (Farrar, p. 105.)

Why Jesus Was Tempted

Jesus was tempted—if we may so say—to fulfill all righteousness. It was part of the eternal plan. It gave him the experiences he needed to work out his own salvation, and it prepared him to sit in judgment upon his erring brethren, who, in a lesser degree, are tried and tested as he was.

We have said his temptations were real. Whether we can understand how and why the things he underwent were real and genuine temptations is of no great moment; that we know he was called upon to choose the right in the hardest and most difficult situations ever imposed upon mortals will perhaps suffice. That his temptations were over and above those of any other person is shown from the Messianic prophecy: "Lo, he shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death." (Mosiah 3:7.) Of the temptation he suffered, after those of which we have here spoken, and before the trial in Gethsemane, he said to the Twelve: "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations." (Luke 22:28.)

Paul, as in so many other matters, is our best New Testament source of doctrinal exposition as to the temptations and sufferings of our Lord. To the Hebrews he wrote:

"It became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. . . .

"Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted. . . .

"Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. . . .

"Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." (Heb. 2:10, 17-18; 4:14-15; 5:8-9.)

The first Adam, yielding to temptation, brought death and sin into the world; the Second Adam, overcoming temptation, brought life and righteousness to men, because he overcame the world. Having been baptized and having come off triumphant in the war with Satan, he is now prepared to go forth on the greatest ministry ever wrought among men.
