Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 26

John Accomplishes His Mission

John saw and bore record of the fulness of my glory. (D&C 93:6.)

Two Men Called John

Two men called John sit together on the banks of the Jordan at the place called Bethabara. Both are devout and righteous souls who, like Simeon and Anna and many others, have been waiting for the Consolation of Israel; both believe the Messianic prophecies and desire to ally themselves with the Deliverer and Savior of whom they speak; both were foreordained for the ministries that are theirs; and both have the spiritual stature, acquired long before mortal birth, to recognize truth and comprehend the mysteries of the kingdom.

They talk of the hosts of Jews from all walks of life who are repenting and being baptized for the remission of sins. They discuss the words of their prophets and the hopes of their nation. As devout Jews they rejoice that the Promised Messiah is at hand. They marvel at the miracle wrought but a short time before in these very waters when one came to fulfill all righteousness by being baptized therein. They speak of the opening of the heavens and the descent—in calmness and serenity, like a dove—of the Holy Spirit of God; and their souls vibrate as they recount again the majesty of the occasion when the voice from heaven acclaimed: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him." These are true believers whose names shall be forever enshrined in the hearts of all like-minded souls who come after.

One of these men called John, at this point in their eternal association, is acting as a teacher, the other as a disciple. The teacher is the son of Elisabeth and Zacharias, and his miraculous conception, birth, name, and ministry as the Lord's forerunner were all foretold by Gabriel. He is now just past thirty-one years of age and has been preaching and teaching and baptizing for a year and a half. He is destined to do more teaching, to be imprisoned by Herod, to be slain, and then as a resurrected personage to restore in the latter days the Aaronic Priesthood. The disciple is the son of Zebedee and the brother of James. Probably a young man, scarce out of his teens, he is destined to be an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, to serve with Peter and James in the First Presidency, and to write the Gospel of John, the Book of Revelation, and three New Testament epistles. He is to become the Beloved Disciple and the Revelator, to be translated, and also to come again in the latter days, along with Peter and James, to restore the Melchizedek Priesthood.

John the Baptist also is destined to write of the gospel of that Lord whose witness he is, but his account, perhaps because it contains truths and concepts that the saints and the world are not yet prepared to receive, has so far not been given to men. On May 6, 1833, however, the Lord did reveal to Joseph Smith eleven verses of the Baptist's writings, and promised that "the fulness of the record of John" would be revealed when the faith of men entitled them to receive it. (D&C 93:6-18.)

From what has been revealed of the writings of the Baptist, and from what John the Apostle has written in his Gospel, it is clear that John the Apostle had before him the writings of John the Baptist when he wrote his Gospel. John 1:1-38 and John 3:23-36 are quoted or paraphrased from that which was first written by the Baptist, a reality that will be perfectly clear to all as we consider their content and message in detail. We shall now begin such a consideration.

John the Baptist—Our Lord's Witness

(John 1:1-12; JST John 1:10, 15; D&C 93:6-10)

John the Baptist, as we are aware, was "filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb"; "was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord"; and "was baptized while he was yet in his childhood." (D&C 84:27-28.) This we learn from latter-day revelation. Our New Testament account tells us that the son of Zacharias was in the desert, apart from men, as he prepared for his ministry. John himself speaks of someone who sent him to baptize with water and who told him he would see the Holy Spirit descend upon the Son of God and remain upon him. Jesus said John was a prophet and more than a prophet. As we are aware, he held the Aaronic Priesthood and the keys thereof while in mortality, both of which he restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in modern times.

Now, how much would such a man know about the plan of salvation, about the mysteries of the kingdom, about the divine mission of the one whose witness he was? Surely he would rank with the apostles and prophets of his age in greatness and spiritual stature, and from such fragmentary accounts of his doings and sayings as have come down to us, we are of the opinion that he did.

What visions, what revelations, what rending of the heavens enabled our Baptist friend to write of the Lord Jesus such things as these: "I saw his glory, that he was in the beginning, before the world was"—leading us to surmise that he saw, as Enoch and Abraham and Moses had each seen, a vision of preexistence and the spirits of men there assembled. "Therefore, in the beginning the Word was, for he was the Word, even the messenger of salvation—The light and the Redeemer of the world; the Spirit of truth, who came into the world, because the world was made by him, and in him was the life of men and the light of men."

These words rank with those of the greatest of the prophets. How aptly did John the Apostle distill their meaning in the beginning of his Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God," and so forth; and even how much more profound is the thought as it comes to us as perfected by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "In the beginning was the gospel preached through the Son. And the gospel was the word, and the word was with the Son, and the Son was with God, and the Son was of God." Also: "In him was the gospel, and the gospel was the life, and the life was the light of men; And the light shineth in the world, and the world perceiveth it not."

At this point the Gospel account acclaims: "There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. The same came into the world for a witness, to bear witness of the light, to bear record of the gospel through the Son, unto all, that through him men might believe." John knew and understood the gospel and the plan of salvation. He came, and he knew he came, so that all men might believe in the Son and be saved. The depth and breadth and height of his teachings compare with those of Enoch and Moses and Joseph Smith.

"He was not that light," the account continues, "but came to bear witness of that light, Which was the true light, which lighteth every men who cometh into the world; Even the Son of God." Christ is the Light, the one to whom all men must turn for salvation; the word and the truth that comes from him will save men. All of his prophets, even John, send forth only a reflection of the greater light. "The words were made by him; men were made by him"—meaning as he acted by divine investiture of authority from his Father—"all things were made by him, and through him, and of him," the Baptist said.

"The Word Was Made Flesh"

(John 1:13-14, 16-18; JST John 1:12-19; D&C 93:11-17)

"And I, John," says the son of Zacharias, "bear record that I beheld his glory, as the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, even the Spirit of truth, which came and dwelt in the flesh, and dwelt among us."

When this vision came and how much more the Baptist saw—and wrote—remains to be revealed. As he preached, month by month, to the throngs that came to him, the visions he had seen and the revelations he had received and the impressions borne in upon his soul by that Spirit which attended him from his mother's womb—all these must have been referred to and explained and quoted to the people. And his beloved disciple John, the future apostle, must have heard them orally even as he later received them on papyrus.

Of Jesus' birth the account now available says: "He was born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." That is: 'Jesus was born, but not as other men are—not of blood—not of a mortal father who had flesh and blood; he was born—not of the will of the flesh—for no mortal appetite or desire was involved; other men are conceived because of the love between parents, but Jesus had no mortal father; he was born—not by the will of man—but because his Eternal Father willed it. As the Eternal Word, he was made flesh to fulfill eternal purposes.'

"For in the beginning was the Word, even the Son, who is made flesh, and sent unto us by the will of the Father," the holy account continues. "And as many as believe on his name shall receive of his fulness. And of his fulness have all we received, even immortality and eternal life, through his grace."

And then, his forerunner John being the last legal administrator of the old Mosaic dispensation and the first administrator sent of God in the new Christian dispensation, how appropriate it is that the revealed record contrasts the two systems. "For the law was given through Moses, but life and truth came through Jesus Christ. For the law was after a carnal commandment, to the administration of death; but the gospel was after the power of an endless life, through Jesus Christ, the Only Begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father." We cannot believe other than that all these things were explained and taught on the banks of the Jordan, even as they should be known and taught today.

"And I, John"—it is the Baptist speaking!—"saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace; And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness; And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first. And I, John, bear record"—and here comes the account of what the Baptist saw as he brought the Lord Jesus up out of the waters of Jordan—"and lo, the heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove, and sat upon him, and there came a voice out of heaven saying: This is my beloved Son." This same John, looking forward to that day when Jesus would be raised in glorious immortality to receive that—and more—which was his before the world was, testified: "And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father; And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him."

One other truth, known of old and revealed anew in plainness in our day, we must record: "And no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son; for except it is through him no man can be saved."

How the cobwebs of the past are swept away when inspired men speak and write! How the fountains of truth pour out the waters of life when prophets of God are available to regulate the flow! How wondrous it is that we know as much as we do of that which was known anciently to two men called John!

And what a perspective it gives us of the mortal ministry of our Lord to know that all these things were known—and testimony was borne of them—even before he started his formal ministry. No doubt Jesus had done much informal teaching over the years, as he did when twelve years of age in his Father's House, and he may even have healed the sick and worked other miracles on special occasions. But his formal ministry, an account of which Divine Providence has preserved for us in the Gospels, began after his baptism, after his temptation, and, be it noted, after his forerunner had testified of him to the full to all who would listen.

Thus, as far as his formal ministry is concerned, at least, before Jesus taught the saving truths of his gospel; before he worked miracles; before he ministered comfort to the comfortless and gave hope to the downcast; before he called apostles and seventies; before any of the great events of his ministry were performed—before all this—the witness had gone forth; the testimony had been born; gospel truths had been taught; the people had been prepared for the Lord; the forerunner had done his work. The time had now come to transfer the responsibility for the kingdom, as it were, from John to Jesus.

John: Our Lord's Elias

(John 1:19-28; JST John 1:21-22, 26-28)

There was a tradition among the Jews, so we learn from the Talmud, that when the Messiah came he would cry repentance, and the new kingdom would be ushered in by a great movement of reformation. John's preaching was so persuasive—so powerful was the word of testimony that God had given him—that great hosts flocked to him from Jerusalem and all Judea. Believing souls were repenting; baptisms in great numbers were being performed; and a special people was being prepared for a new kingdom. Could this be the Messiah? Was John the one for whom the whole nation had so long waited? If he was not the Messiah, who then was he? And why was he baptizing and setting up a new organization among the people?

Accounts of his ministry—no doubt garbled and confused accounts, for they would have been carried by unbelievers who found fault and who sought to discredit the great movement now sweeping the nation—accounts of his ministry reached the scribes and leaders of Jewish thought. Even the Sanhedrin itself is assumed to have been concerned. These leaders—in effect the false ministers of the false sects of the day—would not deign to go and hear the teachings of an unlearned prophet, one who had not been trained for the ministry. But they would make inquiry; they would send a deputation, chosen from among the Pharisees; they would send priests and Levites to find out what was going on. Indeed, the movement had such popular appeal that they had no choice; they must know who this disturber was, who was disrupting their kingdom and their system of religion and worship.

There was also among the Jews a prevailing doctrine relative to Elijah (Elias), whose coming must precede that of Messiah, and also a prevailing doctrine relative to Elias, who should restore all things—their kingdom and glory and the truths and powers they once possessed. Portions of these doctrines remain to this day among devout Jews who set a special chair for Elijah at their Passover meals. The Jews of Jesus' day had scriptural passages relative to Elias and his ministry that we do not have, but even then their understanding of Elias and his mission was no more accurate than their knowledge of Messias and his mission.

And so the deputation came to John to propound three great questions, which he answered plainly and forthrightly:

'Yes; I am Elias. I am sent to go before the Lord in the spirit and power of Elias. My mission is to turn the hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, and to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. I am his forerunner; I hold the priesthood of Elias. But I am not that Elias who was to restore all things; his mission is greater than mine. I am sent to prepare the way for him.'

This, of course, is a Messianic prophecy, and the one like unto Moses was the Messiah and not another, though it was falsely assumed by many, in the day of which we speak, that Moses' words had reference to someone else, identified only as "that prophet." John's answer came in the negative; he was not "that prophet."

Having been so answered, the Pharisaic priests and Levites, who had yet to give answer to those in whose employ they served, had yet another question:

"Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not the Christ, nor Elias who was to restore all things, neither that prophet?" John answered: "I baptize with water, but there standeth one among you, whom ye know not; He it is of whom I bear record. He is that prophet, even Elias, who, coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose, or whose place I am not able to fill; for he shall baptize, not only with water, but with fire, and with the Holy Ghost."

And so it is that the way was prepared. John will continue to preach and baptize for nearly a year. But he has now prepared the way; an organized body of worshippers is awaiting the Messiah; John has borne the testimony he was sent to bear; and tomorrow and the day following we shall see him in process, as he continues to teach and testify of turning over the kingdom to Jesus and of saying to his own disciples: 'Follow thou him!'
