Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 27

Jesus Begins His Ministry

He went forth ministering unto the people, in power and great glory; and the multitudes were gathered together to hear him.(1 Ne. 11:28.)

"Behold the Lamb of God"

(John 1:29-34; JST John 1:30-32, 34)

Jesus is back from communing with his Father in the wilderness; his forty days and forty nights of fasting and prayer and spiritual experiences have been woven into the bones and sinews of his very being. He has now resisted the wiles of Satan, come off triumphant in temptations that were infinitely greater than any other person could have born, and overcome the world. He is now prepared to minister—formally and officially, using all his time, talents, and abilities—among his fellowmen. All that now remains is for his forerunner to make the great climactic pronouncement of Jesus' divine Sonship, and that the son of Zacharias is now prepared to do.

John has already told the deputation from Jerusalem that he, the son of Zacharias, is neither the Christ, nor Elias of the restoration, nor "that prophet" of whom Moses spoke, who, in fact, had they known it, was the Messiah. He has also told them that he is Elias the forerunner; that he has come to prepare a people for the Lord; and that the Lord, who is God's Son, the very Christ, now ministers among them, with power not only to baptize in water, as he, John, is doing, but also to baptize with fire and the Holy Ghost. The word has gone to the leaders of the people, and it is official. The deputation has come from the Sanhedrin, and has returned to report. The highest legal body of their people will now discuss the report and be apprised—however they may react—that a legal administrator, who had obvious power and authority, has told them in plain words that the Nazarene is the Messiah.

Our Lord's Elias—standing on the banks of the Jordan at the site called Bethabara, in the presence of Jesus but newly back from the wilderness, and in the presence of all the people—is now prepared to make the formal pronouncement.

What words of preparation and background he used we do not know; no doubt this great and formal introduction was the climax of a persuasive and powerful sermon. But when it came, it was in these words: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." The Lamb of God! He that taketh away the sin of the world! How fitting that John, a priest, who, like his father before him, had offered lambs in sacrifice on the great altar—to atone for the sins of repentant Israel—should now introduce his Master as the Lamb of God, as the one whose coming sacrifice would give efficacy, virtue, and force to all the sacrifices of the past and make freedom from sin available to all men!

This pronouncement—and surely the words spoken were chosen by the Holy Ghost, whose guidance was ever with John—surely this majestic declaration stirred in the hearts of his hearers a remembrance of Isaiah's Messianic teachings about the Lord's Suffering Servant who should come. John may even have quoted from Israel's Messianic prophet, as he had done in announcing that he himself was the voice of one crying in the wilderness: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God. . . . And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed." (Isa. 40:3-5.)

The Lamb of God! To be slain for the sins of the world! The Lord's Suffering Servant! The Promised Messiah!

Had not Isaiah said, "He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows"? Were we not promised that he would be wounded for our transgressions" and "bruised for our iniquities," and that "with his stripes we are healed"? Did not Isaiah say, "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all," and that "he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter"? The Lamb of God, brought as a lamb to the slaughter!

Does not the Messianic prophecy say, "He was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken"? Is it not written that "it pleased the Lord to bruise him," and that he should "make his soul an offering for sin"? Was he not to "see the travail of his soul," and to "justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities"? Were not these Isaiah's words: "He hath poured out his soul unto death; . . . and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors"? (Isa. 53.)

Surely John's formal introduction—"Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world"—crystallized, in the minds of receptive hearers, the whole purpose of four thousand years of sacrifices, all performed in similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father.

But John also "bare record of him unto the people, saying, This is he of whom I said; After me cometh a man who is preferred before me; for he was before me, and I knew him, and that he should be made manifest to Israel; therefore am I come baptizing with water. And John bare record, saying: When he was baptized of me, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. And I knew him; for he who sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me; Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he who baptizeth with the Holy Ghost."

John, having so testified, must now see to it that his disciples—all those baptized by him for the remission of sins—turn to Jesus and receive the promised baptism of the Holy Ghost. He must invite his followers to forsake him, as it were, and follow the one whom he had been sent to introduce.

John's Disciples Follow Jesus

(John 1:35-40)

John, who bore testimony of Jesus, did so for one reason and one reason only: he was seeking to persuade men to believe in Christ, to come unto him, to accept him as the Son of God, and to be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of his gospel. When John baptized for the remission of sins, he was not seeking disciples who would follow him, except as he guided them to the one who should come after. Indeed, the very remission of sins that he promised could not come until they received the Holy Ghost—the baptism of fire—which burns sin and evil out of a human soul as though by fire. John's whole purpose was to persuade his disciples to follow, not himself, but the Lord Jesus whose witness he was.

Thus, on the day after the great pronouncement in which he introduced Jesus and testified of his divinity, John was standing, still on Jordan's bank, with two of his disciples. Jesus walked nearby, and John said to his disciples—Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, and John, the future apostle and revelator—"Behold the Lamb of God!" We do not know what preceded or followed these words; it may well be they were accompanied by explanations relative to John's own ministry—his ministry as the Elias of Preparation—and that also of Jesus, who came as the Elias of Restoration for that day. In any event the two disciples left John and followed Jesus—which was the whole intent and design and purpose of John where they and all of his disciples were concerned.

And this raises a question of great import. Why did Andrew and John leave their Baptist friend—whose doctrines they believed, whose words thrilled their souls, and who had himself baptized each of them in Jordan—to follow another whom as yet they did not even know? What force impels these or any seekers of religious truth to forsake family and friends and possessions and to go they know not where, at the behest of others whom they do not know, but whose words they believe? The answer: they have what we call a testimony; they know in their souls of the truth of the Lord's work; and they are willing to forsake all else to follow the new light that has been kindled in their souls.

What is this thing that we call a testimony? It is the revealed knowledge that Jesus is the Lord; that he is the Son of the living God; that he was crucified for the sins of the world; that he has brought life and immortality to light through his gospel; that his is the only name given under heaven whereby men may be saved; and that his church and kingdom, in whatever age is involved, is the one place where salvation may be found. Such a testimony comes from the Holy Ghost, and from no other source. "By the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:5.)

When the Holy Spirit of God speaks to the spirit within a man—revealing truth, certifying that Jesus is the Savior—the person so blessed has a testimony. This witness comes whenever a person obeys the law upon which its receipt is predicated. "And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith." (D&C 42:14.) When a prophet or righteous man speaks by the power of the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost carries his words into the hearts of all who are in tune with the Spirit and bears record to such persons that the words spoken are true. The hearers, thus receiving truth from the Spirit, gain testimonies for themselves. Hence Paul's statement, "It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe." (1 Cor. 1:21.)

And so we find John bearing testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Lamb of God, the Savior of the world, whose atoning sacrifice frees men from an eternal burden of sin, and we find Andrew and John—themselves also in tune—receiving the witness in their hearts and knowing for themselves of the truth of what John said. With this knowledge they now have no choice. They must leave John and follow Jesus, for Jesus is the Lord. And so follow him they do.

Jesus, looking upon them, asks, "What seek ye?" They reply, "Rabbi, . . . where dwellest thou?" Jesus says, "Come and see." And they go and abide with Jesus that day, as their question indicates it was their desire to do. What they talked about that day we do not know, but when the day was over they knew, as they had aforetime learned from John, that he was the Messiah. They had determined henceforth to follow him, and they were ready to go out and bear testimony of his divine Sonship and enlist others in his cause.

The transfer of disciples from John to Jesus is now underway; the circle of loyalty toward the forerunner is being enlarged to take in the One who was to come, and we cannot but suppose that thousands of other devout and believing souls left the Baptist to follow the One whom he had baptized.

Jesus Calls Other Disciples

(John 1:41-51; JST John 1:42, 44)

Now the processes of conversion are beginning. Andrew and John have come into the fold. They know Jesus is the Lord—they have heard his voice and believed his words. Andrew now does what every new convert should do: he seeks out the members of his family so they too may receive the saving truths of the gospel. And so Andrew "findeth his own brother Simon," and says: "We have found the Messias." It is just that simple: there was no long period of growth and development; he did not need to hear many sermons and see many miracles; it is not something that he grew into gradually. Andrew knew whereof he spoke, and he knew it the very day he left John and followed Jesus. 'We have found the Christ; he is the Messiah; God's Son has come; he is the Deliverer; John testified of him; and we now bear record that John's witness is true.'

And so Andrew brought Simon—Simon Peter!—unto Jesus. Jesus said: "Thou art Simon, the son of Jona, thou shalt be called Cephas." This new name—"which is, by interpretation, a seer, or a stone"—forecast what was to be in the life of Andrew's brother, who was destined to be, under the Lord, the chief officer of the perfected church and kingdom, the foundations of which were then being laid. Peter, the Rock and the Seer, who would yet hold the keys of he kingdom of heaven; Peter, to whom the Lord would one day say that the gates of hell should never prevail against the rock of revelation and the seership of eternal vision—Peter has now come into the fold.

Whether Peter was one of the Baptist's disciples we do not know, nor do we know how much of the witness of the Lord's Elias he had heard. Having been found by Andrew and having come to Jesus, he was taught the gospel. His soul was open and he believed the message. He too knew, immediately and by instinct, as it were, of the divine Sonship of him whom he now chose to follow. The completeness and surety of the initial conversion of John and Andrew and Peter is attested to in these words of scripture: "And they were fishermen. And they straightway left all, and followed Jesus." Such is the mark of valiant souls who know whereof they speak. These disciples had testimonies of the truth and divinity of the work from the very day they met and were taught by the Lord Jesus. Thereafter they would be fed spiritually by his teachings and his deeds, but from the beginning they were forsaking all to follow him. Even their daily bread and that of their families must somehow be supplied by other means; they are laying down their nets to commence a work that will make them fishers of men.

On the next day, Jesus and his three disciples go into Galilee to a city called Bethsaida. There Jesus himself finds Philip, and says, "Follow me," which means that our Lord and the others told Philip all that had transpired in recent days. They taught him the gospel, told him of the Baptist's teachings and testimony, and, each in turn, bore personal testimony of Jesus' divine Sonship and of the Messianic ministry that was now commencing. Philip believes, not simply because two words are spoken to him, but because the message of salvation is expounded in plainness and by the power of the Spirit. His bosom burns within him, and he knows as the others know.

What then? Philip, being converted, finds Nathanael—who is believed to be Bartholomew, the apostle—and says, "We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph." Moses and the prophets wrote of the Messiah. Philip has gained his testimony, and he is now bearing it to his friend Nathanael. New converts seek out their friends, that they too may receive the light of heaven that has come into their souls. Philip calls Jesus "the son of Joseph," even as Mary said to the young lad in the temple, "Thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing," meaning that Joseph was assumed by those who knew the family to be the father of Him whose Father was divine.

Nathanael's response quotes a derogatory proverb of the day. "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" he asks. Philip's response is the persuasive comment: "Come and see." Whatever else Philip said, his explanations were sufficiently influential to cause Nathanael to accept his invitation. They go to Jesus, who says of the newly found disciple, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!"

Reacting quite naturally, Nathanael asks, "Whence knowest thou me?" Jesus' response is an exhibition of the gift of seership, the gift to see and have a complete awareness of events in the past, present, or future that transpire out of sight of the viewer. "Nathanael had undergone some surpassing spiritual experience while praying, or meditating, or worshiping under a fig tree. The Lord and giver of all things spiritual, though absent in body, had been present with Nathanael in spirit." (Commentary 1:134.) In answer to Nathanael's question, Jesus says: "Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee."

Perhaps our Lord went on to reveal to the future apostle what had actually taken place under the fig tree; and certainly, as Philip and Nathanael had traveled together to the place where Jesus was, there had been extended discussion of the testimony of the Baptist, of the reactions of Andrew and John and Simon, and of Philip himself. All this, coupled with Jesus' seeric declaration, caused the guileless Nathanael to formulate in words what already he had been phrasing in his heart: "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel." The fifth new convert had been added to our Lord's entourage as he prepared to go from Bethsaida, on the shores of the Sea of Galilee, to Cana, where he would change water into wine. Nathanael now knew as the others knew of the divinity of Him whom they had chosen to follow.

"Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou?" Jesus asked of his newest disciple, though in fact that was only the crowning cause of the testimony. Then he gave him this promise: "Thou shalt see greater things than these." He was to see greater things than he had seen under the fig tree, and have a greater manifestation of the gift of seership than Jesus had just shown forth. "Verily, verily, I say unto you," our Lord continued, "Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man." When and under what circumstances this prophetic utterance was fulfilled, we do not know; we have only the ever-present assurance that all things that this Man ever spake came to pass according to his word.

Jesus here calls himself the Son of Man—not in allusion, as is falsely supposed by the scholars of sectarianism, to his humanity, as inherited from Mary but he calls himself the Son of Man because God, who is his Father, is a Holy Man. "In the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ." (Moses 6:57.)

All of those whom he has so far called as his special disciples, as his traveling companions, as those who are to forsake all and follow him in his ministry, as those who one day will be called to the holy apostleship—all of these have borne testimony that they know he is divine. They have said he is the Messias; he is the one of whom Moses and the prophets wrote; he is the Son of God; he is the King of Israel. This has been their witness. Now Jesus speaks forth his own testimony of himself. He is the Son of Man, the Son of Man of Holiness, the Son of that Holy Being whom their fathers worshipped in Jehovah's name.

Truly Jesus' ministry has begun. He is teaching the gospel. He is calling disciples to forsake all and follow him. He is accepting their Spirit-born witness that he is God's Son, and he is adding his own testimony that their words are true, saying in his own words, 'I am the Son of Man, the Son of God. Follow thou me.'
