Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 28

Jesus Begins His Miracles

The Lord Omnipotent . . . shall go forth amongst men, working mighty miracles, such as healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases. (Mosiah 3:5.)

Miracles—Their Nature and Occurrence

Jesus is in Cana of Galilee at a wedding feast. At his mother's earnest entreaty he turns water into wine; about one hundred fifty gallons of water become wine of delicious taste and superior quality, excelling whatever else the guests had been drinking.

It is a miracle, the first public miracle of a great ministry of miracles. Shortly, at his word, the lame shall leap, the blind see, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. We shall soon see the sick healed, paralyzed bodies regain their vigor, and lepers cleansed. He will multiply loaves and fishes, calm storms, and walk on water. He will curse a fig tree, restore a severed ear, and even say to a rotting and stinking corpse: 'Arise; be made whole; live again!'

The Lord Jesus—the Lord of life—is going forth to heal the sick, cast out devils, and raise the dead, and to perform such marvelous miracles that none who know of them—except those who love darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil—can do aught but say: 'Truly, this is God's Son; he is the Messiah. Let us follow him, and he will save us!'

One by one we shall see him perform his mighty works, and—though we know he is God's Son—yet we shall marvel at the deeds he will do. But as a prelude we must be reminded of the law of miracles and tell ourselves anew of the marvelous way in which the Lord always and everlastingly deals with his people.

What then are miracles, and how are they wrought?

Miracles defy full definition; they are manifestations of the power of God in the lives of men. That which was a miracle yesterday may be commonplace today, and some of the most common events are the greatest miracles. Birth and life and existence—these are miracles, and yet few so consider them. Death is a miracle, as is resurrection, and what is a greater miracle than the cleansing of a sin-sick soul through repentance and the receipt of the Holy Spirit?

We ordinarily think of miracles as those signs and wonders and marvels which God does for his people because they have faith in him, and which they cannot do for themselves. More often than not these performances seem to transcend natural laws, though in fact they are always in complete harmony with them, and are simply the manifestations of higher laws not generally known to mortal men.

Miracles are part of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. They are one of the chief characteristics of true believers. Where they are found, there are the Lord's people; where they are not found, there the Lord's people are not. They are the signs that Deity gives to identify those who have faith. Faith is power, the power of God. Unless men have power, among other things, to perform miracles, they do not have faith.

God is a God of miracles; everlastingly, always, and without exception, he performs miracles among his people. The decree is that signs shall follow them that believe; unless the signs are present, the beliefs involved are not founded on the Rock of Eternal Truth, who is Christ. God is an "unchangeable Being," a Being "with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning"—if it were not so "he would cease to be God," which he cannot do. And because he is "the same yesterday, today, and forever," miracles are always found among those who have faith. (Morm. 9; James 1:17; Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 506-8.)

Adam, as Michael, took part in the creation of the earth; and what is a greater miracle than to take unorganized matter and so arrange it that life in all its forms and varieties—including man—can dwell on the planet thus provided for mortal habitation? "Through faith [which is power, God's power] the worlds [this world and all others] were framed by the word of God." (Heb. 11:3.)

And if the earth was made by faith; if great mountains and small streams came into being by God's power; if seas and dry lands took their place because of faith; if storms and tempests and all the elements were set in being by the miracle of creation, why not continue to control and govern all these things by the same power? What is more natural than to see Enoch and Moriancumer move mountains and turn rivers out of their courses? Why should we think it impossible for Moses to part the Red Sea so that its waters congeal into walls on the right hand and on the left? Or what question should arise because Joshua stops the sun, or Jesus stills the storm or walks on the water? Where there is faith, all needed miracles are forthcoming.

Melchizedek, while yet a child, closes the mouths of lions and quenches the violence of fire: Moses and Aaron pour out plagues upon Pharaoh and his people, even to the point of slaying the firstborn in every Egyptian family: Elijah calls down fire from heaven to destroy his enemies, and multiplies the meal and the oil of a widow, whose son he raises from death; and so on and so on and so on. All these miracles—and they are but samples of what has been—are performed in the name of Christ, by the power of Christ, because men had faith and because signs always follow those who believe.

And it is so obvious that it scarce needs stating, that if the Lord's prophets are dividing seas and stopping the sun, they are also healing the sick and opening the eyes of the blind. For instance: "There were great and marvelous works wrought by the disciples of Jesus, insomuch that they did heal the sick, and raise the dead, and cause the lame to walk, and the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear: and all manner of miracles did they work among the children of men; and in nothing did they work miracles save it were in the name of Jesus." (4 Ne. 1:5.)

And it also scarce needs stating, so obvious is the fact, that the Son of God in his mortal ministry, sent as he was to labor among men and to save that which was lost, was destined to perform more miracles and work more wonders than any of the prophets who went before or who shall come after. In this, as in all things, he is the pattern.

The Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee

(John 2:1-2; JST John 2:1)

Jesus and his disciples—Andrew, John, Simon Peter, Philip, and Nathanael-Bartholomew, five noble souls who one day will be apostles—are in Bethsaida on the shores of the Sea of Galilee. The newly called followers of the Messiah are basking in the glory of his presence and in the new light of testimony that has come into their lives. They are all, both Jesus and the disciples, "called" to a marriage and to a marriage feast in nearby Cana—Cana of Galilee, a little village whose name is everywhere known for one reason and one reason only: our Lord performed his first public miracle there.

The Blessed Mary seems to be in charge of the festive portions of the wedding celebration, but no mention is made of Joseph, giving rise to the assumption that he has now passed on to that paradise where the righteous find peace and rest. John's account says the disciples were called, without indicating by whom or on what authority. Shall we not say—since Jesus' ministry has now begun and nothing must be permitted to interfere with it—that their presence was required, that one or more of them was an essential part of the proceedings that ever thereafter would be remembered for the miracle that was then to occur. Scholars generally feel that some member of the Holy Family was being married, and that Mary was supervising and guiding what went on.

Marriages and all that attended them had a significance and an import among the Jews that bespoke the divine origin of the sacred ordinance. They and their fathers believed that a proper marriage in the house of Israel had eternal implications. In Jesus' day there was a formal betrothal ceremony, after which the parties—as pertaining to inheritance, adultery, and the need for a formal divorce—were considered as married, except that they did not live together as husband and wife until after the later and second ceremony.

Devout persons fasted and confessed their sins before marriage and believed they gained a forgiveness of sins by entering the holy order of matrimony. They even had an allegory among them that God Himself had spoken the words of blessing over the cup at the union of our first parents, when Michael and Gabriel acted as groomsmen, and the angelic choir sang the wedding hymn." (Edersheim 1:353.)

On the evening of the marriage, the bride was taken in a bridal procession to her husband's home. It was customary for friends and neighbors and onlookers to join the procession. A formal ceremony was performed; a legal instrument was signed; the required washings were performed and benedictions spoken; the cup was filled, blessed, and drunk; and the marriage supper commenced. The marriage feast lasted from a day to a week or more, with a governor of the feast acting as master of ceremonies.

Jesus' attendance at the marriage in Cana and his participation in the marriage festivities—whatever the reason and whatever the part he played—puts a divine stamp of approval upon marriage and its attendant festivities. Those who forbid marriage to any portion of their adherents are not of God. Also, at the very beginning of his ministry it dramatized the course his ministerial service would take. Whereas John, the last legal administrator of the Old Order, had come fasting, praying, obeying the letter of the law, a prophet of the traditional mien, garbed in garments made of camel's hair—our Lord, the great Prophet of the New Order, came eating and drinking and associating with his fellows in a friendly and easy manner. His was to be a ministry among and with people, a ministry to touch the lives of men in ways in which they had never been touched before. And indeed, where better could he begin his ministry of public miracles than at a wedding feast, and upon an occasion when joy and rejoicing were in every heart?

Jesus Turns Water into Wine

(John 2:3-12; JST John 2:4, 9, 11)

Every hour of every day somewhere on earth the Lord turns water into wine. By his power, pursuant to the laws he has ordained, men prepare the soil and plant the vine; from the good earth, from the rains that fall, and from the light of the sun, the vine takes nutrient, grows, and bears fruit; men dung it and dig about it and prune it, and the fruit matures and ripens: they harvest the crop and process it in the wine vat; and it comes out as wine on the lees well refined. It is a miracle. He who has given a law unto all things provides the way and the means; the water and the elements that could turn into raisins become wine instead. Life in all its forms is a miracle, and the transmutation, as it were, of one substance into another is a part and portion of earthly existence.

But in March of A.D. 27 in Cana, an obscure village of Galilee that would not even be known today, had not this event occurred there, the Lord of life—who is the very one who gave a law unto all things, by which they grow and are and change—he who is the Lord Jesus, turned water into wine, in an instant, suddenly as it were, by laws known to him but unknown to us. It was a miracle, the first of his public miracles.

"The miracles of Christ were miracles addressed," Farrar says, "not to a cold and skeptic curiosity, but to a loving and humble faith. They needed not the acuteness of the impostor, or the self-assertion of the thaumaturge. They were indeed the signs—almost, we had said, the accidental signs—of his divine mission; but their primary object was the alleviation of human suffering or the illustration of sacred truths, or, as in this instance, the increase of innocent joy. An obscure village, an ordinary wedding, a humble home, a few faithful peasant guests—such a scene, and no splendid amphitheatre or stately audience, beheld one of Christ's greatest miracles of power." (Farrar, pp. 127-28.)

At some point in the wedding festivities, apparently after the joyous feast had gone on for some time, "the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no wine." That she felt some obligation to the assembled guests none can doubt, and that she expected her Son to do something about it is also clear. Perhaps Jesus himself, at this particular marriage supper, had a personal obligation to look out for the well-being of the guests and see that they wanted for nothing. Eastern hospitality was of such a nature that it would be a matter of great embarrassment to those in charge of the festivities if the needs of the guests went unheeded.

But we are left to surmise what Mary expected Jesus to do, and it is not unreasonable to conclude that she wanted him to use his divine power. She knew God was his Father; she knew of the angelic message sent at his birth, and of the heavenly choirs that sang hosannas to his name; she had heard the testimony of Simeon and Anna in the temple; she had seen the wise men from the East and heard their witness; she knew of the angelic direction Joseph had received; and she had received the gentle rebuke, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" when she and Joseph found their twelve-year-old teaching in the temple. Of all this we are certain.

And we cannot avoid the conclusion that between Jesus' twelfth and thirtieth years there were many marvelous and miraculous things of which Mary knew. There is no reason to believe there was a spiritual drought of eighteen years, a period when all that was divine and heaven-guided should be obscured. Nor can we avoid believing that Mary was made aware of the mission and testimony of John—her first cousin once removed, the son of her confidante and counselor Elisabeth, the one whose birth Gabriel had also heralded.

Surely she would have been told of her Son's baptism—if indeed she was not present—and of the descent of the Holy Ghost upon him, and of the voice from heaven which said: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him." She may already have learned of Jesus' forty days in the wilderness and of the spiritual experiences and the temptations incident to them. And we would suppose that accounts of the conversion of the first disciples had reached her. The five who were with Jesus at the marriage would have sought her out to recount how they knew that the fruit of her womb was, as Philip expressed it, "Him of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write," or as Nathanael testified "The Son of God . . . the King of Israel."

In this setting, how can we do other than suppose that Mary expected her Son to provide the wine that would assure the success of the celebration then under way.

Jesus' reply seems to contain—as did his words as a twelve-year-old in the temple—a mild reproof. "Woman," he said—a form of salutation that was respectful according to the language and customs of the day, a form of salutation that he would again use as he beheld her at the foot of the cross and was lovingly putting her in the care and keeping of his beloved John—"Woman" he said, "what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come." It is as though he said: 'Please, I am no longer placed in your care. No longer am I subject to the guidance of an earthly mother. My ministry has commenced. I am on my Father's business, and I must make the choices. I will determine when the hour is ripe to perform miracles, to preach, to do all that I am sent to do.'

His mother, understanding, knowing him and his ways, aware of their relationship, and receiving his gentle reproof, yet having perfect confidence in him and knowing her request was right and would be granted said to the servants: "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it."

Now it was the practice of the Jews—pharisaically imposed and rabbinically endorsed—to wash, for ritualistic and purification purposes, their hands before and after eating and also to wash the vessels used. The regulations and procedures, set out in the Mishnah and Talmud, were burdensome, unrealistic, and detailed. In the house in Cana six waterpots of stone were available for this purpose. Apparently they were empty, but each, when full, may have held as much as twenty-five gallons, making as much as one hundred fifty gallons of water available for the ritualistic performances of that abode.

Jesus said to the servants, "Fill the waterpots with water." They filled them to the brim. "Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast," he said; and they did so.

Tasting "the water that was made wine," and not knowing whence it came, though the servants knew, the governor said to the bridegroom: "Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine; and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou hast kept the good wine until now."

We can well imagine the sense of reverential awe that came into the hearts of the revelers as the servants let it be known what Mary's Son had done. And we can suppose that all the villagers wondered and asked, as they heard the account, 'What manner of man is this? We thought he was a carpenter of Nazareth; can he be the Messiah, as some say?' John says that by this act, Jesus "manifested forth his glory; and his disciples believed on him." Miracles follow faith, and miracles strengthen faith.

Jesus turned water into wine. Did he speak out or merely will it so? No matter; it is the deed that counts. He who but shortly before had refused to turn stones into bread to feed his own famished soul, and that for good and sufficient reasons, now provided sweet nectar for others that they might add to their already stated pleasures, as they rejoiced with a bride and a bridegroom in their newfound happiness. Ought we not also to turn the ordinary waters of life—the ritualistic and mundane washings and performances that go with mortality—into the wine of righteousness and joy that dwells in the hearts of those whose lives are purified?

After the wedding feast Jesus, Mary, her other sons, and the five disciples went to Capernaum, where they stayed until time to go to the Feast of the Passover in Jerusalem, which our Lord must needs attend and where his ministry was to take a turn and gain a prominence that none but he could now foresee.
