Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 29

Jesus Ministers at the Passover

I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children. For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me. (Ps. 69:8-9.) [^1]

Jesus Attends the Feast of the Passover

(John 2:12-13)

Our Blessed Lord, after turning water into wine at the wedding celebration in Cana—which was in March of A.D. 27, according to the chronology we are using—chose for himself a city of residence, a home base as it were for the years of his active ministry. That city was Capernaum. Matthew says he "dwelt" there, that it was "his own city." (Matt. 4:13; 9:1.)

We are left to suppose that Mary and her other sons also now lived in this beautiful spot on the shores of the Sea of Galilee; at least they traveled with Jesus from Cana to Capernaum after the wedding feast. We know it was the home of Peter and Andrew, and of James and John, and that it was the place where Matthew sat as a collector of customs. It may be that on the occasion of this visit—for Jesus traveled much and abode in many places during the years of his ministry, and indeed had no permanent place to lay his head—it may be that he stayed with his family members. On later occasions it was his wont to stay with Peter.

Capernaum, itself in the days of Jesus, lay amid the wealth and prosperity of Palestine. The fertility of the plain of Gennesaret was legendary; the district itself was spoken of as "the garden of God" and as "paradise." It was here that Capernaum and numerous other cities, all exceeding fifteen thousand in population, were located. The Sea of Galilee, otherwise called the Lake of Gennesaret, was plied by four thousand boats. Industry, agriculture, and commerce thrived in all the cities there located.

Jesus' choice of Capernaum as the city of his abode placed him in the mainstream of Galilean life, in the midst of a people—part Jewish, part Gentile—where he, as the Light sent forth "to lighten the Gentiles," could fulfill Isaiah's Messianic utterance: 'In the land of Zebulun and of Naphtali, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the Gentiles, the people that walk in darkness shall see a great light; they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them shall the light shine.' (Isa. 9:1-2.)

And shine it did, as shine it must, for a short season, following which Capernaum, then exalted to heaven, would be brought down to hell. "For if the mighty works, which have been done in thee," Jesus would soon say, "had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day." (Matt. 11:23-24.) Today we do not so much as know the site of ancient Capernaum.

But Jesus' stay in Capernaum on this occasion was brief. John says that "he, and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples"—including, at least, Peter, Andrew, John, Philip, and Nathanael-Bartholomew—"continued there not many days." It would appear that the whole group of them then "went up to Jerusalem" with Jesus, because "the Jews' passover was at hand." Perhaps Jesus, during his brief stay there, had some opportunity to preach and teach in the streets; certainly any Sabbaths would have seen him in the synagogue teaching doctrine, bearing testimony, and working miracles. But the Passover, and the Feast of Unleavened Bread, which was linked with it, was now to receive the chief attention of the little group. In the year A.D. 27 these festive events covered the period April 11 to 18.

This Passover time—the first of four during Jesus' mortal ministry—was a glorious time of festivity and worship when every faithful male in Israel, if he could possibly arrange it, presented himself before the Lord in the Holy Temple in the Holy City. As the First of the Faithful, Jesus must do his duty and go to worship in his Father's House.

There again, as when first he went up at the age of twelve, and as when he attended during all the years of his preparation, he will mingle with the worshipping throngs and feel the spirit of a people set apart from all nations because they worship Jehovah and sacrifice to his holy name. There, as is his wont, he will keep the feast, eat the paschal lamb, and renew his covenant to serve God and keep his commandments—all in connection with the sacrificial offerings that will be made, legally and officially, by those holding the Priesthood of Aaron.

But this time—with holy zeal, for was it not written, "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up"?—this time he himself, the future Paschal Lamb, will minister as none others had before done in that house which his Father still owns, but which has been desecrated by designing and sinful men whose hearts are set on money and carnal things rather than upon the great sacrificial ceremonies that would have freed them from their sins.

Jesus Cleanseth His Father's House

(John 2:14-17)

Arriving in Jerusalem to keep the Feast of the Passover, Jesus and his friends found their way to the Holy Temple, as all who came up to the Holy City to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, at that season must needs do. He and his disciples came to his Father's House, to the House of the Most High God, to the house where all Israel had been commanded to worship the Father in the name of the Son by the power of the Holy Ghost. He and they came to join in worship of the Supreme Being, to place themselves in tune with the Infinite, to renew their covenants, and (in the case of all save the Sinless One who led the group) to receive a remission of their sins through the sacrificial ordinances that would be performed by those legal administrators who sat in Aaron's seat.

His Father's House! Outwardly a house of glory and honor, with solid gold covering the great marble stones of the inner temple building; the great altar of unhewn stones in daily use; the holy place, containing the table for the Bread of the Presence, the golden candlestick, and the altar of incense, in constant use; the veil and the Holy of Holies, into which the high priest went each year to make an atonement for the sins of the people, as it should be—outwardly, in architecture and form and magnificence, his Father's House was, for that day and time, as it should have been.

But inwardly it was full of ravening wolves, as it were, of greedy souls who made merchandise of sacred things, and whose hearts were sealed against the true meanings and purpose of the sacred ceremonies designed for that holy place. It is no wonder that the Shekinah no longer rested in the Holy of Holies, nor would it have done so even if the ark of the covenant—with the tables from Sinai, the Urim and Thummim (as we suppose), the mercy seat of pure gold, and the Cherubim—had been present as of old. It was to this spiritual wickedness that a righteously indignant Son of God now addressed himself.

Having passed through the vendor-crowded streets where hawkers of wares sought to profit from the traveling worshippers; having been enticed to buy salt and oil and wine and all else for sacrifices; having been offered clay dishes and ovens for the Passover lamb; having faced the higher prices made possible by the tourist trade, Jesus and his group came into the outer court, the Court of the Gentiles. There they looked upon a scene of unholy merchandising that desecrated the temple and testified against those who were engaged in its money-grubbing practices. There they saw the moneychangers, those who examined sacrificial animals for a fee, the sellers of sheep, and the hawkers of oxen and doves. The noise and the haggling destroyed every vestige of reverence; the lowing of cattle and the bleating of sheep drowned out the priestly performances nearby; and the filth and stench of the barnyard so overpowered the senses that arriving pilgrims soon lost the desire to worship the Lord in Spirit and in truth. It was a scene of desecration, of physical filth, and of spiritual degeneracy.

Moneychangers in the temple of the Lord! Greed and avarice and sharp dealing replacing the spirit of true worship! True it was that each year all Israel, both Jews and proselytes—women, slaves, and minors excepted—had to pay the atonement money to ransom their souls. This temple-tribute of half a shekel, payable only in the shekel of the Sanctuary, gave rise to a thriving and profitable exchange business. Palestinian, Roman, Grecian, Egyptian, Tyrian, and Persian coins, among others, were in common circulation in the Holy Land. Money-changing involved weighing the coins, taking deductions for loss of weight, arguing, debating, disputing, bargaining, oftentimes using scales of questionable accuracy. Tables piled high with coins of all denominations and nations were the stock in trade of those who charged a fixed fee, and more, in the lucrative enterprise.

For a fee those who brought their own sacrificial animals had them examined at the temple for Levitical fitness. All that was needed for meat offerings and drink offerings was for sale within the sacred walls. Oxen, sheep, and doves could be purchased outright. There is a record of Baba ben Buta bringing in three thousand sheep at one time for sale in the Court of the Gentiles. Great herds of cattle and tiers of wickers filled with flocks of doves were more the rule than the exception. A courtyard paved with marble, that could accommodate two hundred and ten thousand people had ample room for the needed sacrificial animals, for those who bought and sold, and for those who weighed and haggled as coins exchanged hands.

Profits earned or extorted through all this sacrifice-related merchandising went both to individuals and to the temple officials. Sums paid for the items needed for meat and drink offerings went directly to the temple; others paid rent for the use of temple space. Even a temple market, referred to as the bazaars of the sons of Annas, occupied part of the space in the court. Annas was, of course, the high priest before whom Jesus would stand in three years during another Passover season. There was considerable popular resentment against the sons of Annas and their temple merchandising. "From the unrighteousness of the traffic carried on in these Bazaars, and the greed of their owners," Edersheim says, "the 'Temple-market' was at the time most unpopular." Because of the prevalent abuses, he says, it is "no wonder that, in the figurative language of the Talmud, the Temple is represented as crying out against them: 'Go hence, ye sons of Eli, ye defile the Temple of Jehovah!' " (Edersheim 1:371-72.) [^2]

This popular feeling relative to the merchandising practices that desecrated the temple enables us to see why there was no popular outcry when Jesus drove out the cattle and the money-changers. Aside from the fact that the targets of his indignation had their mouths closed by their own guilty consciences, the cleansing act performed by our Lord seems to have met with popular appeal among the people.

We have no doubt that the eyes of many were upon Jesus when he entered the Temple Court. It was as though the Lord whom they sought had "suddenly come to his temple." He was there in person, the Incarnate Jehovah, not to "purify the sons of Levi" (Mal. 3:1-3), as he would do at his Second Coming, but to drive out both the men and beasts whose filth and dung desecrated the Holy Place.

We are confident that word of his coming had preceded him. John's testimony that Jesus was the Lamb of God had not been borne in a corner. All Jerusalem had heard the word. The testimonies of his own disciples had surely been noised about, and the Galilean pilgrims who came to the Passover would not have hesitated to speak of the water that became wine.

And so, as the center of attraction, with many waiting and wondering what this new Rabbi would do, he who eighteen years before had said, within these same walls, that he must be about his Father's business, now engaged in that business with vigor and vengeance.

Sickened by the stench and the filth, repulsed by the jangling and haggling as paltry coins were exchanged, saddened by the complete absence of spirituality with which the chosen people should have been so richly endowed, the Son of Him whose house these evil miscreants then desecrated "made a scourge of small cords." Then, filled with indignant justice, his righteous anger blazing forth in physical strength, he of whom Moses had said, "The Lord is a man of war" (Ex. 15:3), this Galilean from Nazareth, drove out the sheep and the oxen and those in whose custody they lowed and bleated.

To the keepers of the doves he commanded: "Take these things hence." With force and violence he overturned the tables of the moneychangers, scattering their ill-gotten coins amid the dirt and dung on the marble floor. To those who bought and sold, who haggled in the temple bazaars, and whose hearts were set on laying up treasures on earth rather than in heaven, with a voice of authority he decreed: "Make not my Father's house an house of merchandise."

Truly, as Peter and John and Andrew and Philip and Nathanael and all his disciples saw this open and bold ushering in of our Lord's Messianic ministry, they rejoiced in what he did and remembered the Messianic words of Israel's greatest king: "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up."

"My Father's house!" "Thine house," O God, 'for thou art my Father.' When but a lad of twelve, when a mature man of thirty—during all the years of his life and ministry—Jesus, freely openly, publicly, to all men, be they devoted disciples or sinning scribes, was bold to announce that God was his Father. Even the cleansing and purifying of the house Herod had built for the Hebrews became an occasion for such a solemn declaration. Jesus was God's Son. He knew it, and he wanted all men to gain the same sure knowledge.

Jesus Foretells His Own Death and Resurrection

(John 2:18-25; JST John 2:22, 24)

Jesus has driven the cattle and sheep from the Court of the Gentiles; the cages of doves have been removed from the sacred site; the coins and scales of the bankers, who contended over the weight of their coins, are lying in the rubble; and the temple bazaars of the sons of Annas the high priest are in shambles. Merchandising in the temple has ceased, and profits are no longer flowing into the pockets of the rapacious and priest-appointed merchants who plied their wares among the Passover throngs. Indeed, their flocks and herds are scattered, their coins lost, and their merchandise destroyed. The loss to individuals and to the temple treasury itself is of giant proportion.

And yet there is no public outcry. No Roman soldiers have come to keep the peace. No one calls for Jesus' arrest. No one even berates him for causing a disturbance or for destroying the property of the merchants. One thing only happens. The leaders of the people and the officials of the temple ask, "What sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?" There is no resistance, no seeming bitterness over financial loss—just an inquiry as to why he has overstepped his bounds and cleansed the temple when it is their responsibility to regulate all that therein transpires.

Why this mild reaction on the part of those whose property has been destroyed and whose functions have been assumed? We have already noted that there was popular support for the cleansing of the Temple Court; the dealings of the sons of Annas were known by the common people to be corrupt. But there was a greater reason. In the persuasive and well-chosen words of Canon Farrar, it is summarized in these words:

"Why did not this multitude of ignorant pilgrims resist? Why did these greedy chafferers content themselves with dark scowls and muttered maledictions, while they suffered their oxen and sheep to be chased into the streets and themselves ejected, and their money flung rolling on the floor, by one who was then young and unknown, and in the garb of despised Galilee? Why, in the same way we might ask, did Saul suffer Samuel to beard him in the very presence of his army? Why did David abjectly obey the orders of Joab? Why did Ahab not dare to arrest Elijah at the door of Naboth's vineyard? Because sin is weakness; because there is in the world nothing so abject as a guilty conscience, nothing so invincible as the sweeping tide of a Godlike indignation against all that is base and wrong. How could these paltry sacrilegious buyers and sellers, conscious of wrong-doing, oppose that scathing rebuke, or face the lightnings of those eyes that were kindled by an outraged holiness? When Phinehas the priest was zealous for the Lord of Hosts, and drove his javelin through the bodies of the prince of Simeon and the Midianitish woman with one glorious thrust, why did not guilty Israel avenge that splendid murder? Why did not every man of the tribe of Simeon become a Goel to the dauntless assassin? Because Vice cannot stand for one moment before Virtue's uplifted arm. Base and grovelling as they were, these money-mongering Jews felt in all that remnant of their souls which was not yet eaten away by infidelity and avarice, that the Son of Man was right.

"Nay, even the Priests and Pharisees, and Scribes and Levites, devoured as they were by pride and formalism, could not condemn an act which might have been performed by a Nehemiah or a Judas Maccabaeus, and which agreed with all that was purest and best in their traditions. But when they had heard of this deed, or witnessed it, and had time to recover from the breathless mixture of admiration, disgust, and astonishment which it inspired, they came to Jesus, and though they did not dare to condemn what He had done, yet half indignantly asked Him for some sign that he had a right to act thus." (Farrar, pp. 144-46.)

Show us a sign! 'What proof can you offer that you are entitled to cleanse the courts of the temple?' The mere fact that they asked such a question shows that doubt and fear were rising in their minds: 'What if this Man really is the Messiah, as his disciples say?'

But the Lord and his prophets do not perform miracles to prove their divine appointments and priestly powers. Signs follow faith, and faith precedes the miracle. It is a wicked and adulterous generation that seeks for a sign. For them there is only one sign—"The sign of the prophet Jonas: For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth." (Matt. 12:38-40.)

That is to say, for the wicked and ungodly, for those without faith, for those who reject the words of the prophets, there is only one sign: the work itself. Prophets are known by their fruits. If "the church is built upon my gospel," Jesus said to the Nephites, "then will the Father show forth his own works in it." (3 Ne. 27:10.) There are to be no signs—meaning no miracles or gifts of the Spirit—for unbelievers. They are left to pursue their own course now, but in a future day they shall know that Jesus rose again the third day and is the Son of God. His resurrection is the sign; it proves his divine Sonship and testifies of the power resident in him to cleanse the temple or do all else that his Father commands.

And so, "Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up." The sign of the prophet Jonas! The only sign for wicked men! The sign that proves the work is true when it is everlastingly too late, everlastingly too late for those who seek for signs in a day when they should seek for faith, that signs might follow!

'Crucify me; destroy this body; place me in the Arimathean's tomb; and, lo, in three days I shall rise again, rise in glorious immortality, rise to judgment. This shall be your sign.'

Whether Jesus, in his answer, said more than the bare words quoted by John we do not know: but this we do know; those to whom he spoke, despite their false pretensions, knew exactly what he meant. They knew that to destroy the temple meant to take the life of the Nazarene, and that his promise to "raise it up" in three days meant that his dead body would come forth in immortality on the third day.

It may well be that one of the very reasons Jesus cleansed the temple was so he could say—in this setting, using a figure, and with words that would never be forgotten—that he would be slain and would come forth in the resurrection on the third day. In any event, his spoken word, so dramatically phrased, was not forgotten. Three years later a false witness, hoping to see him crucified on a Roman cross, would testify: "We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build another made without hands." (Mark 14:58.) And a reviling scoffer, glorying in the agony of our Lord's crucifixion and awaiting the death that all felt was near, taunted the Cleanser of the Temple by saying: "Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, Save thyself, and come down from the cross." (Mark 15:29-30.) And yet again, while his body lay in the tomb, a Jewish spokesman, hearkening back to our Lord's declaration made at this memorable Passover, would say to Pilate: "Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again" (Matt. 27:63), with reference to which Canon Farrar so aptly says: "Now there is no trace that Jesus had ever used any such words distinctly to them: and unless they had heard the saying from Judas, or unless it had been repeated by common rumour derived from the Apostles—i.e., unless the 'we remember' was a distinct falsehood—they could have been referring to no other occasion than this." (Farrar, p. 149.)

And yet their immediate response to Jesus was: "Forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days?" [^3] At this point in the record John says simply: "But he spake of the temple of his body."

After his resurrection—and the sign proving he was God's Son, the sign proving he had power to cleanse the temple, was the fact of resurrection—his disciples remembered the teachings of this day and believed all of the words Jesus had spoken unto them.

At this Passover Jesus performed many miracles, none of which are named or described in the Gospel accounts. John says simply that "many believed on his name, when they saw the miracles which he did." But Jesus, knowing "all things," including the fact that faith founded solely on miracles leaves much to be desired, "did not commit himself unto them." He sought no motley throng who followed because the sick are healed and the dead raised. His disciples must, like Peter, gain the witness of his divine Sonship by the power of the Holy Ghost. And this revealed knowledge was to come to many in the years ahead.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] These words, more definitive and expressive even than those spoken to Nicodemus, were spoken by the Spirit Lord Jesus to Alma the son of Alma, about a hundred years before our Lord's mortal birth. They are preceded in the Book of Mormon account by Alma's declaration: "I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit." (Mosiah 27:24.) Alma had, of course, been baptized of water in his youth, and the occasion of which he here speaks was the actual receipt by him of the Holy Spirit, without which no man ever receives the new birth.
[^2] Such ownership is inferred from John 19:27.
[^3] Similarly, our Lord "so loved the world that he gave his own life, that as many as would believe might become the sons of God." (D&C 34:3.)
