Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 30

Nicodemus Visits Jesus

Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters; And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. (Mosiah 27:25-26.) [^1]

Jesus’ Ministry Divides the People

Our Friend and Brother, the Lord Jesus—and blessed be he—has now spent about two months in his active and formal ministry among men. As nearly as we can tell—and this is the chronology followed by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.—Jesus was baptized by John in Jordan in January. A.D. 27; his forty days of fasting, prayer, and worship in the wilderness were in January and February (possibly continuing into March); probably he began to teach and call disciples (Andrew, Simon, and others) in February, not later than in March; and in March in Cana came the first public miracle, the changing of water into wine. Now it is Passover time, April 11-18, and the place is Jerusalem, the Holy City.

Our Lord has driven from the Temple Court the sacrificial animals, probably numbering in the thousands; has used a scourge of small cords upon the carnal men who made merchandise in his Father's House; and has extended his own arm of healing to bless and cure many—and all Jerusalem is aware of the miracles he has done. Up to this point in the scriptural accounts there is no record of what he has said in any sermon or of what he did in the performance of any miracle, except the one in Cana. All this now is to change.

Perhaps he began his ministry when he was baptized by his kinsman; perhaps it was when he overcame temptation and viewed the wonders of eternity while in the wilderness; perhaps it was when he taught and called disciples. No matter. But when he openly confronted the priestly powers of the whole nation; when he announced that God was his Father, and that he would be slain and rise again the third day; and when he confirmed—proved, if you will—his right so to act and teach by performing many miracles, then his ministry became the matter of chief concern to all the people in all Palestine. No longer were his deeds done in a corner. No longer could anyone say: 'He is only a Galilean, a Nazarene, someone from a place out of which ariseth no prophet.'

At this Passover Jesus made his ministry the thing that would be uppermost in all minds for the three long years of that ministry, until the fourth Passover, when he would crown his work in Gethsemane, at Golgotha, and before an open tomb.

At this Passover, Jesus divided the people. He began the process of assembling the goats, to be damned, on his left hand, and the sheep, to be saved, on his right.

At this Passover, he incurred the undying enmity of, the rulers of the people. Ever thereafter they would plot and scheme and seek to defame his character and mission and to bring about his death.

But at this Passover also, people began to flock to his standard because of his gracious words and his mighty miracles. Many began to believe the reports they had heard of a voice from heaven at his baptism; of a miracle performed in an obscure Galilean city; of disciples who testified openly that he was David's Son, the one of whom Moses and the prophets had written, the Promised Messiah.

And this brings us to Nicodemus—a Pharisee, a ruler of the Jews, one of the Great Sanhedrin—who came to Jesus by night to learn about this new Rabbi whose miracles bore testimony that he had divine power. In effect Nicodemus wanted to investigate the gospel in secret, lest his associates turn against him and his worldly influence wane. His discipleship does not compare with a Peter, who drew his sword in the Master's defense, or of a Thomas—unwisely and somewhat slanderously referred to as Doubting Thomas—who was willing to face persecution for the cause, and once said to the others of the Twelve: "Let us also go that we may die with him" (John 11:16); or a Stephen, who was stoned to death for saying he saw 'the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God" (Acts 7:51-60).

But at least he came, and it is apparent that he thereafter believed in Christ and supported the gospel cause. Indeed, as Edersheim says: "It must have been a mighty power of conviction to break down prejudice so far as to lead this old Sanhedrist to acknowledge a Galilean, untrained in the Schools, as a Teacher come from God, and to repair to Him for direction on, perhaps, the most delicate and important point in Jewish theology. But, even so, we cannot wonder that he should have wished to shroud his first visit in the utmost possible secrecy. It was a most compromising step for a Sanhedrist to take. With that first bold purgation of the Temple a deadly feud between Jesus and the Jewish authorities had begun, . . . and it needed not the experience and wisdom of an aged Sanhedrist to forecast the end." (Edersheim 1:381.)

We are left to assume that following his interview with Jesus, the processes of conversion continued to operate in the life of Nicodemus. On one occasion, when the officers of the Sanhedrin excused themselves for their inability to arrest Jesus, Nicodemus asked his fellow rulers: "Doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth?" (John 7:45-53.) And after Joseph of Arimathea had obtained the body of the Crucified One, Nicodemus "brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight" (John 19:38-42) for use in preparing the body for burial.

Jesus Teaches: Fallen Man Must Be Born Again

(John 3:1-12)

John tells us that Nicodemus came to Jesus by night, and we are left to assume the meeting took place in a house owned or occupied by John in Jerusalem. [^2] If so, the interview may well have taken place in the guest chamber on the roof, which would have been accessible via outside stairs. John was either present or Jesus recounted to him what was said. The scriptural account is clearly a digest and recitation of the chief points made in what has come to be called our Lord's first great recorded discourse.

"Rabbi," said Nicodemus in a solemn and respectful way, "we know"—perhaps indicating that he and others of the Sanhedrin had like feelings"—that thou art a teacher come from God." This pronouncement is in effect a testimony. It was clear to every unprejudiced mind that Rabbi Jesus was more than an ordinary teacher. He came from God! "For," Nicodemus continued, "no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him." If only all his fellow Sanhedrists, and the people generally, had known and remembered this simple test. Those who work miracles of the sort performed by Jesus bear the stamp of divine approval. And if a man both raises the dead and says he is the Son of God, it must of necessity be so, for a dishonest man could not wield the power that says to a decaying corpse: 'Arise and live again, because I will it.'

Jesus' answer was blunt, concise, and apparently not responsive, leading to the assumption that Nicodemus had more to say than has been preserved in the holy record. "Verily, verily, I say unto thee," Jesus said—and note that our Lord is not quoting scripture, not speaking in the name of another as the prophets of old did, but is speaking in his own name, as the Author of truth—"I say unto thee," he says, "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God."

Man must be born again; he must receive the promptings of the Spirit; he must turn from darkness to light; he must die as to carnal things and live again as to the things of righteousness; he must rise from spiritual death and go forth in spiritual life—all this if he is to "see" the truth; if he is to gain a testimony; if he is to know where the truth is and the course he must pursue to gain peace here and eternal reward hereafter.

If ever there were a people or a nation in need of spiritual rebirth, it was the Jewish assemblage of Jesus' day. If ever there were those in darkness who needed the light of heaven to shine in their souls, it was these children of the prophets who now dwelt in the shadow of death. If ever there were a kindred or a kingdom that needed to rise from the degeneracy of the present, as they sought for the glory of the past, it was those among whom God had sent his Son. And as that Son turned the early events of his ministry into a cause celebre, which would come to the attention of all Israel, he chose to speak of being born again. One man must be born again to see the kingdom of God. All men must receive the spiritual rebirth if the people and the nation are to bask in the light of divine favor as had their fathers.

Nicodemus, himself a teacher and a leader of the people, one who should have been guiding them toward the spiritual rebirth they so much needed, should have known they could not save themselves by continuing in the Herodian course of darkness and rebellion. If the people were to rise again to the heights attained by some under Moses and Joshua, and in the days of Samuel and of David and of Isaiah, they must once more live in the Spirit as the ancients had. If the Shekinah was to rest visibly in the Lord's Holy House, as it did in the days of Moses and Solomon, there must once again be people fit and worthy to enter the divine presence. But Nicodemus did not know; as an appointed teacher of spiritual truths, he himself was in spiritual darkness. "How can a man be born when he is old," he asked. "Can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born?"

To these foolish questions, which showed a complete lack of understanding of the great moral issues involved, Jesus gave the eternal reply that has been the basis of salvation for men and nations in all ages. Again he spoke solemnly in his own name: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God."

Such is the plan of salvation for all men in all ages. Adam fell and brought death—both temporal death and spiritual death—into the world. The effects of his fall passed upon all men; all die temporally, and all are subject to spiritual death. Spiritual death is to die as pertaining to the things of the Spirit, as pertaining to things of righteousness. If men are to live again as pertaining to the things of righteousness, they must receive a spiritual rebirth.

Beginning in the days of Adam, the Lord's word has gone forth among his people "that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence." By the mouths of Adam and Enoch and prophets in all ages, these words of the Lord have been taught, "That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory."

In all ages past the Lord's people had been taught these things, and to them had been appended this divine proclamation: "This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time." (Moses 6:57-62.) We suppose that Jesus taught these wondrous truths to the inquiring Sanhedrist, either in the same or similar words. Such a doctrine is the natural prelude to the testimony he was about to bear of himself, that as the Only Begotten of the Father he had come to bring salvation. We do know that he said, "That which is born of the flesh is flesh," meaning that people are born into this world of water and blood and the Spirit, and so become of dust living souls; and we do know that he said: "And that which is born of the Spirit is spirit," meaning that men must be born again of the Spirit if they are to be alive as to spiritual things, and therefore qualify for that spiritual or eternal life reserved for the faithful. And that this second birth, this rebirth, this birth into the kingdom of heaven, is through the waters of baptism, comes by the power of the Holy Ghost, and is possible because of the cleansing power of the blood of Christ is apparent to all. Hence, Jesus says, "Marvel not," Nicodemus, "that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again." The doctrine is so basic, so fundamental, so much at the bedrock of the house of salvation, that he and all men must believe and understand it if they are to gain the promised rewards.

"The wind bloweth where it listeth," Jesus continued—perhaps as they felt the cool refreshment of the night breeze as it gusted and whispered through the dark streets of Jerusalem—"and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth"—for such is the way with the gentle zephyrs, who knoweth their source or their destiny. Then came the gospel verity that grew out of the illustration: "So is every one that is born of the Spirit."

"How can these things be?" Nicodemus asked. 'How can the water of baptism, and the Spirit of the Lord, and the blood of the Only Begotten, constitute a birth into the kingdom of heaven? How can the serene and calm influence of the Spirit—the still small voice, as it were—descend, as from nowhere, upon a human soul?'

"Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things?" comes the reply. 'Art thou an appointed teacher, a guide and a light to the people, a member of the Great Sanhedrin itself, and thou knowest not that spiritual rebirth is the very beginning of righteousness, and that until men are born again they are not so much as on the path leading to eternal life?' Was there just a touch of irony in our Lord's response?

Then in tones of solemn adjuration, as it were, the greatest Rabbi of them all bore testimony of the truths taught by him and by his disciples. "We speak that we do know," he said—as with all the prophets, they were sure of the truths they proclaimed—"and testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our witness." Only those who are alive spiritually can comprehend the deep and hidden meanings of those things spoken by the power of the Spirit; the light may shine in the darkness, but those who choose darkness rather than light comprehend it not.

"If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things." 'If I have told you the simple, basic truths about being born again; if I have told you the first principles—faith, repentance, baptism, and the receipt of the Holy Ghost—and ye believe not, how shall ye either believe or understand if I tell you the "wonders of eternity," "the hidden mysteries of my kingdom," the "things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet have entered into the heart of man"?' (Commentary 1:142.)

Jesus Testifies: I Am the Messiah, the Son of God, the Only Begotten

(John 3:13-21; JST John 3:13, 18, 21-22)

If all men everywhere must be born again; if they must be born of water and of the Spirit and be cleansed by the blood of the Only Begotten; if they must put off the natural man and become new creatures by the power of the Holy Ghost; if they must taste the good things of the Spirit; if they must believe in the Messiah and accept him as their Savior—all to the end that they may enjoy the words of eternal life here and now and be inheritors of eternal glory hereafter—then the great questions are: Who is the Messiah? Where shall he be found? How is he to be recognized? And what must men do to accept him?

Jesus has a ready answer, the one and only true answer, which he now vouchsafes to Nicodemus. "No man hath ascended up to heaven," he says, "but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven." Here, then, is one of the "heavenly things" that none can see but those whose spiritual eyes are open, and none can hear but those whose spiritual ears are attuned to the Infinite. It is: 'I am the Messiah, who has come down from heaven. I am the Son of Man of Holiness who is in heaven; and I shall yet ascend to be with God who is my Father.' And if we look upon Nicodemus with a critical eye because he failed to grasp the infinite wonder of this heavenly truth, how much more shall we despair for the hosts of sectarians who, with the New Testament scriptures before them, fail to accept the Son as the Only Begotten in the full and literal sense of the word.

"And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness," our Lord continues, "even so must the Son of man be lifted up: That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life."

Moses, in the wilderness, when the Lord sent "fiery serpents" among them, so that many people in Israel were bitten and died, made a serpent of brass and put it upon a pole. Then all who were bitten by the poisonous creeping things and who looked, in faith, upon the brazen serpent, lived; the others died. Why? Because Moses was commanded of God so to do, and the thing was an ordinance in Israel—an ordinance performed in similitude of the fact that the Promised Messiah would be lifted up upon the cross, and all who looked to him in faith would live; the others would die. Nephi the son of Helaman, speaking of Moses to his Hebrew brethren, asked: "Did he not bear record that the Son of God should come?" In answer, this ancient American prophet said: "As he [Moses] lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall he be lifted up who should come. And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal." (Hel. 8:13-15; Num. 21:4-9.)

Eternal life—life in the highest heaven; the kind of life enjoyed by Deity himself; life reserved for those who receive, inherit, and possess all things—this glorious type and kind of everlasting existence comes to those who believe in the Son of Man! How is it brought to pass? In answer Jesus speaks what is considered by many to be the most glorious and wondrous single verse of scripture ever to fall from the lips of God or man: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." [^3]

God so loved the world! The Father sent the Son! He is the Only Begotten! Believe in him and gain eternal life! "For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved." Salvation is in Christ. "He who believeth on him is not condemned; but he who believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed on the name of the only Begotten Son of God, which before was preached by the mouth of the holy prophets; for they testified of me."

How could Nicodemus or anyone misunderstand these teachings? Our Lord is speaking in the early days of his ministry. He is using plain, simple, and forceful language. The doctrine is strong. No parables are involved; nothing is hidden with imagery or in similitudes. He is saying plainly that men must believe in him; that he is the Son of God, the Promised Messiah, the Only Begotten of the Father, the One of whom Moses and the prophets testified. He is saying that men must repent and be baptized in water; that they must receive the companionship of the Holy Spirit and be born again.

It is plain and clear beyond question. Why, then, do not men believe? He answers: "And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he who loveth truth, cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest. And he who obeyeth the truth, the works which he doeth they are of God."

Jesus has spoken. These are his words. This is his testimony of the doctrine taught and of his own divine Sonship. We shall see these truths accepted by many, and this witness borne by his disciples, as we follow the feet of the Son of God along the dusty lanes of Palestine, and as we hear his voice speaking in private to his disciples and in public to all men.

How glorious is the Voice from heaven!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "That is, they accepted John as a prophet in an emotional, unreasoning way, much as the world today believes in the prophets of old. If they had accepted John in the full gospel sense, they would have also believed in Jesus as the Messiah, for such was the burden of John's message to them." (Commentary 1:148.)
[^2] Jesus was the great Exemplar—in the life that he lived, the teachings he taught, the miracles he wrought, the ordinances he performed; indeed, in all things that pertain to life and godliness. Without question he also performed all other gospel ordinances. We know he ordained the members of the Twelve. (John 15:16.) President Joseph Fielding Smith suggests that Peter, James, and John received their endowments from Jesus on the Mount of Transfiguration. (Doctrines of Salvation 2:165.)
[^3] Similarly, our Lord "so loved the world that he gave his own life, that as many as would believe might become the sons of God." (D&C 34:3.)
