Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 31

John (the Baptist) and Jesus Minister in Judea

Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved. (Acts 16:31.)

Jesus Preaches and Baptizes in Judea

(John 3:22; 4:1-3; JST John 4:2-4; Matthew 4:12; Mark 1:14; Luke 4:14)

Jesus came to Jerusalem at Passover time—when all Israel was present, either in person or through appointed representatives—to announce publicly and officially, before the rulers and the people, that he, the Promised Messiah was now among them and that his ministry had commenced. With thunderous and righteous indignation he cleansed the temple and proclaimed his coming death and resurrection, thus affirming that he himself was the Messiah who had life in himself because God was his Father. All this he did openly and before all the people, and we cannot doubt that his acts and deeds were known to most of the two and a half to three million people who crowded into the city and its environs at this most sacred time.

To selected souls—Nicodemus and his own disciples among them—he spoke even more plainly. Men must be born again; repentance and faith in Christ are essential to salvation; he had come down from heaven to atone for the sins of the world; it was of him that Moses and all the prophets had spoken; he was God's Son, the Only Begotten of the Father. It was there, spoken in plain and clear Aramaic. He had announced his divine commission and had done it in the spiritual capital of Jewish Israel. It was done formally; he spoke officially; his voice was the voice of his Father; and his words would stand as a witness in time and in eternity.

Having so done, our Lord's work in Jerusalem, for the moment, was accomplished. With the departing pilgrims, who would carry an account of his doings and sayings to the chosen seed everywhere, he and his disciples also left the Holy City. Their destiny: the villages and cities of Judea, from Beersheba and Moladah in the south, to Masada and Engedi on the Dead Sea, to Joppa in the northwest and Jericho in the northeast. Their mission and purpose: to preach the gospel of the kingdom and to baptize repentant souls. For how long? For nine full months, until December of A.D. 27, at which time—having, as Peter expressed it, preached "throughout all Judea" that "word which God sent unto the children of Israel" (Acts 10:34-43)—he and his disciples went through Samaria (where the conversation at Jacob's Well took place) and into Galilee.

It is not our good fortune to possess a day-by-day account, or even a week-by-week or month-by-month summary, of what Jesus did and said in the days of his flesh. We are sure that his waking hours were filled with wise words and good deeds, his sleeping hours with the dreams of heaven and the visions of eternity, for he was serving on a mission. He was sent by his Father to preach the gospel, heal the sick, and perform the ordinances of salvation. To those whom he has called in these last days, his instructions are: Thou shalt send forth my word unto the ends of the earth. Contend thou, therefore, morning by morning; and day after day let thy warning voice go forth; and when the night cometh let not the inhabitants of the earth slumber, because of thy speech." (D&C 112:4-5) We cannot assume that he imposed any less standard than this upon himself during his own ministry. But it is only an isolated word here and a healing miracle there that has been preserved for us by the evangelical authors.

As to the early Judean ministry John says only that "Jesus and his disciples"—and they must by now have included more than Peter, John, Andrew, Philip, and Nathanael; perhaps women also were among them—"tarried" and baptized in the "land of Judea." Nine months gave them time to tarry long enough in each locale so that all those who dwelt there would hear the word and be accountable for their reaction to it. No doubt many of the seeds sown would be harvested by the apostles and seventies as they thereafter went forth proclaiming the same gospel and baptizing by the same power.

After naming "all Judea" as the place where Jesus "published" the glad tidings of salvation, Peter tells "how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power: who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him." (Acts 10:37-38.) The early Judean ministry thus would have been like the later great Galilean ministry concerning which we know far more, as shall hereafter appear.

Whenever the gospel is preached by legal administrators having power and authority from on high; whenever ministers possess the power of the priesthood and are guided by the Holy Spirit; whenever those professing to be apostles and prophets do in fact hold these high and holy callings, they always both preach and baptize. Jesus was no exception. He preached the gospel and baptized repentant souls.

Jesus performed baptisms in water for the remission of sins, and he did it on the same basis and in the same way that his forerunner John performed the same sacred ordinance. When John first came, baptizing by immersion in the river Jordan, he taught that the one who was coming after him—the one mightier than he; the one whose shoes the Baptist was not worthy to bear—that such a one would baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire.

This baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost, which the Son of God was destined to perform, is not the baptism of which we now speak; such was to come and did come later. While Jesus was with the disciples, he did not give them the gift of the Holy Ghost, so they could have at that time the constant companionship of that member of the Godhead. It was after he ascended to his Father—it was, in fact, on the day of Pentecost—that the Holy Spirit descended in power upon those whom Jesus had called out of the world and into his earthly kingdom. But at this time, in the early days of his early Judean ministry, Jesus and his disciples performed the same baptismal ordinance that John the Baptist was still performing. One of the things this means is that Jesus had already conferred the priesthood upon his newly called disciples.

And so we find our evangelist friend, John, commenting upon the events of that day in these words: "When therefore the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John, They sought more diligently some means that they might put him to death; for many received John as a prophet but they believed not on Jesus. [^1] Now the Lord knew this, though he himself baptized not so many as his disciples; For he suffered them for an example, preferring one another." [^2]

John Continues to Baptize and Prepare the Way

(John 3:23-26; JST John 3:27)

It is now a full year since John the Baptist began his public ministry; since he cried repentance in the wilderness of Judea; since he reprehended the Jewish multitudes, calling them a generation of vipers; since he immersed repentant souls in the Holy River, promising them a remission of their sins and the future receipt of the Holy Ghost under the hands of Him whose forerunner the Baptist was. It is a full year since the Lord's forerunner first bore public witness that the mighty Messiah would soon walk among them, and that he would baptize them with the Holy Ghost and with fire.

It is now at least six months—probably seven, and possibly eight—since the son of Zacharias baptized the Son of God. And it is five or six months since the appointed Elias bore fervent witness that Jesus was the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world. And during all this time the promised forerunner has continued to prepare the way for the Promised Messiah.

There is nothing incongruous or unexpected in finding the one who was to prepare the way continuing to prepare a people for their Lord until that day when the one of whom the witness was borne had been identified in every mind as the one who should come. John was expected to continue to invite repentant persons to forsake the world and come unto that Christ whose witness he was. And John was doing just that. He was preaching and baptizing at Aenon near Salim—a location now unknown to us—"because there was much water there," and all valid baptisms must be performed by immersion.

Jesus and his disciples were baptizing in Judea, no doubt in many locations, for all Judea was hearing the word from the mouth of the one whose word it was. John's influence as a figure of public renown, as the center of a great national movement of popular appeal, was on the wane; that of Jesus was waxing great; and though many still came to John, multitudes flocked to Jesus.

Two reasons identify the basis for this shift in public opinion: the word of truth and salvation was with the Source of truth and the Author of salvation, as it should have been; and when John made converts, he sent them to Jesus. Whereas the forerunner had once baptized in the name of Him who should come and had made ready a congregation to receive the Lord, he now baptized in the name of Him who had come and invited his converts to join the congregation of his Leader. The converts were Christ's. The gathered sheep belonged to the Shepherd. John claimed no personal preference. He was a servant, and his glory was to serve the Master.

But it is not surprising to find some of John's disciples feeling that their teacher was deserving of more attention and honor than he was receiving. And so, when a dispute arose between them and "the Jews"—or as the better translations read, "a Jew"—"about purifying," they took the matter to John. It seems clear that the dispute involved the purifying power of baptism and whether John's baptism actually brought remission of sins.

To a caviling, disputing, contentious theologian of that day an obvious point of debate would have been: How can John's baptism be for the remission of sins when those who receive it must have a second baptism of the Holy Ghost so that sin and evil and dross will be burned out of their souls as though by fire? How are men actually purified by baptism? Is baptism in water for the remission of sins, or is the purifying power of the Holy Spirit needed to cleanse a human soul? However the contention was phrased, John's disciples called it to the attention of the Baptist, saying: "Rabbi, he who was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou bearest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and he receiveth of all people who come unto him." With these words the stage is set for John to bear one of his greatest witnesses of the one whose way he prepared.

John Reaffirms His Witness of Christ

(John 3:27-36; JST John 3:32-36)

Comes now the blessed Baptist—the son of Zacharias and Elisabeth, named John by the angel Gabriel; our Lord's forerunner and witness, who also immersed him in Jordan—to bear, as far as our scriptures record, his final glorious testimony of Jesus. He will continue as a free man to speak and baptize for another four or five months, until November or December of A.D. 27; then he will be imprisoned by Herod. He will languish in the dungeons of Machaerus for more than a year, perhaps fifteen months, before Herod's headsman, at the word of almighty Antipas, will send him to a martyr's grave, from which he shall come forth, with Christ, to receive glory and honor in the kingdom that is prepared.

We can be sure that wherever he met people, and as long as he had breath, his burning witness of one greater than he was given freely, boldly, and with prophetic zeal. We know that he sent disciples to hear Jesus while he himself was restrained in the dungeons of the fortress where Herod had chosen to imprison him. But what he is now to say is his last witness to find place in the scriptures that have come to us. He whose "little light" is being "swallowed up in the boundless Dawn" (Farrar, p. 156), this stern and impassioned prophet from Hebron and the Judean deserts, speaking by the power of the Holy Ghost—which gift he possessed from his mother's womb—is opening his mouth to bear one of the most eloquent and powerful testimonies to find place in Holy Writ.

Whether he answered his disciples' queries about the purifying power of baptism, we do not know, nor does it matter. Many revelations unravel the baptismal mysteries and many prophets have expounded upon the purifying power of the Holy Ghost. Let the disputants search the scriptures and find their answers. But there was only one Baptist, sent—as the voice of one crying in the wilderness of doubt and disbelief—to prepare the way before the Son of the Highest. John must be true to his trust and bear the witness that was his alone to proclaim. And the acceptance of that witness would provide answer for all lesser problems and solve all doctrinal controversies. Thus with the voice of testimony and of doctrine the Baptist proclaimed:

A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but I am sent before him. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy there is fulfilled.

'I, John, came only as the promised Elias, but he came as the holy Messiah, of whom all the prophets have testified. Each of us has received only as the Father has given unto us—he to be the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the world, I to announce his coming and to prepare the way before him. It is not given to me to do his work, for he, as the Son of an immortal Father, is greater than I. Ye yourselves are witnesses that I have always said I was not the Christ, only his forerunner. He is the Bridegroom; I, his servant, am as the friend of the bridegroom, the one sent to make arrangements for the wedding. My reward is to be near him, to hear his voice, to know my mission was successful; in this my joy is full.'

He must increase, but I must decrease. He who cometh from above is above all; he who is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth; he who cometh from heaven is above all.

'His mission is beginning, mine ending; he must increase, I decrease. My counsel is: Forsake me; follow him; he is the Light of the world who teaches the truth and makes salvation available to all men. He is the Lord Omnipotent who, coming from his Father in heaven, is superior to all men; I am as other men, of the earth.'

And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and but few men receive his testimony. He who hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is true.

'But though he is the very Son of God, and though he carries the very message his Father sent him to deliver, yet few men receive his testimony. Those who do believe his witness and obey his counsels, however, have a seal placed upon them; they are sealed up unto eternal life in the everlasting kingdom of the Father.'

For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God; for God giveth him not the Spirit by measure, for he dwelleth in him, even the fulness.

'And the Son, whom the Father hath sent, speaks the words of the Father because the Spirit of God is not apportioned to him; he enjoys it in full measure, and it is by this means that the Father dwelleth in him. Yea, and the Father loveth the Son and hath given all things into his hands—all power, all wisdom, all truth, all judgment, and the fulness of every godly attribute.'

The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand. And he who believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and shall receive of his fulness. But he who believeth not the Son, shall not receive of his fulness; for the wrath of God is upon him.

'Now those who believe in Jesus as the Son, who believe so fully and completely as to abide in his counsels, shall have everlasting life, even exaltation in the highest heaven of the Father's kingdom. They shall then receive of his fulness, even all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father shall be with them, for he shall dwell in them. But those who believe not on the Son shall fail to gain eternal life and shall not receive of his fulness, for the wrath of God is upon them.' (Commentary 1:147-48.)

Such is the last recorded witness of the one chosen from all the spirit hosts of heaven to prepare the way before the Son of God, to bear record of his divine Sonship, to invite all men to flock to his standard that they might be saved with him in the kingdom of his Father.

Herod Imprisons John

(Matthew 4:12; 14:3-5; JST Matthew 4:11; Mark 6:17-20; JST Mark 6:21; Luke 3:19-20)

There is no New Testament account of any act or word of either Jesus or John from the summer of A.D. 27, when the Baptist bore his wondrous witness, to November or December of that year, when Herod Antipas reached forth the Roman arm of power and imprisoned the son of Zacharias. We know only that Jesus and his disciples were tarrying and teaching in the villages and cities of Judea, and we must assume that John also continued his labors with unwearying diligence.

Herod the Great—an Idumean Jew; a Jew as to religion, a pagan as to practice; the mad monster who ordered the slaughter of the Innocents in all the coasts of Bethlehem; a polygamist who had ten wives—passed on both his murderous proclivities and his religious superstitions to his son Herod Antipas, who governed Galilee and Perea in the days of John and Jesus. Lechery and lust were a way of life with the Herods, and Antipas, like his father before him, felt free to take and reject wives at will. Divorcing his first wife, he married Herodias, the wife of his half-brother Philip (not Philip the tetrarch). Herodias, the mother of Salome by Philip, was a granddaughter of the original Herod, and so married, in turn, her uncle Philip and her uncle Antipas. Under Jewish law the marriage of Herod Antipas and Herodias was scandalous, incestuous, and adulterous, and was so viewed by the people.

Herod Antipas, conceived in sin, reared in the household of sin, himself the servant of sin, trumpeted his sinful lusts before all Israel by endorsing and practicing—openly and defiantly—the abominations of adultery and incest. Such a course could not go unreproved. John the Baptist had been sent to cry repentance; he had power to baptize for the remission of sins; and a Herod on his throne was no different from any man. All men—high or low, kings and slaves, Jews and Gentiles, everyone—must repent or they will be damned, and all men are entitled to hear the warning voice from the lips of a legal administrator.

If John commanded the publicans to exact no greater taxes than they were appointed to collect; if he commanded the soldiers to do violence to no man, to accuse none falsely, and to be content with their wages; if the common people were called to forsake lesser sins, how much greater is the need to rebuke the ruler in his palace who flaunts the sanctity of the moral law and the holiness of the family unit! There is nothing in the prophetic nature that admits of the fear of men, whether they be kings on their thrones or generals before their armies. As Samuel rebuked David before his armies, and as Elijah called down curses upon Ahab and Jezebel in the house of the king, so John must confront Herod Antipas and his ill-gotten marriage partner. They must needs be called to repentance.

And so, apparently in a face-to-face encounter, the voice sent to cry repentance in a wilderness of sin, the voice of John, reproved Herod for all the evils he had done, and also said: "It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife." The gauntlet had been hurled; the issue was set; Herod and Herodias must repent or be damned. John was a legal administrator, and he had delivered his message.

Herodias demanded the death of John, and Herod agreed. But in the providences of the Lord, there were yet further tests and added spiritual experiences for the forerunner of the Son. At a future time, Herodias, Salome, and Herod—an unholy trio—would gape upon the severed head of the Baptist as it was paraded before the drunken nobles of Herod's court. But for now, the Baptist had yet to drink the dregs of the bitter cup that an all-wise Father had placed in his hands. He must drain the cup and do all he was sent to do; he must yet suffer to the full for the testimony of Jesus. He must languish for more than a year in the dungeons of Machaerus.

Thus, when Herod "would have put [John] to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet," and so the decree, for the present, was one of imprisonment only. Not only did Herod fear the multitude, but he also personally feared John. He knew that John "was a just man, and a holy man, and one who feared God and observed to worship him." There must have been some stirring in Herod's soul, some desire to rise above the iniquities of his court and to live by higher standards, for the record says that when he heard of John, "he did many things for him, and heard him gladly." How often it is that adulterers and sinners of the vilest sort, knowing in their hearts that their course is evil, turn to religion of one kind or another, seeking to find peace of mind of some sort. Yet how often, as with Herod, the seeds of repentance die in the stony soil of sin where they are first sown.

Why was John imprisoned? It was with him as with all the prophets. Satan sought to silence his tongue, by death if possible, by imprisonment in any event; and the Lord permitted that evil one to triumph for a season, as part of the refining processes that would cleanse and perfect the life of his servant. The Baptist's imprisonment was "but a part of that merciful fire in which He is purging away the dross from the seven-times-refined gold of a spirit which shall be worthy of eternal bliss." (Farrar, p. 220.)

From an earthly perspective, three motives appear for the course Antipas chose to take. For one, with the fires of conscience burning at her vitals, and having an implacable hatred against one who had held her up to popular contempt and ridicule, Herodias sought his imprisonment and death. For another, and Josephus is the source of this view: "The Tetrarch was afraid that his absolute influence over the people, who seemed disposed to carry out whatever he advised, might lead to a rebellion. This circumstance is also indicated in the remark of St. Matthew, that Herod was afraid to put the Baptist to death on account of the people's opinion of him." (Edersheim 1:657.) And finally, there can be little doubt that pharisaic intrigue played its part. The Pharisees, those masters of deceit and of opposition to revealed truth, opposed Jesus and had broken with John, who bore witness of Jesus. The clear inference is that they used their persuasive powers to make Herod their tool of terror against John, just as they would make Rome their weapon to crucify the one greater than John, when the Lord Jesus was led as a lamb to the slaughter. (Edersheim 1:657-58.)

"To St. John Baptist imprisonment must have been a deadlier thing" than to most of the suffering seers and prophetic messengers who fell into like dungeons of despair, "for in the free wild life of the hermit he had lived in constant communion with the sights and sounds of nature, had breathed with delight and liberty the free winds of the wilderness. To a child of freedom and of passion, to a rugged, untamed spirit like that of John, a prison was worse than death. For the palms of Jericho and the balsams of Engedi, for the springing of the beautiful gazelles amid the mountain solitudes, and the reflection of the moonlight on the mysterious waves of the Salt Lake, he had nothing now but the chilly damps and cramping fetters of a dungeon, and the brutalities of such a jailor as a tetrarch like Antipas would have kept in a fortress like Makor [Machaerus]. In that black prison, among its lava streams and basaltic rocks, which were tenanted in reality by far worse demons of human brutality and human vice than the 'goats' and 'satyrs' and doleful creatures believed by Jewish legend to haunt its whole environment, we cannot wonder if the eye of the caged eagle began to film." (Farrar. p. 220.) Such is the eloquent language of Farrar.

From our vantage point, however, we know that the eye of the caged eagle did not begin to film. Rather, a wondrous and glorious event took place that brightened the caged eagle's eyes and enabled him to see out of the darkness of the dungeon, and beyond the confines of the earthlike prison, whereon all pilgrims from God's presence dwell for a moment. The veil was rent; the heavens were opened; angelic ministrants from the courts of glory hied themselves to the prison called earth, and to the dungeons of Herod, to speak peace to the weary and tried soul of the one who prepared the way before the Son of God. In majestic simplicity, the inspired record says: "And now Jesus knew that John was cast into prison, and he sent angels, and, behold, they came and ministered unto him."

Jesus did it! John was not forgotten by him. No more are any of those who suffer for his name's sake. Though heaven's Lord dwelt in a tabernacle of clay, yet the angelic legions were subject to his will, and he—in his love and in his pity and in his mercy—sent some of them to his friend and forerunner.

We cannot doubt that the heavens were rent after John had overcome the world. Faith precedes the miracle. After John had risen in his own mind from the bottomless pit of despair, he was prepared to ascend on angelic wings to heights beyond the skies.

His mortal work was done. As with Joseph and Hyrum in Carthage Jail, one thing only remained to be done: the sealing of his own testimony with his own blood. And that, as we shall hereafter see, was destined to be.

Prophets die that prophets may live, and through it all souls are saved and God is glorified. So be it.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "When the Ten Tribes were transported to Assyria more than seven centuries before the Christian era, Samaria was repeopled by heathen colonists from other Assyrian provinces. These pagan peoples, intermixing somewhat with scattered remnants of Israel, founded the race of despised and hated Samaritans of Jesus' day. As a nation, they claimed Jacob as their father and maintained they were inheritors of the blessings of the chosen seed. Their religion, partially pagan in nature, accepted the Pentateuch, but rejected the prophets and the psalms. In the day of Jesus they were friendly to Herod and Rome, but bitter toward the Jews, a feeling fully reciprocated by their Jewish kindred." (Commentary 1:151.)
[^2] "The political enmity and religious separation between the Jews and Samaritans account for their mutual jealousy. On all public occasions the Samaritans took the part hostile to the Jews, while they seized every opportunity of injuring and insulting them. Thus, in the time of Antiochus III they sold many Jews into slavery. Afterwards they sought to mislead the Jews at a distance, to whom the beginning of every month (so important to the Jewish festive arrangements) was intimated by beacon fires, by kindling spurious signals. We also read that they tried to desecrate the Temple on the eve of the Passover; and that they waylaid and killed pilgrims on their road to Jerusalem. The Jews retaliated by treating the Samaritans with every mark of contempt; by accusing them of falsehood, folly, and irreligion; and, what they felt most keenly, by disowning them as of the same race or religion, and this in the most offensive terms of assumed superiority and self-righteous fanaticism. " (Edersheim 1:399.)
