Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 1 ( 1979)

Chapter 32

Jesus Takes the Gospel to Samaria

Unto him that keepeth my commandments I will give the mysteries of my kingdom, and the same shall be in him a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life. (D&C 63:23.)

Jesus Journeys to Sychar in Samaria

(John 4:4-6; JST John 4:2, 6-7)

"I must needs go through Samaria," Jesus said to his disciples, as he and they prepared to leave Judea and go to Galilee. Having embittered the Pharisees with his bold doctrines to the point that "they sought more diligently some means that they might put him to death," and knowing that his mission in Judea, for the moment, was completed, Jesus chose to go back to Galilee, to the land of his youth, to the rugged and hilly homeland where friends and kinsmen dwelt, there to launch his great Galilean ministry.

But why take the dangerous and robber-infested route through Samaria? It was the Jewish practice to go the long way around, through Perea, for the Samaritans were a hated race whose customs were abhorred and whose traditions were shunned. True, "the direct road to Galilee ran through the half-heathen country of Samaria," but this "road was proverbially unsafe for Jewish passengers, either returning from Jerusalem or going to it, for it passed through the border districts where the feuds of the two rival peoples raged most fiercely. The paths among the hills of Akrabbim, leading into Samaria, had often been wet with the blood of Jew or Samaritan, for they were the scene of constant raids and forays. . . . The pilgrims from Galilee to the feasts were often molested, and sometimes even attacked and scattered, with more or less slaughter; each act of violence bringing speedy reprisals from the population of Jerusalem and Judea, on the one side, and of Galilee on the other; the villages of the border districts, as most easily reached, bearing the brunt of the feud, in smoking cottages, and indiscriminate massacre of young and old." (Geikie, p. 361.)

Why, then, did Jesus feel compelled to go through Samaria? Superficially, some have supposed it was to avoid Perea, that part of Palestinian soil which was subject to Herod Antipas, who had now imprisoned John, and who—thanks to pharisaic intrigue—apparently opposed Jesus for himself and because he was the friend and colleague of the Baptist. Perhaps with Herod's soldiers on the alert to arrest for treason any who gathered followers—whether religious or political—there were perils connected with Perean travel, and they may have been, in Jesus' case, more serious than those through Samaria. We must conclude, however, that Jesus, though merely en route to Galilee for a greater work, chose to utilize his time and to bear witness of his divinity to the Samaritans. That is, Jesus went to Samaria to preach the gospel, to tell that spiritually benighted race that he was the Messiah whom they sought, and that salvation is in him. His message is the same for all people, Jew and Gentile alike, and the Samaritans were a racial mixture, half-Israelite and half-Gentile. [^1] They must hear his voice; the Everlasting Word must speak to them in person.

As to the religion of the Samaritans, it was "a spurious Judaism," Edersheim says, "consisting of a mixture of their former [pagan] superstitions with Jewish doctrines and rites." They had once built their own temple on Mount Gerizim, and they claimed their own high priest and their own priestly administrators. "In the troublous times of Antiochus IV Epiphanes, the Samaritans escaped the fate of the Jews by repudiating all connection with Israel, and dedicating their temple to Jupiter. . . . In 130 B.C. John Hyrcanus destroyed the Temple on Mount Gerizim, which was never rebuilt." (Edersheim 1:396-98.) [^2]

The Samaritans were a half-Jewish, half-heathen race who practiced a form of worship of Jehovah and who looked for a Messiah who was to come. Their religious sensitivities were not so highly refined as were those of the Jews, but they were nonetheless children of the Father of us all, and his Son chose to preach the gospel of salvation to them beginning in Sychar.

And so our Lord and his missionary companions go from Judea to Samaria—from northern Judea, where he and they were teaching and baptizing, to Jacob's Well near Sychar, a distance of some twenty miles. Their travels are through a rugged, hilly area; even in December the Palestinian weather is hot. Jesus is thirsty, hungry, weary. [^3] He rests in the shade of the alcove that protects the well while his disciples go another half mile or so into the city to obtain food.

Jesus Offers Living Water to All Men

(John 4:7-15; JST John 4:11, 15-16)

Jesus is alone on ground hallowed by the feet of the great patriarch Jacob, who is Israel and whose descendants are the chosen people, of whom Jesus is one. Here is the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph; here is the well—seven or eight feet in diameter and one hundred fifty feet deep—that the father of all Israel dug to provide lifegiving draughts to his family and cattle. On either side are Ebal and Gerizim, mountains of ancient fame, and nearby is the tomb of Joseph, whose bones were carried out of Egypt. What ponderings as to the past, and what meditations of the present and the future, our Lord now has on this sacred spot, we can only surmise.

His moment of solitude soon ends. A woman of Samaria—alone and unattended, carrying a pitcher on her head, with a long cord to lower and raise the vessel—comes to draw water from her ancestor's well. Jesus speaks. "Give me to drink," he says. And, be it noted, to have the very conversation that he is now commencing is one of the chief reasons he chose to travel through Samaria, as he made his way to his homeland of Galilee.

"How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria?" the woman responds, "for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans." To give drink to a thirsty traveler was, in that day and in that part of the earth, a cardinal rule of proper human conduct. To drink water is to live; to thirst for its life-giving properties is to die. All people in Palestine, Jew and Samaritan alike, gave water to their neighbors as the need arose. But the woman here is so taken back by the request of a Jew that she hesitates to comply with a basic rule of their society.

Time was when the Jews cursed the Samaritans in their synagogues, refused to accept them as proselytes, accused them of worshipping idols, said that to eat their bread was like eating swine's flesh, and taught that they would be denied a resurrection. Even Jesus spoke of a Samaritan as a stranger, or more accurately an alien. These feelings were not now so intense, as witness the fact that the disciples were then in Sychar to obtain Samaritan food, but much of the old hatreds remained. Why then was this Jew asking a Samaritan for a drink?

"If thou knewest the gift of God"—the gift of his Son ("For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life"—John 3:16) [^4]—"and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water."

Living water! "For the thirsty and choking traveler in a desert wilderness to find water, is to find life, to find an escape from agonizing death; similarly, the weary pilgrim traveling through the wilderness of mortality saves himself eternally by drinking from the wells of living water found in the gospel.

"Living water is the words of eternal life, the message of salvation, the truths about God and his kingdom; it is the doctrines of the gospel. Those who thirst are invited to come unto Christ and drink. Where there are prophets of God, there will be found rivers of living water, wells filled with eternal truths, springs bubbling forth their life-giving draughts that save from spiritual death." (Commentary 1:151-52.)

For the sin-laden woman of Samaria, Jesus' words have little meaning. Her spiritual understanding is dimmed almost to darkness because she has chosen adultery as a way of life. "The things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. . . . The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Cor. 2:11-14.) Her response can deal only with literal water; the things of the Spirit are beyond her comprehension.

"Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with," she says, "and the well is deep: from whence then hast thou that living water?" As though living water could be found in a dead well! As though spiritual things can be understood by a carnal mind! "Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle?" Her claim to prophetic ancestry but dramatizes the reality that even the wicked and ungodly have religious instincts that they seek to satisfy by forms of worship that do not interfere with their carnal courses.

The stage is set, all is in readiness, and the Master Teacher is now prepared to teach the perfect lesson, to deliver the message of how salvation comes to thirsty and water-hungry mortals. They must drink the draughts of eternal truth; these only will give life to the spirit; these eternal wells, full of eternal water, will make available eternal life. As the parched and swollen tongues of desert travelers are refreshed with water drawn from the wells of earth, so the thirsting spirit lives again when living water is poured into the soul. Hence, Jesus' answer is:

Whosoever shall drink of this well, shall thirst again; But whosoever drinketh of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.

But the woman, still blinded by her sins, fails to hear the message. Still thinking only of the things of this world, as is the way with carnal people, she says: "Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw."

Jesus Invites Men to Worship the Father

(John 4:16-24; JST John 4:26)

Jesus taught the woman of Samaria that she must come to him and receive the living water that refreshes and enlivens the spirit and leads the spiritually refreshed person to eternal life. His teachings were beyond the level of her spiritual understanding. She remained in darkness. He now uses her to find other truth seekers for him, and he does it by shocking her with a demonstration of his divine power, so that, perchance, even yet she will come to an understanding of the message he is sent to deliver. "Go, call thy husband, and come hither," he directs. "I have no husband," she replies. Jesus says, "Thou hast well said, I have no husband: For thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: in that saidst thou truly."

A light begins to dawn. This is no ordinary man; not only does he speak of a strange water, living water, but he also reveals those things which can only be known by divine power. "Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet," the woman says.

This, then, is her opportunity. This Jew is a prophet; he can solve the centuries-old dispute between the Samaritans and the Jews. True Israelite worship centers in a temple. Jerusalem has its House of Herod with its great altar and its Holy of Holies; the Samaritan temple on Mount Gerizim was destroyed more than one hundred fifty years ago. Now, here at the foot of that Samaritan place of worship, the woman ventures to say: "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship."

"Woman, believe me," comes the response, "the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father," which is to say: The places where men built the temples of the past shall no longer be the only centers of approved worship. The old order changeth; there ariseth a new covenant, a new gospel: the temples of the future are the bodies of the saints; [^5] and the sacrifices of the future are a broken heart and a contrite spirit. [^6] The true believers of the future shall worship in all places and at all times, not just when sacrificial fires burn on Gerizim and in Jerusalem.

"Ye worship ye know not what." Samaritan worship was a strange intermixture of pagan and Israelite doctrine. Centuries before they had added the worship of Jehovah to the worship of their numerous idols; now this higher form of worship had become the dominant force in their way of worship, and their rituals and performances were dominantly Mosaic in nature, but still their worship was both Jewish and pagan all wrapped in one. [^7]

"We know what we worship," Jesus continued, "for salvation is of the Jews." As between Jerusalem and Mount Gerizim; as between the Jews and the Samaritans; as between a people who accepted all of the Old Testament, and another that believed only the Pentateuch; as was the case with the Samaritans—the Jews were right and the Samaritans were wrong. The Jews knew what they worshipped, and such knowledge was not had by the Samaritans. Jesus had no hesitancy in telling would-be worshippers that their system of religion was wrong. Though the Jews were apostate, as a people, yet they did have the scriptures; they did search the writings of the prophets; their priests were still legal administrators; they had the knowledge of God to a degree; and salvation was to come through them to the world. Their Messiah was to be the Savior of the world. And so Jesus, the foundation again having been laid, makes the great proclamation:

But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him. For unto such hath God promised his Spirit [not God is a Spirit as our King James Version erroneously records]—And they who worship him, must worship in spirit and in truth.

Jesus Saith: I AM THE MESSIAH

(John 4:25-30; JST John 4:28)

We know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them; And that he created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them; And gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they should worship. (D&C 20:17-19.)

Praise ye the Father. Worship the Father. Come unto the Father. He is God above all. Worship him in spirit and in truth. Such is his will. But do it in and through Christ who is the Messiah.

The number one truth—in all eternity—is that God is our Father, the Creator of us and all things, whom we must worship in spirit and in truth to gain salvation. Jesus has now, at Jacob's Well, proclaimed this eternal verity. It is the beginning of all true religion.

The number two truth—in all eternity—is that the Son of God is the Messiah, the Redeemer, through whose atoning sacrifice immortality and eternal life are brought to pass. Having testified of the Father, our Lord must now bear witness of the Son. The woman, still not comprehending the pearls of great price that are dropping from the mouth of a Jew, says: "I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things." [^8] She could not believe this unknown Jew; if only the Messiah would come, if only he were here, all problems would be solved!

Jesus said unto her, I who speak unto thee am the Messias.

She had his witness of the Father; now he bore record of himself. He knew who he was. In the temple when but twelve years of age, he had so certified, in the statements about his Father's business. He had accepted the testimonies of John the Baptist and of his disciples. Nicodemus had heard him refer to himself as the Only Begotten of the Father. He was the Messiah; he knew it; and he knew it was his mission so to testify to all who would hear, whether they were receptive or, as this Samaritan woman, had sealed hearts and unbelieving blood.

How much else Jesus said to this woman we do not know. At this point in the dialogue, John's account says the disciples returned from Sychar with food to eat. They marveled that Jesus talked with the woman—a conversation that he and not she had initiated, for it violated the customs of the day for a Rabbi to speak in public with a woman, to say nothing of a Samaritan woman, and least of all a woman of easy virtue. Yet their reserve was such and his command of the situation so complete that none asked, "What seekest thou: or, Why talkest thou with her?"

With the arrival of the disciples, the woman left, leaving, in her excitement, her water pot. In the city she said to the men, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did." No doubt her report was a great exaggeration, but Jesus may well have told her other things about her life than those which pertained to her marital state. She had heard him say he was the Messiah, and so she said to the people in the city: "Is not this the Christ?"

"Then they went out of the city," as Jesus had planned and foreseen, "and came unto him." He had preached to one unreceptive person with such power and effect that he now had a congregation of many receptive souls, all anxious to hear the marvelous message about which one of their own number spoke so positively.

"He That Reapeth Receiveth Wages"

(John 4:31-42; JST John 4:40)

After the woman, whose name we do not even know, departed for Sychar, the disciples made ready their food. When it was offered to Jesus, he said: "I have meat to eat that ye know not of," which caused the disciples to ask one another: "Hath any man brought him ought to eat?"

To this Jesus said: "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work." The preaching of the gospel; the spread of eternal truth; the establishment of the earthly kingdom; the onward rolling of the great cause of truth and righteousness among men—these become the work, the all-consuming passion, of those who are endowed with power from on high. It becomes their meat and their drink; it takes all their strength; it embraces every waking word and thought. Those who are called to divine service are expected to serve with all their hearts, might, mind, and strength. Temporal needs sink into oblivion. The work becomes their meat and drink and breath and life. Jesus' meat was to do the work of his Father.

Now the multitudes are arriving. "Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then cometh harvest?" Jesus asks. That is, it is late December, possibly early January, and in four months the barley harvest will begin in Palestine. But as Jesus had spoken of living water and spiritual meat, he is now speaking of a harvest, not of barley, but of human souls. "Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for they are white already to harvest." Surely this was a sample of what the prophet Joel had foreseen: "Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe," he said, as he spoke of the "multitudes in the valley of decision" (Joel 3:12-14), the hosts of men who must decide whether they will be gathered with the Lord's harvest into his kingdom or be left for the day when the tares and the grain that are not harvested shall be burned.

"And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal," Jesus continued, "that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together." The Lord pays his servants. Those who sow and those who harvest in his fields receive wages. They receive eternal life for themselves in that kingdom which is eternal; such a reward is the wages that are provided. [^9]

"And herein is that saying true, One soweth, and another reapeth. I have sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor; the prophets have labored, and ye have entered into their labors." The work of saving souls is a great cooperative enterprise: one sows and another reaps. Isaiah and the prophets foretold the coming of a Messiah and the setting up of his earthly kingdom; they sowed the seeds of faith in the hearts of all who should read and believe their words, and the disciples who were with Jesus in his ministry reaped in the fields planted by their fellow servants of old. The Nephite prophets sowed the seeds of faith and righteousness in the Book of Mormon, and we go out, in our day, to reap the harvest, so that we and our Nephite brethren can rejoice together in that great day when all are safely gathered into the Eternal Granaries.

Jesus preached to those who thus came out to hear him, and he went, at their importuning, into the city, where he abode two days ministering among the people. Many believed because of the testimony of the woman. "And many more believed because of his own word," and they testified: "We have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world."

Truly, the gospel was preached in Samaria. Seeds were sown and a harvest reaped. And at a later date, apostles and seventies and other missionaries would yet reap in the same fields. Jesus' stay there lasted only a few days, but the results of his ministry shall endure to all generations. And we cannot but hope that the woman who first met him at the well of the ancient patriarch was among those who forsook the world, had their sins washed away in the waters of baptism, kept the commandments thereafter, and received an eternal inheritance with the saved and exalted of all ages.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "When the Ten Tribes were transported to Assyria more than seven centuries before the Christian era, Samaria was repeopled by heathen colonists from other Assyrian provinces. These pagan peoples, intermixing somewhat with scattered remnants of Israel, founded the race of despised and hated Samaritans of Jesus' day. As a nation, they claimed Jacob as their father and maintained they were inheritors of the blessings of the chosen seed. Their religion, partially pagan in nature, accepted the Pentateuch, but rejected the prophets and the psalms. In the day of Jesus they were friendly to Herod and Rome, but bitter toward the Jews, a feeling fully reciprocated by their Jewish kindred." (Commentary 1:151.)
[^2] "The political enmity and religious separation between the Jews and Samaritans account for their mutual jealousy. On all public occasions the Samaritans took the part hostile to the Jews, while they seized every opportunity of injuring and insulting them. Thus, in the time of Antiochus III they sold many Jews into slavery. Afterwards they sought to mislead the Jews at a distance, to whom the beginning of every month (so important to the Jewish festive arrangements) was intimated by beacon fires, by kindling spurious signals. We also read that they tried to desecrate the Temple on the eve of the Passover; and that they waylaid and killed pilgrims on their road to Jerusalem. The Jews retaliated by treating the Samaritans with every mark of contempt; by accusing them of falsehood, folly, and irreligion; and, what they felt most keenly, by disowning them as of the same race or religion, and this in the most offensive terms of assumed superiority and self-righteous fanaticism. " (Edersheim 1:399.)
[^3] "Here we view one of the most human scenes of the Master's whole ministry. The Lord of heaven, who created and controls all things, having made clay his tabernacle, is physically tired, weary, hungry, and thirsty, following his long journey from Judea. He who had power to draw food and drink from the elements, who could have transported himself at will to any location, sought rest and refreshments at Jacob's Well. In all things he was subjecting himself to the proper experiences of mortality." (Commentary 1:151.)
[^4] Farrar, p. 159, footnote 2; Edersheim 1:399-403; Luke 17:18.
[^5] "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" (1 Cor. 3:16.)
[^6] "And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings. And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit." (3 Ne. 9:19-20.) "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service." (Rom. 12:1.)
[^7] We might liken Samaritan worship to that of the Aztecs or the Mayas, after those ancient peoples had been conquered by Cortez and the other Spanish generals. Their conquerors imposed Christianity in the form of Catholicism upon them, and the result was a strange admixture of religious form and thought, which over the years has taken on more and more of the basics of Catholicism and less and less of the paganism of the past.
[^8] With the Samaritans it was as with the Jews, they anxiously awaited the advent of the Messiah. "They looked for the coming of a Messiah, in Whom the promise would be fulfilled, that the Lord God would raise up a Prophet from the midst of them, like unto Moses, in Whom his words were to be, and unto Whom they should hearken. Thus, while, in some respects, access to them would be more difficult than to His own countrymen, yet in others Jesus would find there a soil better prepared for the Divine Seed, or, at least, less encumbered by the thistles and tares of traditionalism and Pharisaic bigotry." (Edersheim 1:403.)
[^9] "For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul." (D&C 4:4.) "Whoso desireth to reap, let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts. that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God." (D&C 6:3.)
