The temple is the house of the Lord. It is a place where we learn about Heavenly Father, make covenants (or promises) with Him, and receive great blessings. In the temple, we do important work for ourselves and for family members who have died. The work that is done in the temple includes baptisms for the dead, endowments, and sealings. These are called temple ordinances.

When you are eight years old, you can be baptized and confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Many of your ancestors have died without being baptized and confirmed. Though their bodies are dead, their spirits are still alive in the spirit world, where they can be taught the gospel of Jesus Christ.

When you are 12 years old, you can go to the temple and help these people by being baptized and confirmed in their name. They can then choose whether or not they want to accept baptism and confirmation. You will wear all white when you are baptized for the dead, just as you do when you are baptized for yourself.

Ask your parents to help you make a list of family members who have died without being baptized in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Find out if anyone has been to the temple to be baptized for them.

One of the great blessings of the temple is the endowment. Endowment means “gift.” When you receive your endowment, you will learn more about the plan of salvation and make covenants. Covenants are promises we make with Heavenly Father. As you keep those covenants, you prepare to live with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ someday.

Inside the temple is a beautiful, peaceful room called the celestial room. In the celestial room we feel close to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, and we feel a little of what it will be like to live with Them in the celestial kingdom.

When a man and a woman get married in the temple, they kneel at an altar and are sealed for time and all eternity. This means that they and their children can be united together as an eternal family. Plan to be married in the temple someday. This is the greatest blessing of the temple.

The temple is a holy place. Bishops and branch presidents make sure that those who enter the temple are prepared and worthy. Before you go to the temple, you will have a special interview with your bishop or branch president. He will ask if you have a testimony of the Church, keep the commandments, support the Church leaders, obey the Word of Wisdom, pay tithing, and are honest in everything you do and say. He will help you know what to do to be worthy to enter the temple.

Heavenly Father gives many blessings to those who live righteously and attend the temple. It is important to prepare to enter the temple while you are young.

Heavenly Father loves you and wants you to receive the blessings of the temple. He will bless you for performing temple ordinances for yourself and others. Although you may not be able to enter the temple now, if there is a temple nearby, you can visit the temple grounds and feel the spirit that is there. You can also keep a picture of the temple in your home to remind you of how important the temple is. Live righteously so that you will be worthy to enter the house of the Lord.

[SIDEBAR] [/SIDEBAR]
