“Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six clays shalt thou labour, and do all thy work: But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, … For in six days, the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore, the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.” (Ex. 20:8–11.)

Sunday is a day that is different from any other day of the week. Reverence in our thoughts and actions should be shown on this day.

It’s a clean day—

Our shoes are shined.

Our clothes are clean.

Our hair is combed.

It’s a happy day—

We spend it with our family.

We see our friends at church.

We smile.

It’s a reverent day—

We go to Sunday School and sacrament meeting. We are reverent in our Heavenly Father’s house. We learn about Jesus Christ and our Heavenly Father.

And even at home we do quiet, reverent things.

Because Sunday should be a day of worship and rest, we don’t do many of the things we do on other days. Make your own list of different things you might do on Sunday. Here are are some suggested activities:

Visit a neighbor.

Read and act a parable or other story from the scriptures.

Go for a walk with a younger brother or sister.

Write and illustrate a letter to a missionary or someone you know.

Read one or more chapters from the scriptures.

Count or write down all the beautiful things you can see or think of that our Heavenly Father has given to us.

Ask your mother, father, or grandparents to tell you about their lives when they were children.

Draw a picture of your favorite biblical character.

Draw a picture of three of your blessings.

Do a secret good deed for someone.

Work on recording your own story from directions in the May (1977) issue.

Memorize the words to a favorite hymn or poem.

Read a story from the Friend.

Ask your mother if you may invite a friend for lunch or supper.

Learn about your ancestors and fill out a genealogy sheet.

Read a book.

Decorate a small box, jar, or suitable container. Then cut your list into separate pieces with an activity on each one and place in your Sunday box.

Every Sunday, choose an idea from your box and you will know just what to do to have a reverent and happy day.
