“I have no ancestors among the nineteenth-century pioneers. However, since the first days of my Church membership, I have felt a close kinship to those early pioneers who crossed the plains. They are my spiritual ancestry, as they are for each and every member of the Church, regardless of nationality, language, or culture. …

“As the message of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ is now being embraced around the world, we are all pioneers in our own sphere and circumstance.”

President Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, “Heeding the Voice of the Prophets,” Liahona, July 2008, 3; Ensign, July 2008, 5.

“By being the first in your family to accept the gospel, you become the first generation, a chosen generation through which generations past, present, and future may be blessed. …

“… In the Church we read and speak much about pioneers in early Church history. They were first-generation members just like you. …

“Their legacy can be yours as fellow members of the first generation. Be faithful, serve your fellowman, bless your family, and make proper choices. You are the first generation, a chosen generation to bless past, present, and future generations.”

Elder Paul B. Pieper of the Seventy, “The First Generation,” Liahona and Ensign, Nov. 2006, 11, 13.

“We are all needed to finish the work that was begun by those pioneering Saints over 175 years ago and carried out through the subsequent decades by faithful Saints of every generation. We need to believe as they believed. We need to work as they worked. We need to serve as they served. And we need to overcome as they overcame. …

“… The Lord isn’t asking us to load up a handcart; He’s asking us to fortify our faith. He isn’t asking us to walk across a continent; He’s asking us to walk across the street to visit our neighbor. He isn’t asking us to give all of our worldly possessions to build a temple; He’s asking us to give of our means and our time despite the pressures of modern living to continue to build temples and then to attend regularly the temples already built. He isn’t asking us to die a martyr’s death; He’s asking us to live a disciple’s life.

“This is a great time to live, brothers and sisters, and it is up to us to carry on the rich tradition of devoted commitment that has been the hallmark of previous generations of Latter-day Saints.”

Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, “The Truth of God Shall Go Forth,” Liahona and Ensign, Nov. 2008, 83, 84.
