LIFE OF CHRIST

by

Frederic W. Farrar, D.D., F.R.S;

Late fellow of trinity college, Cambridge;

Master of Marlborough College; and Chaplain in Ordinary

to the Queen

Etext prepared by Theresa Hoose

Foreward by

Dr. Cyril J. Barber

Manet Immota Fides.

Electronic manuscript © 2008 Cumorah Foundation

www.cumorah.com

All rights reserved

Klock & Klock Christian Publishers, Inc.

2527 Girard Avenue North

Minneapolis, Minnesota 55411

PREFACE

In fulfilling a task so difficult and so important as that of writing the Life of Christ, I feet it to be a duty to state the causes which led me to undertake it, and the principles which have guided me in carrying it to a conclusion.

Under the circumstances application was made to me, and I could not at first but shrink from a labour for which I felt that the amplest leisure of a lifetime would be insufficient, and powers incomparably greater than my own would still be utterly inadequate. But the considerations that were urged upon me came no doubt with additional force from the deep interest with which, from the first, I contemplated the design. I consented to make the effort, knowing that I could at least promise to do my best, and believing that he who does the best he can, and also seeks the blessing of God upon his labours, cannot finally and wholly fail.

And I have reason to be thankful that I originally entered upon the task, and, in spite of all obstacles, have still persevered, in it. If the following pages in any measure fulfill the objects with which such a Life ought to be written, they should fill the minds of those who read them with solemn and not ignoble thoughts; they should "add sunlight to daylight by making the happy happier;" they should encourage the toiler; they should console the sorrowful; they should point the weak to the one true source of moral strength. But whether this book be thus blessed to high ends, or whether it be received with harshness and indifference, nothing at least can rob me of the deep and constant happiness which I have felt during almost every hour that has been spent upon it. Though, owing to serious and absorbing duties, months have often passed without my finding an opportunity to write a single line, yet, even in the midst of incessant labour at other things, nothing forbade that the subject on which I was engaged should be often in my thoughts, or that I should find in it a source of peace and happiness different, alike in kind and in degree, from any which other interests could either give or take away.

"holy fields over whose acres walked those blessed feet

Which eighteen hundred years ago were nailed,

For our advantage, on the bitter cross" --

In the midst of those immemorial customs which recalled at every turn the manner of life He lived -- at Jerusalem, on the Mount of Olives, at Bethlehem, by Jacob's Well, in the Valley of Nazareth, along the bright strand of the Sea of Galilee, and in the coasts of Tyre and Sidon -- many things came home to me, for the first time, with a reality and vividness unknown before. I returned more than ever confirmed in the wish to tell the full story of the Gospels in such a manner and with such illustrations as -- with the aid of all that was within my reach of that knowledge which has been accumulating for centuries -- might serve to enable at least the simple and the unlearned to understand and enter into the human surroundings of the life of the Son of God.

[1] Faith remains unmoved.

[2] See pp. 128, 129, passim.

Nor have I left the subject of the credibility of miracles and the general authenticity of the Gospel narratives entirely untouched, although there was the less need for my entering fully upon those questions in the following pages, from my having already stated elsewhere, to the best of my ability, the grounds of my belief. The same remark applies to the yet more solemn truth of the Divinity of Christ. That -- not indeed as surrounded with all the recondite inquiries about the περιҳώρησις[1] (perchóresis) or communicatio idiomatum,[2] the hypostatic union, the abstract impeccability, and such scholastic formulae, but in its broad Scriptural simplicity -- was the subject of the Hulsean Lectures before the University of Cambridge in the year 1870. In those lectures I endeavoured to sketch what has ever seemed to my mind the most convincing external evidence of our faith, namely, "The Witness of History to Christ." Those who have rejected the creed of the Church in this particular, approach the subject from a totally opposite point to our own. They read the earlier chapters of St. Luke and St. Matthew, and openly marvel that any mind can believe what to them appears to be palpable mythology; or they hear the story of one of Christ's miracles of power -- the walking on the Sea of Galilee, or turning the water into wine -- and scarcely conceal their insinuated misgivings as to honesty of those who can accept such narratives as true. Doubtless we should share their convictions in these respects, if we approach the subject in the same spirit and by the same avenues. To show that we do not and why we do not so approach it, is -- incidentally at least -- one of the objects of this book.

[1] Interchange

[2] "Communication of idioms," or, communion of attributes

The sceptic -- and let me here say at once that I hope to use no single word of anger or denunciation against a scepticism which I know to be in many cases perfectly honest and self-sacrificingly noble -- approaches the examination of the question from a point of view the very opposite to that of the believer. He looks at the majestic order and apparently unbroken uniformity of Low, until the Universe becomes to him but the result mechanically evolved from tendencies at once irreversible and self-originated. To use such a conception is wholly inconceivable. Law to us involves the necessity of postulation a Lawgiver, and "Nature," which we only use as an unscientific and imaginative synonym for the sum total of observed phenomena, involves in our conceptions the Divine Power of whose energy it is but the visible translucence. We believe that the God and Creator of "Nature" has made Himself known to us, if not by a primitive intuition, at any rate by immediate revelation to our hearts and consciences. And therefore such narratives as those to which I have alluded are not nakedly and singly presented to us in all their unsupported and startling difficulty. To us they are but incidental items in a faith which lies at the very bases of our being -- they are but fragments of that great whole which comprises all that is divine and mysterious and supernatural in the two great words, Christianity and Christendom. And hence, though we no longer prominently urge the miracles of Christ as the proofs of our religion, yet, on the other hand, we cannot regard them as stumbling-blocks in the path of an historical belief. We study the sacred books of all the great religions of the world; we see the effect exercised by those religions on the minds of their votaries; and in spite of all the truths which even the worst of them enshrined, we watch the failure of them all to produce the inestimable blessings which we have ourselves enjoyed from infancy, which we treasure as dearly as our life, and which we regard as solely due to the spread and establishment of the faith we hold. We read the systems and treatises of ancient philosophy, and in spite of all the great and noble elements in which they abound, we see their total incapacity to console, or support, or deliver, or regenerate the world. Then we see the light of Christianity dawning like a tender day-spring amid the universal and intolerable darkness. From the first, that new religion allies itself with the world's utter feeblenesses, and those feeblenesses it shares; yet without wealth, without learning, without genius, without arms, without anything to dazzle and attract -- the religion of outcasts and exiles, of fugitives and prisoners -- numbering among its earliest converts not many wise, not many noble, not many mighty, but such as the jailer of Philippi, and the runaway slave of Colossae -- with no blessing apparently upon it save such as cometh from above -- with no light whatever about it save the light that comes from heaven -- it puts to flight kings and their armies; it breathes a new life, and a new hope, and a new and unknown holiness into a guilty and decrepit world. This we see; and we see the work grow, and increase, and become more and more irresistible, and spread "with the gentleness of a sea that caresses the shore it covers." And seeing this, we recall the faithful principle of the wise and tolerant Rabbi, uttered more than 1,800 years ago -- "If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found to fight against God."[1]

[1] Acts v. 38, 39.

And when we have thus been led to see and to believe that the only religion in the world which was established the ideal of a perfect holiness, and rendered common the attainment of that ideal, has received in conspicuous measure the blessing of God, we examine its truths with a deeper reverence. The record of these truths -- the record of that teaching which made them familiar to the world -- we find in the Gospel narrative. And that narrative reveals to us much more. It not only furnishes us with an adequate reason for the existence and for the triumphs of the faith we hold, but it also brings home to us truths which affect our hearts and intellects no less powerfully than "the starry heavens above and the moral law within." Taught to regard ourselves as children of God, and common brothers in His great family of man, we find in the Gospels a revelation of God in His Son, which enables us to know Him more, and to trust Him more absolutely, and to serve Him more faithfully, than all which we can find in all the other books of God, whether in Scripture, or history, or the experience of life, or those unseen messages which God has written on every individual heart. And finding that this revelation has been recorded by honest men in narratives which, however fragmentary, appear to stand the test of history, and to bear on the face of them every mark of transparent simplicity and perfect truthfulness -- prepared for the reception of these glad tidings of God's love in man's redemption by the facts of the world without, and the experiences of the heart within -- we thus cease to find any overwhelming difficulty in the record that He whom we believe to have been the Son of God -- He who alone has displayed on earth the transcendent miracle of a sinless life -- should have walked on the Sea of Galilee or turned the water into wine.

And when we thus accept the truth of the miracles they become to us moral lessons of the profoundest value. In considering the miracles of Jesus we stand in a wholly different position to the earlier disciples. To them the evidence of the miracles lent an overwhelming force to the teachings of the Lord; they were as the seal of God to the proclamation of the new kingdom. But to us who, for nineteen centuries, have been children of that kingdom, such evidence is needless. To the Apostles they were the credentials of Christ's mission; to us they are but fresh revelations of His will. To us they are works rather than signs, revelations rather than portents. Their historical importance lies for us in the fact that without them it would be impossible to account for the origin and spread of Christianity. We appeal to them not to prove the truth of Christianity, but to illustrate its dissemination. But though to us Christianity rests on the basis of a Divine approval far more convincing than the display of supernatural power -- though to us the providence which for these two millenniums has ruled the destinies of Christendom is a miracle far more stupendous in its evidential force than the raising of the dead or the enlightenment of the blind -- yet a belief in these miracles enables us to solve problems which would otherwise be insolvable, as well as to embrace moral conceptions which would otherwise have found no illustration. To one who rejects them -- to one who believes that the loftiest morals and the divinest piety which mankind has ever seen were evoked by a religion which rested on errors or on lies -- the world's history must remain, it seems to me, a hopeless enigma or a revolting fraud.[1]

[1] "Que la philosophie est ingénieuse et profonde dans ses conjectures!" writes De Lamennais in his scornful style. "Comme les événemens qui paraissaient les plus extraordinaires, deviennent simple dès qu'elle daîgne les expliquer! Vous ne concevez pas que le Christianisme se soit propagé naturellement: elle va vous le faire comprendre. Les Apôtres ont dit, 'Nous vous annonçons l'Évangile au nom de l'Éternel, et vous devez nous croire, car nous sommes doués du pouvoir miraculeux. Nous rendons la santé aux malades, aux perclus l'usage de leurs membres, la vue aux aveugles, l'ouie aux sourds, la vie aux morts.' A ce discours le peuple est accouru de toutes parts, pour être témoin des miracles promis avec tant de confiance. Les malades n'ont point été guéris, les perclus n'ont point marché, les aveugles n'ont point vu, les sourds n'ont point entendu, les morts n'ont point ressuscité. Alors, transporté d'admiration, le peuple est tombé aux pieds des Apôtres, et s'est écrié, 'Ceux-ci sont manifestement les envoyés de Dieu, les ministres de sa puissance!' et sur le champ brisant ses idoles, il a quitté le culte des plaisirs pour le cutle de la croix; il a renoncé à ses habitudes, à ses préjugés, à ses passions; il a réformé ses mœurs et embrassé la pénitence; les riches ont vendu leurs biens, pour en distribuer le prix aux indigens, et tous ont préfacé les plus horribles tortures et une mort infâme aux remords d'abandonner une religion qui leur était si solidement prouvée." (Ess. sur l'Indifférence, iv. 458)

How ingenious and profound is philosophy in its conjectures! How simple do events which

appeared most extraordinary become when it deigns to explain them! You do not understand how naturally Christianity propagated itself: Philosophy will enable you to comprehend the matter. The Apostles said, "We proclaim to you the Gospel in the name of the Eternal, and you must believe us, for we are endowed with miraculous power. We restore health to the sick, the use of their limbs to the impotent, sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, life to the dead." At this announcement the people hurried from all quarters to witness the miracles promised with so much confidence. The sick were not healed, the impotent did not walk, the blind did not see, the deaf did not hear, the dead did not return to life. Then, transported with admiration, the people fell at the feet of the Apostles, and cried out, "These are manifestly the messengers of God, the ministers of his power!" and immediately breaking in pieces their idols, they forsook the worship of pleasure for the worship of the cross; they renounced their habits, their prejudices, their passions; they reforned their morals and embraced penitence; the rich sold their goods in order to distribute the price of them among the poor; and all preferred the most horrible tortures and an infamous death to the remorse of abandoning a religion which was proved to them in so solid a manner

[1] I take this opportunity of saying that the reader will not find in the following pages any one rigid or uniform system of transliteration of Hebrew words into English. This is due to the fact that, in most instances, my references to the Talmud have been derived from the numerous sources mentioned in the above paragraphs, and in referring such passages to the author who is responsible for their accuracy, I have generally adopted his mode of spelling. Scripture names I have mostly left in the form in which they occur in our English version; and in many terns that have acquired, a common currency, like Mishna, Gemara, Talmud, &c., I have left the words in the shape most usually adopted. Besides these sources of difference there may doubtless be others "quas aut incuria fudit aut humana parum cavit natura."[a] For these errors, where they occur, as well as for all others, I must ask the indulgence of the candid reader, who will appreciate the difficulties of a task accomplished under conditions far from favorable.

[a] Which may be ascribed either to negligence or to that incaution which is a part of human nature.

And now I send these pages forth not knowing what shall befall them, but with the earnest prayer that they may be blessed to aid the cause of truth and righteousness, and that He in whose named they are written may, of His mercy,

"Forgive them where they fail in truth,

And in His wisdom make me wise."

F. W. F.

THE LODGE, MARLBOROUGH COLLEGE,

Monday before Easter, 1874.
