GETHSEMANE -- THE AGONY AND THE ARREST.

"Non mortem horruit simpliciter ... peccata vero nostra, quorum onus illi erat impositum, suâ

ingente mole eum premebant."[1]

-- CALVIN (ad Matt. xxvi. 37).

[1] "He had no horror at death simply, ... our sins, the load of which was laid upom him, pressed him down with their enormous weight."

Their way led them through one of the city gates -- probably that which then corresponded to the present gate of St. Stephen -- down the steep sides of the ravine, across the wady of the Kidron,[1] which lay a hundred feet below, and up the green and quiet slope beyond it. To one who has visited the scene at that very season of the year and at that very hour of the night -- who has felt the solemn hush of the silence even at this short distance from the city wall -- who has seen the deep shadows flung by the great boles of the ancient olive-trees, and the chequering of light that falls on the sward through their moonlight-silvered leaves, it is more easy to realise the awe which crept over those few Galilæans, as in almost unbroken silence, with something perhaps of secrecy, and with a weight of mysterious dread brooding over their spirits, they followed Him, who with bowed head and sorrowing heart walked before them to His willing doom.[2]

[1] The reading of St. John, πέραν τοΰ χειµάρρου τών κέδρων (xviii. 1; א,D, τοΰ κέδρου), is probably no more than a curious instance of the Grecising of a Hebrew name, just as the brook Kishon is in 1 Kings xviii. 40 called χείµαρρος κισσών (of the Ivies): cf. LXX., 2 Sam. xv. 23; Jos. Antt. ix. 7, § 3. We do not hear of any cedars there but even if τών Κέδρων be the true reading, the word may have been surfrappé by the Evangelist himself; τοΰ κεδρών is, however, the most probable reading. The Kidron is a ravine rather than a brook. No water runs in it except occasionally, after unusually heavy rains. Nor can we see any special significance -- any "pathetic fallacy" -- in the name Kidron, as though it meant (Stier vii. 220) "the dark brook in the deep valley," with allusion to David's humiliation (1 Kings xv. 13), and idolatrous abominations (2 Kings xxiii. 4, &c.), and the fact that it was a kind of sewer for the Temple refuse. "There," says Stier, "surrounded by such memorials and typical allusions, the Lord descends into the dust of humiliation and anguish, as His glorification had taken place upon the top of the mountain." This attempt to see more in the words of the Gospel than they can fairly be supposed to convey would soon lead to all the elaborate mysticism and trifling of Rabbinic exegesis.

[2] Luke xxii. 39.

We are told but of one incident in that last and memorable walk through the midnight to the familiar Garden of Gethsemane.[1] It was a last warning to the disciples in general, to St. Peter in particular. It may be that the dimness, the silence, the desertion of their position, the dull echo of their footsteps, the stealthy aspect which their movements wore, the agonising sense that treachery was even now at work, was beginning already to produce an icy chill of cowardice in their hearts; sadly did Jesus turn and say to them that on that very night they should all be offended in Him -- all find their connection with Him a stumbling-block in their path -- and the old prophecy should be fulfilled, "I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered abroad." And yet, in spite of all, as a shepherd would he go before them, leading the way to Galilee?[2] They all repudiated the possibility of such an abandonment of their Lord, and Peter, touched already by this apparent distrust of His stability, haunted perhaps by some dread lest Jesus felt any doubt of him, was loudest and most emphatic in his denial. Even if all should be offended, yet never would he be offended. Was it a secret misgiving in his own heart which made his asseveration so prominent and so strong? Not even the repetition of the former warning, that, ere the cock should crow, he would thrice have denied his Lord, could shake him from his positive assertion that even the necessity of death itself should never drive him to such a sin. And Jesus only listened in mournful silence to vows which should so soon be scattered into air.

[1] Matt. xxvi. 31-35; Mark xiv. 27-31.

[2] Zech. xiii. 7; Matt. xxvi. 32, προάξω ύµάς.

So they came to Gethsemane, which is about half a mile from the city walls. It was a garden or orchard[1] marked probably by some slight enclosure; and as it had been a place of frequent resort for Jesus and His followers, we may assume that it belonged to some friendly owner. The name Gethsemane means "the oil-press," and doubtless it was so called from a press to crush the olives yielded by the countless trees from which the hill derives its designation. Any one who has rested at noonday in the gardens of En-gannim or Nazareth in spring, and can recall the pleasant shade yielded by the interlaced branches of olive and pomegranate, and fig and myrtle, may easily imagine what kind of spot it was. The traditional site, venerable and beautiful as it is from the age and size of the grey gnarled olive-trees, of which one is still known as the Tree of the Agony, is, perhaps, too public -- being, as it always must have been, at the angle formed by the two paths which lead over the summit and shoulder of Olivet -- to be regarded as the actual spot. It was more probably one of the secluded hollows at no great distance from it which witnessed that scene of awful and pathetic mystery.[2] But although the exact spot cannot be determined with certainty, the general position of Gethsemane is clear, and then as now the chequering moonlight, the grey leaves, the dark brown trunks, the soft greensward, the ravine with Olivet towering over it to the eastward and Jerusalem to the west, must have been the main external features of a place which must be regarded with undying interest while Time shall be, as the place where the Saviour of mankind entered alone into the Valley of the Shadow.

[1] κήπος (John xviii. 1); χωρίον (Matt. xxvi. 36).

[2] I had the deep and memorable happiness of being able to see Gethsemane with two friends, unaccompanied by any guide, late at night and under the full glow of the Paschal moon, on the night of April 14th, 1870. It is usually argued that the eight old time-hallowed olive-trees cannot reach back to the time of Christ, because Titus cut down the trees all round the city. This argument is not decisive; but still it is more probable that these trees are only the successors and descendants of those which have always given its name to the sacred hill. It is quite certain that Gethsemane must have been near this spot, and the tradition which fixes the site is very old.

Jesus knew that the awful hour of His deepest humiliation had arrived -- that from this moment till the utterance of that great cry with which He expired, nothing remained for Him on earth but the torture of physical pain and the poignancy of mental anguish. All that the human frame can tolerate of suffering was to be heaped upon His shrinking body; every misery that cruel and crushing insult can inflict was to weigh heavy on His soul; and in this torment of body and agony of soul even the high and radiant serenity of His divine spirit was to suffer a short but terrible eclipse. Pain in its acutest sting, shame in its most overwhelming brutality, all the burden of the sin and mystery of man's existence in its apostacy and fall -- this was what He must now face in all its most inexplicable accumulation. But one thing remained before the actual struggle, the veritable agony, began. He had to brace His body, to nerve His soul, to calm His spirit by prayer and solitude to meet that hour in which all that is evil in the Power of Evil should wreak its worst upon the Innocent and Holy. And He must face that hour alone: no human eye must witness, except through the twilight and shadow, the depth of His suffering. Yet He would have gladly shared their sympathy; it helped him in this hour of darkness to feel that they were near, and that those were nearest who loved Him best. "Stay here," he said to the majority, "while I go there and pray." Leaving them to sleep on the damp grass, each wrapped in his outer garment, He took with Him Peter and James and John, and went about a stone's-throw farther. It was well that Peter should face all that was involved in allegiance to Christ: it was well that James and John should know what was that cup which they had desired pre-eminently to drink. But soon even the society of these chosen and trusted ones was more than He could bear. A grief beyond utterance, a struggle beyond endurance, a horror of great darkness, a giddiness and stupefaction of soul overmastered Him, as with the sinking swoon of an anticipated death.[1] It was a tumult of emotion which none must see. "My soul," He said, "is full of anguish, even unto death. Stay here and keep watch." Reluctantly He tore Himself away from their sustaining tenderness and devotion,[2] and retired yet farther, perhaps out of the moonlight into the shadow. And there, until slumber overpowered them, they were conscious of how dreadful was that paroxysm of prayer and suffering through which He passed. They saw Him sometimes on His knees, sometimes outstretched in prostrate supplication upon the damp ground;[3] they heard snatches of the sounds of murmured anguish in which His humanity pleaded with the divine will of His Father. The actual words might vary, but the substance was the same throughout. "Abba, Father, all things are possible unto Thee; take away this cup from me; nevertheless, not what I will, but what Thou wilt."[4]

[1] Matt. xxvi. 37, ήρξατο λυπεϊσθαι καί άδηµονεϊν;[1a] Mark xiv. 33, έκθαµβεϊσθαι.[1b] Cf. Job. xviii. 20 (Aqu., άδηµονήσουσιν); Ps. cxvi. 11. See Pearson, On the Creed, Art. iv. n. The derivation may be from ά δηµέω, "I am carried away from myself;" or, perhaps more probably, from άδήσαι, "to loathe." It is remarkable that this verse (Matt. xxvi. 38), and John xii. 27, are the only passages where Jesus used the word ψυχή[1c] of Himself. [1a] "He began to be sorrowful and full of anguish." (Noyes.) [1b] "to be in great consternation."

[1c] soul.

[2] Luke xxii. 41, άπεσπάσθη άπ' αύτών[2a]. Cf. Acts xxi. 1. [2a] "and he was withdrawn from them."

[3] Luke xxii. 41, θείς τά γόνατα[3a]. Matt. xxvi. 39, έπεσεν έπί πρόσωπον αύτοΰ[3b]. [3a] "and kneeled down."

[3b] "and fell on his face."

[4] Nothing, as Dead Alford remarks, could prove more decisively the insignificance of the letter in comparison with the spirit, than the fact that the three Evangelists vary in the actual expression of the prayer.

And that prayer in all its infinite reverence and awe was heard;[1] that strong crying and those tears were not rejected. We may not intrude too closely into this scene. It is shrouded in a halo and a mystery into which no footstep may penetrate. We, as we contemplate it, are like those disciples -- our senses are confused, our perceptions are not clear. We can but enter into their amazement and sore distress. Half waking, half oppressed with an irresistible weight of troubled slumber, they only felt that they were dim witnesses of an unutterable agony, far deeper than anything which they could fathom, as it far transcended all that, even in our purest moments, we can pretend to understand. The place seems haunted by presences of good and evil, struggling in mighty but silent contest for the eternal victory. They see Him, before whom the demons had fled in howling terror, lying on His face upon the ground. They hear that voice wailing in murmurs of broken agony, which had commanded the wind and the sea, and they obeyed Him. The great drops of anguish which drop from Him in the deathful struggle, look to them like heavy gouts of blood. Under the dark shadows of the trees, amid the interrupted moonlight, it seems to them that there is an angel with Him, who supports His failing strength, who enables Him to rise victorious from those first prayers with nothing but the crimson traces of that bitter struggle upon His brow.[2]

[1] Heb. v. 7, είσακουσθείς άπό τής εύλαβείας.[1a]

[1a] "was heard by reason of his godly reverence." (Noyes, who adds: "Otherwise, was heard [and delivered] from what he feared." Alford's translation is: "having been heard by reason of his reverent submission;" Ainslie's: "and was delivered from what he feared") [2] The verses (Luke xxii. 43, 44) are omitted in some of the best MSS. (e.g., even A, B, and

the first corrector of א), and were so at a very early age. Professor westcott thinks that the varying evidence for their authenticity points to a recension of the Gospel by the Evangelist himself (Introd. p. 306). Olshausen and Lange here understand the angel of "the accession of spiritual power" -- "the angel of the hearing of prayer" (verse 43, ώφθη δέ α ύ τ ώ). It seems certain that an αίµατώδης ίδρώς[2a] under abnormal pathological circumstances is not unknown; and even if it were, all that the Evangelist says is έγένετο ό ίδρώς αύτοΰ ώ σ ε ί θρόµβοι αϊµατος, κ. τ. λ.[2b] See Dr. Stroud, On the Physical Cause of the Death of Christ, p. 183; Bynaeus, De Morte Christi, ii. 33.

[2a] sweat looking like blood.

[2b] "His sweat was as it were great drops of blood."

And whence came all this agonised failing of heart, this fearful amazement, this horror of great darkness, this passion which almost brought Him down to the grave before a single pang had been inflicted upon Him -- which forced from Him the rare and intense phenomenon of a blood-stained sweat -- which almost prostrated body, and soul, and spirit with one final blow? Was it the mere dread of death -- the mere effort and determination to face that which He foreknew in all its dreadfulness, but from which, nevertheless, His soul recoiled? There have been those who have dared -- I can scarcely write it without shame and sorrow -- to speak very slightingly about Gethsemane; to regard that awful scene, from the summit of their ignorant presumption, with an almost contemptuous dislike -- to speak as though Jesus had there shown a cowardly sensibility. Thus, at the very moment when we should most wonder and admire, they

"Not even from the Holy One of Heaven

Refrain their tongues blasphemous."[1]

And yet, if no other motive influence them -- if they merely regard Him as a Prophet preparing for a cruel death -- if no sense of decency, no power of sympathy, restrain them from thus insulting even a Martyr's agony at the moment when its pang was most intense -- does not common fairness, does not the most ordinary historic criticism, show them how cold and false, if nothing worse, must be the miserable insensibility which prevents them from seeing that it could have been no mere dread of pain, no mere shrinking from death, which thus agitated to its inmost centre the pure and innocent soul of the Son of Man?[2] Could not even a child see how inconsistent would be such an hypothesis with that heroic fortitude which fifteen hours of subsequent sleepless agony could not disturb -- with the majestic silence before priest and procurator, and king -- with the endurance from which the extreme of torture could not wring one cry -- with the calm and infinite ascendancy which overawed the hardened and worldly Roman into involuntary respect -- with the undisturbed supremacy of soul which opened the gates of Paradise to the repentant malefactor, and breathed compassionate forgiveness on the apostate priests? The Son of Man humiliated into prostration by the mere abject fear of death, which trembling old men and feeble maidens, and timid boys -- a Polycarp, a Blandina, an Attalus -- have yet braved without a sigh or a shudder, solely through faith in His name! Strange that He should be thus insulted by impious tongues, who brought to light that life and immortality from whence came the

"Ruendi

In ferrum mens prona viris, animaeque capaces

Mortis, et ignavum rediturae parcere vitae!"[3]

-- (Luc. Phars. i. 455.)

The meanest of idiots, the coarsest of criminals, have advanced to the scaffold without a tremor or a sob, and many a brainless and brutal murderer has mounted the ladder with a firm step, and looked round upon a yelling mob with an unflinching countenance. To adopt the commonplace of orators, "There is no passion in the mind of man so weak but it mates and masters the fear of death. Revenge triumphs over death; love slights it; honour aspireth to it; grief flieth to it; fear preoccupateth it. A man would die, though he were neither valiant nor miserable, only upon a weariness to do the same thing so oft over and over. It is no less worthy to observe how little alteration in good spirits the approaches of death make: for they appear to be the same men till the last instant." It is as natural to die as to be born. The Christian hardly needs to be told that it was no such vulgar fear which forced from his Saviour that sweat of blood. No, it was something infinitely more than this: infinitely more than the highest stretch of our imagination can realise. It was something far deadlier than death. It was the burden and the mystery of the world's sin which lay heavy on His heart; it was the tasting, in the divine humanity of a sinless life, the bitter cup which sin had poisoned; it was the bowing of Godhead to endure a stroke to which man's apostacy had lent such frightful possibilities. It was the sense, too, of how virulent, how frightful, must have been the force of evil in the Universe of God which could render necessary so infinite a sacrifice. It was the endurance, by the perfectly guiltless, of the worst malice which human hatred could devise; it was to experience in the bosom of perfect innocence and perfect love, all that was detestable in human ingratitude, all that was pestilent in human hypocrisy, all that was cruel in human rage. It was to brave the last triumph of Satanic spite and fury, uniting against His lonely head all the flaming arrows of Jewish falsity and heathen corruption -- the concentrated wrath of the rich and respectable, the yelling fury of the blind and brutal mob. It was to feel that His own, to whom He came, loved darkness rather than light -- that the race of the chosen people could be wholly absorbed in one insane repulsion against infinite goodness and purity and love.

[1] Ps. xl. 13.

[2] So Celsus (ap. Orig. ii. 24), and Julian (Theod. Mops.; Munter, Fragm. Patr. i. 121). Vanini, when taken to the scaffold, boasted his superiority to Jesus, "Illi in extremis prae timore imbellis sudor; ego imperturbatus morior"[2a] (Grammond, Hist. Gall. iii. 211). The Jews made the same taunt (R. Isaak b. Abraham, Chissuh Emunah, in Wagenseil). The passages are all quoted by Hofmann, p. 439.

[2a] "Then the band and the captain."

[3] ["Thrice happy they beneath their northern skies,

Who that worst fear, the fear of death despise;

Hence they no cares for this frail being feel,

But] rush undaunted on the pointed steel;

Provoke approaching fate, and bravely scorn

To spare that life which must so soon return." (Rowe's tr.) (The passage has reference to the Druids and their notions of the life to come.)

Through all this he passed in that hour which, with a recoil of sinless horror beyond our capacity to conceive, foretasted a worse bitterness than the worst bitterness of death. And after a time -- victorious indeed, but weary almost to fainting, like His ancestor Jacob, with the struggle of those supplications -- He came to seek one touch of human support and human sympathy from the chosen of the chosen -- His three Apostles. Alas! He found them sleeping. It was an hour of fear and peril; yet no certainty of danger, no love for Jesus, no feeling for His unspeakable dejection, had sufficed to hold their eyes waking. Their grief, their weariness, their intense excitement, had sought relief in heavy slumber. Even Peter, after all his impetuous promises, lay in deep sleep, for his eyes were heavy. "Simon, sleepest thou?" was all He said. As the sad reproachful sentence fell on their ears, and startled them from their slumbers, "Were ye so unable," He asked, "to watch with me a single hour? Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation." And then, not to palliate their failure, but rather to point out the peril of it, "The spirit," he added, "is willing, but the flesh is weak."

Once more He left them, and again, with deeper intensity, repeated the same prayer as before, and in a pause of His emotion came back to His disciples. But they had once more fallen asleep; nor, when He awoke them, could they, in their heaviness and confusion, find anything to say to Him. Well might He have said, in the words of David, "Thy rebuke hath broken my heart; I am full of heaviness; I looked for some to have pity on me, but there was no man, neither found I any to comfort me."[1]

[1] Ps. lxix. 20.

For the third and last time -- but now with a deeper calm, and a brighter serenity of that triumphant confidence which had breathed through the High-Priestly prayer -- He withdrew to find His only consolation in communing with God. And there He found all that He needed. Before that hour was over He was prepared for the worst that Satan or man could do. He knew all that would befall Him; perhaps He had already caught sight of the irregular glimmering of lights as His pursuers descended from the Temple precincts. Yet there was no trace of agitation in His quiet words when, coming a third time and finding them once more sleeping, "Sleep on now," He said and take your rest. It is enough. The hour is come. Lo! the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of sinners." For all the aid that you can render, for all the comfort your sympathy can bestow, sleep on. But all is altered now. It is not I who now wish to break these your heavy slumbers. They will be very rudely and sternly broken by others. "Rise, then; let us be going. Lo! he that betrayeth me is at hand."[1]

[1] It has been asked why St. John tells us nothing of the agony? We do not know; but it may very likely have been because the story had already been told as fully as it was known. Certainly, his silence did not spring from any notion that the agony was unworthy of Christ's grandeur (see xii. 27; xviii. 11).

Yes, it was more than time to rise, for while saints had slumbered sinners had plotted and toiled in exaggerated preparation. While they slept in their heavy anguish, the traitor had been very wakeful in his active malignity. More than two hours had passed since from the lighted chamber of their happy communion he had plunged into the night, and those hours had been very fully occupied. He had gone to the High Priests and Pharisees, agitating them and hurrying them on with his own passionate precipitancy; and partly perhaps out of genuine terror of Him with whom he had to deal, partly to enhance his own importance, had got the leading Jews to furnish him with a motley band composed of their own servants, of the Temple watch with their officers, and even with a part at least of the Roman garrison from the Tower of Antonia, under the command of their tribune.[1] They were going against One who was deserted and defenceless, yet the soldiers were armed with swords, and even the promiscuous throng had provided themselves with sticks. They were going to seize One who would make no attempt at flight or concealment, and the full moon shed its lustre on their unhallowed expedition; yet, lest He should escape them in some limestone grotto, or in the deep shade of the olives, they carried lanterns and torches in their hands. It is evident that they made their movements as noiseless and stealthy as possible; but at night a deep stillness hangs over an Oriental city, and so large a throng could not move unnoticed. Already, as Jesus was awaking His sleepy disciples, His ears had caught in the distance the clank of swords, the tread of hurrying footsteps, the ill-suppressed tumult of an advancing crowd. He knew all that awaited Him; He knew that the quiet garden which He had loved, and where He had so often held happy intercourse with His disciples, was familiar to the traitor. Those unwonted and hostile sounds, that red glare of lamps and torches athwart the moonlit interspaces of the olive-yards, were enough to show that Judas had betrayed the secret of His retirement, and was even now at hand.

[1] ή ούν σπεϊρα καί ό χιλίαρχος[1a] (John xviii. 12; cf. 3); but clearly St. John does not mean that all the 600 soldiers of the garrison accompanied Judas. Of course the consent of Pilate must have been obtained with the express object of prejudicing him against Jesus as a dangerous person. The στρατηγοί τοΰ ίεροΰ[1b] of Luke xxii. 52 are Levitical officers. Critics have tried, as in so many instances, to show that there is an error here because there was only one "captain of the Temple" (or ish ar ha-bait) whose office seems to date from the Captivity [Neh. ii. 8; vii. 2 (sar ha-bîrah); cf. 2 Macc. iii. 4]. But in 3 Esdr. i. 8, we find οί έπιστάται τοΰ ίεροΰ, three in number; and as the captain of the guards under him, to make the rounds (Jos. B. J. vi. 5, § 3, οί τοΰ ίεροΰ φύλακες ήγγειλαν τώ στρατηγώ),[1c] the name might be applied generally to the whole body.

[1a] "Then the band and the captain."

[1b] "Captains of the temple."

[1c] "Now those that kept watch in the temple [came hereupon running] to the captain of the temple, and told him [of it"].

And even as Jesus spoke the traitor himself appeared.[1] Overdoing his part -- acting in the too-hurried impetuosity of a crime so hideous that he dared not pause to think -- he pressed forward into the enclosure, and was in front of all the rest.[2] "Comrade," said Jesus to him as he hurried forward, "the crime for which thou art come[3] -- "The sentence seems to have been cut short by the deep agitation of His spirit, nor did Judas return any answer, intent only on giving to his confederates his shameful preconcerted signal. "He whom I kiss," he had said to them, "the same is He. Seize Him at once, and lead Him away safely."[4] And so, advancing to Jesus with his usual cold title of address, he exclaimed, "Rabbi, Rabbi, hail!" and profaned the sacred cheek of his Master with a kiss of overacted salutation.[5] "Judas," said Jesus to him, with stern and sad reproach, "dost thou betray the Son of Man with a kiss?" These words were enough, for they simply revealed the man to himself, by stating his hideous act in all its simplicity; and the method of his treachery was so unparalleled in its heinousness, so needless and spontaneously wicked, that more words would have been superfluous. With feelings that the very devils might have pitied, the wretch slunk back to the door of the enclosure, towards which the rest of the crowd were now beginning to press.

[1] Throughout the description of these scenes I have simply taken the four Gospel narratives as one whole, and regarded them as supplementing each other. It will be seen how easily, and without a single violent hypothesis, they fall into one harmonious, probable, and simple narrative. Lange here adopts what seems to me to be the best order of sequence. The fact that Judas gave the signal too early for his own purpose seems to follow from John xviii. 4-9 (έξήλθεν). Alford thinks it "inconceivable" that Judas had given his traitor-kiss before this scene; but his own arrangement will surely strike every careful reader as much more inconceivable.

[2] Luke xxii. 47.

[3] Matt. xxvi. 50, έφ' ό πάρει -- perhaps this is an exclamation for "What a crime!" I have taken it in the sense of an aposiopesis, "What thou art here for (do)." But perhaps έφ' ό; may == έπί τί; in Hellenistic Greek (Winer, III. xxiv. 4). It is not, however, likely that Jesus would have asked a question on the purpose of Judas's coming. Observe Έταϊρε (Matt. xxvi. 50), "Comrade," not "friend" (φίλε), as most versions wrongly translate it. Never, even in the ordinary conventionalities of life, would Christ use a term which was not strictly true. There is even something stern in the use of έταϊρε (cf. Matt. xx. 13; xxii. 12). Judas, in the strictest sense of the word had been an έταϊρος; but as Ammonius says, ό έταϊρος ού πάντως φίλος[3a]. Hence the lines of Houdenius (De Pass.) --

"Si honoras, O dulcis Domine,

Inimicum amici nomine.

Quales erunt amoris carmine

Qui te canunt et modulamine?"[3b]

although exquisitely beautiful, are not strictly accurate. 3a. the comrade is not altogether a friend.

3b. Dear Lord, if thou dost honor

Thy foe with name of friend,

Then tell the name thou givest

To those who love thee ever,

Who praise thee without end.

[4] Mark xiv. 44, κρατήσατε ... καί άπαγάγετε άσφαλώς -- one of the many slight undesigned traces of Judas's involuntary terror and misgiving. His words probably were Schalôm alêka rabbi, "Peace be to thee, Rabbi!" but there came no alêka Shalôm in reply: there was no peace for the errand on which Judas had come. Mr. Monro observes how characteristic are these snatches of dialogue like τό εί δύνασαι[4a] in Mark ix. 23 (v. p. 387), and the τήν άρχήν ότι καί λαλώ ύµϊν[4b] (John viii. 25; v. p 416), and έάτε έως τούτου[4c] (Luke xxii. 51; v. infr., p. 583). Surely the most inventive of inventors neither could nor would invent phrases like these! [4a] "if thou art able."

[4b] See note 2, p. 416.

[4c] "suffer ye thus far." [5] The κατεφίλησεν of Matt. xxvi. 49; Mark xiv. 45, as compared with the φιλήσω before, is clearly meant to imply a fervent kiss. Something of the same kind seems to be intended by the "Rabbi! Rabbi!" of Mark xiv. 45. Κύριε[5a] was the ordinary address of the Apostles to Christ; but the colder and feebler "Rabbi" seems to have been the title always used by Judas (Bengel). Cf. supr., p. 562.

[5a] Lord.

"Lord, shall we smite with the sword?" was the eager question of St. Peter, and the only other disciple provided with a weapon; for, being within the garden, the Apostles were still unaware of the number of the captors.[1] Jesus did not at once answer the question; for no sooner had He repelled the villainous falsity of Judas than He Himself stepped out of the enclosure to face His pursuers. Not flying, not attempting to hide Himself, He stood there before them in the full moonlight in His unarmed and lonely majesty, shaming by His calm presence their superfluous torches and superfluous arms.

[1] All this is obvious from the context. The place which, since the days of St. Helena, has been pointed out as the garden of Gethsemane, may or may not be the authentic site; but there can be little doubt that the actual κήπος or χωρίον had an enclosing wall.

"Whom are ye seeking?" He asked.

The question was not objectless. It was asked, as St. John points out,[1] to secure His Apostles from all molestation; and we may suppose also that it served to make all who were present the witnesses of His arrest, and so to prevent the possibility of any secret assassination or foul play.

[1] John xviii. 8. How absolutely does this narrative shatter to pieces the infamous calumny of the Jews, κρυπτόµενος µέν καί διαδιδράσκων έπονειδέστατα έάλω[1a] (Orig. c. Cels. 2, 9 quoted by Keim, III. ii. 298). Keim, without ignoring Celsus's use of Jewish calumnies, thinks that this attack is founded on John x. 39, &c.

[1a] "was found attempting to conceal himself, and endeavoring to escape in a most disgraceful manner."

"Jesus of Nazareth," they answered.

Their excitement and awe preferred this indirect answer, though if there could have been any doubt as to who the speaker was, Judas was there -- the eye of the Evangelist noticed him, trying in vain to lurk amid the serried ranks of the crowd -- to prevent any possible mistake which might have been caused by the failure of his premature and therefore disconcerted signal.

"I am He,[1]" said Jesus.

[1] John xviii. 5. One of those minute touches which so clearly mark the eye witness -- which are inexplicable on any other supposition, and which abound in the narrative of the beloved disciple. To give to the "I am He" any mystic significance (Isa. xliii. 10, LXX.; John viii. 28), as is done by Lange and others, seems unreasonable.

Those quiet words produced a sudden paroxysm of amazement and dread. That answer so gentle "had in it a strength greater than the eastern wind, or the voice of thunder, for God was in that 'still voice,' and it struck them down to the ground." Instances are not wanting in history in which the untroubled brow, the mere glance, the calm bearing of some defenceless man, has disarmed and paralysed his enemies. The savage and brutal Gauls could not lift their swords to strike the majestic senators of Rome. "I cannot slay Marius," exclaimed the barbarian slave, flinging down his sword and flying headlong from the prison into which he had been sent to murder the aged hero.[1] Is there, then, any ground for the scoffing scepticism with which many have received St. John's simple but striking narrative, that, at the words "I am He," a movement of contagious terror took place among the crowd, and, starting back in confusion, some of them fell to the ground? Nothing surely was more natural. It must be remembered that Judas was among them; that his soul was undoubtedly in a state of terrible perturbation; that Orientals are specially liable to sudden panic; that fear is an emotion eminently sympathetic; that most of them must have heard of the mighty miracles of Jesus, and that all were at any rate aware that He claimed to be a Prophet; that the manner in which He met this large multitude, which the alarms of Judas had dictated as essential to His capture, suggested the likelihood of some appeal to supernatural powers; that they were engaged in one of those deeds of guilty violence and midnight darkness which paralyse the stoutest minds. When we bear this in mind, and when we remember too that on many occasions in His history the mere presence and word of Christ had sufficed to quell the fury of the multitude, and to keep Him safe in the midst of them,[2] it hardly needs any recourse to miracle to account for the fact that these official marauders and their infamous guide recoiled from those simple words, "I am He," as though the lightning had suddenly been flashed into their faces.

[1] Vell. Paterc. ii. 19. Other commentators adduce the further instances of M. Antonius (Val. Max. viii. 9, 2), Probus, Pertinax, Teligny, stepson of Admiral Coligny, Bishop Stanislaus, &c. No one, so far as I have seen, quotes the instance of Avidius Cassius, who, springing to the door of his tent in night-dress, quelled a mutinous army by his mere presence. In the Talmud, seventy of the strongest Egyptians fall to the earth in attempting to bind Simeon, the brother of Joseph. Jeremy Taylor beautifully says, "But there was a divinity upon Him that they could not seize Him at first; but as a wave climbing of a rock is beaten back and scattered into members, till falling down it creeps with gentle waftings, and kisses the feet of the stony mountain, and so encircles it: so the soldiers coming at first with a rude attempt, were twice repelled by the glory of His person, till they, falling at His feet, were at last admitted to a seizure of His body." (Life of Christ III. xv.)

[2] Luke iv. 30; John vii. 30; viii. 59; x. 39; Mark xi. 18.

While they stood cowering and struggling there, He again asked them, "Whom are ye seeking?" Again they replied, "Jesus of Nazareth." "I told you," He answered, "that I am He. If, then, ye are seeking me, let these go away." For He Himself had said in His prayer, "Of those whom Thou hast given me have I lost none."

The words were a signal to the Apostles that they could no longer render Him any service, and that they might now consult their own safety if they would. But when they saw that He meant to offer no resistance, that He was indeed about to surrender Himself to His enemies, some pulse of nobleness or of shame throbbed in the impetuous soul of Peter; and hopeless and useless as all resistance had now become, he yet drew his sword, and with a feeble and ill-aimed blow severed the ear of a man named Malchus, a servant of the High Priest. Instantly Jesus stopped the ill-timed and dangerous struggle. "Return that sword of thine into its place," He said to Peter, "for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword;" and then He reproachfully asked His rash disciple whether he really supposed that He could not escape if He would? whether the mere breathing of a prayer would not secure for Him -- had He not voluntarily intended to fulfil the Scriptures by drinking the cup which His Father had given Him -- the aid, not of twelve timid Apostles, but of more than twelve legions of angels?[1] And then, turning to the soldiers who were holding Him, He said, "Suffer ye thus far,"[2] and in one last act of miraculous mercy touched and healed the wound.

[1] A legion during the Empire consisted of about 6,000 men. The fact that St. John alone mentions the names of St. Peter and Malchus may arise simply from his having been more accurately acquainted than the other Evangelists with the events of that heart-shaking scene; but there is nothing absurd or improbable in the current supposition, that the name of Peter may have been purposely kept in the background in the earliest cycle of Christian records. [2] This may either mean, "Let me free for one moment only, while I heal this wounded man," as Alford not improbably understands it; or, "Excuse this single act of resistance."

In the confusion of the night this whole incident seems to have passed unnoticed except by a very few. At any rate, it made no impression upon these hardened men. Their terror had quite vanished, and had been replaced by insolent confidence. The Great Prophet had voluntarily resigned Himself; He was their helpless captive. No thunder had rolled; no angel flashed down from heaven for His deliverance; no miraculous fire devoured amongst them. They saw before them nothing but a weary unarmed man, whom one of His own most intimate followers had betrayed, and whose arrest was simply watched in helpless agony by a few terrified Galilæans. They had fast hold of Him, and already some chief priests, and elders, and leading officers of the Temple-guard had ventured to come out of the dark background from which they had securely seen His capture, and to throng about Him in insulting curiosity. To these especially[1] He turned, and said to them, "Have ye come out as against a robber with swords and staves? When I was daily with you in the Temple ye did not stretch out your hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness." Those fatal words quenched the last gleam of hope in the minds of His followers. "Then His disciples, all of them"[2] -- even the fiery Peter, even the loving John -- "forsook Him, and fled." At that supreme moment only one unknown youth -- perhaps the owner of Gethsemane, perhaps St. Mark the Evangelist,[3] perhaps Lazarus the brother of Martha and Mary -- ventured in his intense excitement, to hover on the outskirts of the hostile crowd. He had apparently been roused from sleep, for he had nothing to cover him except the sindôn, or linen sheet, in which he had been sleeping. But the Jewish emissaries, either out of the mere wantonness of a crowd at seeing a person in an unwonted guise, or because they resented his too close intrusion, seized hold of the sheet which he had wrapped about him; whereupon he too was suddenly terrified, and fled away naked, leaving the linen garment in their hands.

[1] Luke xxii. 52, είπε δέ ... πρός τούς π ρ ο σ γ ε ν ο µ έ ν ο υ ςπρός αύτόν άρχιερεϊς, κ. τ. λ. 2. Matt. xxvi. 56, οί µαθηταί πάντες. Many readers will thank me here for quoting the fine lines from Browning's Death in the Desert: --

"Forsake the Christ thou sawest transfigured, Him

Who trod the sea and brought the dead to life!

What should wring this from thee? Ye laugh and ask

What wrung it? Even a torchlight and a noise,

The sudden Roman faces, violent hands,

And fear of what the Jews might do! Just that,

And it is written, 'I forsook and fled.'

There was my trial, and it ended thus."

[3] Mark xiv. 51, 52 only. As to the supposition that it was Lazarus -- founded partly on the locality, partly on the probabilities of the case, partly on the fact that the σινδών was a garment that only a person of some wealth would possess -- see a beautiful article on "Lazarus," by Professor Plumptre, in the Dict. of the Bible. Ewald's supposition, that it was St. Paul(!), seems to me amazing. The word םור ָע, γυµνός, though, like the Latin nudus, it constantly means "With only the under robe on" (1 Sam. xix. 24; John xxi. 7; Hes. Έργ., 391; Virg. G. i. 299), is here probably literal.

Jesus was now absolutely alone in the power of His enemies. At the command of the tribune His hands were tied behind His back,[1] and forming a close array around Him, the Roman soldiers, followed and surrounded by the Jewish servants, led Him once more through the night, over the Kedron, and up the steep city slope beyond it, to the palace of the High Priest.

[1] John xviii. 12.
