JESUS BEFORE PILATE.

"Per procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat."[1]

-- TAC. Ann. xv. 44.

[1] [Christ] "was put to death as a criminal by Pontius Pilate, procurator [of Judea"]

"Suffered under Pontius Pilate" -- so, in every creed of Christendom, is the unhappy name of the Roman procurator handed down to eternal execration. Yet the object of introducing that name was not to point a moral, but to fix an epoch; and, in point of fact, of all the civil and ecclesiastical rulers before whom Jesus was brought to judgment, Pilate was the least guilty of malice and hatred, the most anxious, if not to spare His agony, at least to save His life.

What manner of man was this in whose hands were placed, by power from above, the final destinies of the Saviour's life? Of his origin, and of his antecedents before AD 26, when he became the sixth Procurator of Judæa, but little is known. In rank he belonged to the ordo equester, and he owed his appointment to the influence of Sejanus. His name "Pontius" seems to point to a Samnite extraction; his cognomen "Pilatus" to a warlike ancestry. His praenomen, if he had one, has not been preserved. In Judæa he had acted with all the haughty violence and insolent cruelty of a typical Roman governor. Scarcely had he been well installed as Procurator, when, allowing his soldiers to bring with them by night the silver eagles and other insignia of the legions from Cæsarea to the Holy City, he excited a furious outburst of Jewish feeling against an act which they regarded as idolatrous profanation. For five days and nights -- often lying prostrate on the bare ground -- they surrounded and almost stormed his residence at Cæsarea with tumultuous and threatening entreaties, and could not be made to desist on the sixth, even by the peril of immediate and indiscriminate massacre at the hands of the soldiers whom he sent to surround them. He had then sullenly given way, and this foretaste of the undaunted and fanatical resolution of the people with whom he had to deal, went far to embitter his whole administration with a sense of overpowering disgust.[1]

[1] Jos. Antt. xviii. 3, § 1; B. J. ii. 9, §§ 2, 3.

The outbreak of the Jews on a second occasion was perhaps less justifiable, but it might easily have been avoided, if Pilate would have studied their character a little more considerately, and paid more respect to their dominant superstition. Jerusalem seems to have always suffered, as it does very grievously to this day, from a bad and deficient supply of water. To remedy this inconvenience, Pilate undertook to build an aqueduct, by which water could be brought from the "Pools of Solomon." Regarding this as a matter of public benefit, he applied to the purpose some of the money from the "Corban," or sacred treasury, and the people rose in furious myriads to resent this secular appropriation of their sacred fund. Stung by their insults and reproaches, Pilate disguised a number of his soldiers in Jewish costume, and sent them among the mob, with staves and daggers concealed under their garments, to punish the ringleaders. Upon the refusal of the Jews to separate quietly, a signal was given, and the soldiers carried out their instructions with such hearty good-will, that they wounded and beat to death not a few both of the guilty and the innocent, and created so violent a tumult that many perished by being trodden to death under the feet of the terrified and surging mob.[1] Thus, in a nation which produced the sicarii, Pilate had given a fatal precedent of sicarian conduct; the Assassins had received from their Procurator an example of the use of political assassination.

[1] These two instances are twice related by Josephus, Antt. xviii. 3, §§ 1, 2. B. J. ii. 9, §§ 2, 3, 4. Ewald has precariously conjectured that the "tower of Siloam" which fell and crushed eighteen people may have been connected with these works, and so may have furnished ground to those who desired to interpret that accident as a Divine judgment (Gesch. v. 40; Luke xiii. 4). It has been suggested with some probability that the real disgust of the Jews against the plan for building an aqueduct was due to a belief that its construction would render the city less easy of defence.

A third seditious tumult must still more have embittered the disgust of the Roman Governor for his subjects, by showing him how impossible it was to live among such people -- even in a conciliatory spirit -- without outraging some of their sensitive prejudices. In the Herodian palace at Jerusalem, which he occupied during the festivals, he had hung some gilt shields dedicated to Tiberius. In the speech of Agrippa before the Emperor Gaius, as narrated by Philo, this act is attributed to wanton malice; but since, by the king's own admission, the shields were perfectly plain, and were merely decorated with a votive inscription, it is fair to suppose that the Jews had taken offence at what Pilate simply intended for a harmless private ornament; and one which, moreover, he could hardly remove without some danger of offending the gloomy and suspicious Emperor to whose honour they were dedicated. Since he would not give way, the chief men of the nation wrote a letter of complaint to Tiberius himself. It was a part of Tiberius's policy to keep the provinces contented, and his masculine intellect despised the obstinacy which would risk an insurrection rather than sacrifice a whim. He therefore reprimanded Pilate, and ordered the obnoxious shields to be transferred from Jerusalem to the Temple of Augustus at Cæsarea.

The latter incident is related by Philo[1] only; and besides these three outbreaks, we hear in the Gospels of some wild tumult in which Pilate had mingled the blood of the Galilæans with their sacrifices. He was finally expelled from his Procuratorship in consequence of an accusation preferred against him by the Samaritans, who complained to Lucius Vitellius, the Legate of Syria, that he had wantonly attacked, slain, and executed a number of them who had assembled on Mount Gerizim by the invitation of an impostor -- possibly Simon Magus -- who promised to show them the Ark and sacred vessels of the Temple, which, he said, had been concealed there by Moses.[2] The conduct of Pilate seems on this occasion to have been needlessly prompt and violent; and although, when he arrived at Rome, he found that Tiberius was dead, yet even Gaius refused to reinstate him in his government, thinking it no doubt a bad sign that he should thus have become unpleasantly involved with the people of every single district in his narrow government. Sejanus had shown the most utter dislike against the Jews, and Pilate probably reflected his patron's antipathies.[3]

[1] Legat. ad Caium, § 38. Philo calls him βαρύµηνις, and τήν φύσιν άκαµπής καί µετά τοΰ αύθάδους άµείλικτος.[1a]

[1a] by nature unbending and doggedly implacable. [2] Jos. Antt. xviii. 4, § 1. This was a Messianic expectation (Ewald, Gesch. Isr. v. 171, E. Tr.) [3] See Salvador, Dominion Romaine, i. 428.

Such was Pontius Pilate, whom the pomps and perils of the great yearly festival had summoned from his usual residence at Cæsarea Philippi to the capital of the nation which he detested, and the headquarters of a fanaticism which he despised. At Jerusalem he occupied one of the two gorgeous palaces which had been erected there by the lavish architectural extravagance of the first Herod. It was situated in the Upper City to the south-west of the Temple Hill, and like the similar building at Cæsarea, having passed from the use of the provincial king to that of the Roman governor, was called Herod's Prætorium.[1] It was one of those luxurious abodes, "surpassing all description," which were in accordance with the tendencies of the age, and on which Josephus dwells with ecstasies of admiration.[2] Between its colossal wings of white marble -- called respectively Cæsareum and Agrippeum, in the usual spirit of Herodian flattery to the Imperial house -- was an open space commanding a noble view of Jerusalem, adorned with sculptured porticos and columns of many-coloured marble, paved with rich mosaics, varied with fountains and reservoirs, and green promenades which furnished a delightful asylum to flocks of doves.[3] Externally it was a mass of lofty walls, and towers, and gleaming roofs, mingled in exquisite varieties of splendour; within, its superb rooms, large enough to accommodate a hundred guests, were adorned with gorgeous furniture and vessels of gold and silver. A magnificent abode for a mere Roman knight! and yet the furious fanaticism of the populace at Jerusalem made it a house so little desirable, that neither Pilate nor his predecessors seem to have cared to enjoy its luxuries for more than a few weeks in the whole year. They were forced to be present in the Jewish capital during those crowded festivals which were always liable to be disturbed by some outburst of inflammable patriotism, and they soon discovered that even a gorgeous palace can furnish but a repulsive residence if it be built on the heaving lava of a volcano.

[1] Acts xxiii. 35. Verres occupied an old palace of Hiero at Syracuse (Cic. Verr. ii. 5, 12). [2] Jos. B. J. v. 4, § 4: παντός λόγου κρείσσων;[2a] id., ούθ' έρµηνεΰσαι δυνατόν άξίως τά βασίλεια[2b].

[2a] [a palace] "which exceeds all my ability to describe it." [2b] "it is not possible to give a complete description of these palaces." [3] See Jos. B. J. ii. 14, § 8; 15, § 5, from which it appears that Florus usually occupied this palace. For the Cæsareum and the Agrippeum, see id. i. 21, § 1, δύο τούς µεγίστους καί περικαλλεστάτους οϊκους οϊς ούδέ ναός πή συνεκρίνετο;[3a] id. v. 4, § 4, άδιήγητος ή ποικιλία τών λίθων ήν.[3b] Keim [Eine stolze Residenz für einen römischen Ritter] has partly reproduced the description of Josephus, III. ii. 2, 361. [3a] ["He also built for himself a palace in the upper city, containing] two very large and most beautiful apartments, to which the holy house itself could not be compared [in largeness"] [3b] "the variety of the stones is not to be expressed."

In that kingly palace -- such as in His days of freedom He had never trod -- began, in three distinct acts, the fourth stage of that agitating scene which preceded the final agonies of Christ. It was unlike the idle inquisition of Annas -- the extorted confession of Caiaphas -- the illegal decision of the Sanhedrin; for here His judge was in His favour, and with all the strength of a feeble pride, and all the daring of a guilty cowardice, and all the pity of which a bloodstained nature was capable, did strive to deliver Him. This last trial is full of passion and movement: it involves a threefold change of scene, a threefold accusation, a threefold acquittal by the Romans, a threefold rejection by the Jews, a threefold warning to Pilate, and a threefold effort on his part, made with ever-increasing energy and ever-deepening agitation, to baffle the accusers and to set the victim free.[1] [1] German criticism has, without any sufficient grounds, set aside as unhistorical much of St. John's narrative of this trial; but although it is not mentioned either by Josephus or Philo, it agrees in the very minutest particulars with everything which we could come to expect from the accounts which they give us, both of Pilate's own character and antecedents, and of the relations in which he stood to the Emperor and to the Jews.

[1] δήσαντες (Matt. xxvii. 2; Mark xv. 1). In sign of condemnation: such at least is the early tradition, and St. Basil derives from this circumstance the use of the stole (Jer. Taylor, III. xv.)

Disturbed at this early hour, and probably prepared for some Paschal disturbance more serious than usual, Pilate entered the Hall of Judgment, whither Jesus had been led, in company (as seems clear) with a certain number of His accusers and of those most deeply interested in His case.[1] But the great Jewish hierarchs, shrinking from ceremonial pollution, though not from moral guilt -- afraid of leaven, though not afraid of innocent blood -- refused to enter the Gentile's hall, lest they should be polluted, and should consequently be unable that night to eat the Passover. In no good humour, but in haughty and half-necessary condescension to what he would regard as the despicable superstitions of an inferior race, Pilate goes out to them under the burning early sunlight of an Eastern spring. One haughty glance takes in the pompous assemblage of priestly notables, and the turbulent mob of this singular people, equally distasteful to him as a Roman and as a ruler; and observing in that one glance the fierce passions of the accusers, as he had already noted the meek ineffable grandeur of their victim, his question is sternly brief: "What accusation bring ye against this man?" The question took them by surprise, and showed them that they must be prepared for an unconcealed antagonism to all their purposes. Pilate evidently intended a judicial inquiry; they had expected only a licence to kill, and to kill, not by a Jewish method of execution, but by one which they regarded as more horrible and accursed.[2] "If He were not a malefactor," is their indefinite and surly answer, "we would not have delivered Him up unto thee." But Pilate's Roman knowledge of law, his Roman instinct of justice, his Roman contempt for their murderous fanaticism, made him not choose to act upon a charge so entirely vague, nor give the sanction of his tribunal to their dark disorderly decrees. He would not deign to be an executioner where he had not been a judge. "Very well," he answered, with a superb contempt, "take ye Him and judge Him according to your law." But now they are forced to the humiliating confession that, having been deprived of the jus gladii, they cannot inflict the death which alone will satisfy them; for indeed it stood written in the eternal councils that Christ was to die, not by Jewish stoning or strangulation, but by that Roman form of execution which inspired the Jews with a nameless horror, even by crucifixion;[3] that He was to reign from His cross -- to die by that most fearfully significant and typical of deaths -- public, slow, conscious, accursed, agonising -- worse even than burning -- the worst type of all possible deaths, and the worst result of that curse which He was to remove for ever. Dropping, therefore, for the present, the charge of blasphemy, which did not suit their purpose,[4] they burst into a storm of invectives against Him, in which are discernible the triple accusations, that He perverted the nation, that He forbade to give tribute, that He called Himself a king. All three charges were flagrantly false, and the third all the more so because it included a grain of truth. But since they had not confronted Jesus with any proofs or witnesses, Pilate, in whose whole bearing and language is manifest the disgust embittered by fear with which the Jews inspired him -- deigns to notice the third charge alone, and proceeds to discover whether the confession of the prisoner -- always held desirable by Roman institutions -- would enable him to take any cognizance of it. Leaving the impatient Sanhedrin and the raging crowd, he retired into the Judgment Hall. St. John alone preserves for us the memorable scene. Jesus, though not "in soft clothing," though not a denizen of kings' houses, had been led up the noble flight of stairs, over the floors of agate and lazuli, under the gilded roofs, ceiled with cedar and painted with vermilion, which adorned but one abandoned palace of a great king of the Jews. There, amid those voluptuous splendours, Pilate -- already interested, already feeling in this prisoner before him some nobleness which touched his Roman nature -- asked Him in pitying wonder, "Art thou the King of the Jews?" -- thou poor, worn, tear-stained outcast in this hour of thy bitter need[5] -- oh, pale, lonely, friendless, wasted man, in thy poor peasant garments, with thy tied hands, and the foul traces of the insults of thine enemies on thy face, and on thy robes -- thou, so unlike the fierce magnificent Herod, whom this multitude which thirsts for thy blood acknowledged as their sovereign -- art thou the King of the Jews? There is a royalty which Pilate, and men like Pilate, cannot understand -- a royalty of holiness, a supremacy of self-sacrifice. To say "No" would have been to belie the truth; to say "Yes" would have been to mislead the questioner. Sayest thou this of thyself?" He answered with gentle dignity, "or did others tell it thee of me?"[6] "Am I a Jew?" is the disdainful answer. "Thy own nation and the chief priests delivered thee unto me. What hast thou done?" Done? -- works of wonder, and mercy, and power, and innocence, and these alone. But Jesus reverts to the first question, now that He has prepared Pilate to understand the answer: "Yes, He is a king; but not of this world; not from hence; not one for whom His servants would fight." "Thou art a king, then?" said Pilate to Him in astonishment. Yes! but a king not in this region of falsities and shadows, but one born to bear witness unto the truth, and one whom all who were of the truth should hear. "Truth," said Pilate impatiently, "what is truth?" What had he -- a busy, practical Roman governor -- to do with such dim abstractions? what bearing had they on the question of life and death? what impractical hallucination, what fairyland of dreaming phantasy was this? Yet, though he contemptuously put the discussion aside, he was touched and moved. A judicial mind, a forensic training, familiarity with human nature which had given him some insight into the characters of men, showed him that Jesus was not only wholly innocent, but infinitely nobler and better than His raving sanctimonious accusers. He wholly set aside the floating idea of an unearthly royalty; he saw in the prisoner before his tribunal an innocent and high-souled dreamer, nothing more. And so, leaving Jesus there, he went out again to the Jews, and pronounced his first emphatic and unhesitating acquittal: "I FIND IN HIM NO FAULT AT ALL."

[1] Being only a procurator, Pilate had no quaestor, and therefore was obliged to try all causes himself. In this instance, he very properly refused to assume the responsibility of the execution without sharing in the trial. He did not choose to degrade himself into a mere tool of Jewish superstition.

[2] Deut. xxi. 22, 23. Hence the name of hatred יולחה, "the Hung," applied to Christ in the

Talmud; and Christians are called "servants of the Hung" (יולחה ירכוע). Their reasons for desiring His crucifixion may have been manifold, besides the obvious motives of hatred and revenge. (1.) It would involve the name and memory of Jesus in deeper discredit. (2.) It would render the Roman authorities accomplices in the responsibility of the murder. (3.) It would greatly diminish any possible chance of a popular êmeute. [3] Deut. xxi. 23; Numb. xxv. 4; 2 Sam. xxi. 6; Jos. B. J. vii. 6, § 4. ούκ άνασχετόν εϊναι τό πάθος λέγοντες[3a]. Some obscurity hangs over the question as to when and how the Jews had lost the power of inflicting capital punishment (John xviii. 31). The Talmud seems to imply (Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr. in loc.) that they had lost it by voluntarily abandoning the use of the Lishcat haggazzith, on account of the number of murderers whom they were forced to condemn. But this, in the usual loose Jewish way, is fixed "forty years before the destruction of the Temple" (Aboda Zara, f. 8, 2; Buxtorf, Lex. Talm., p. 513). Others suppose that it was still permitted to them -- or at any rate its use connived at -- in ecclesiastical (Acts vii. 57; Jos. Antt. xx. 9, § 1) but not in civil cases. They had, legally, only the coignitio causae.[3b] [3a] "and cried out that they could not bear to see him thus destroyed." [3b] "the cognition of a cause."

[4] Cf. Acts xviii. 14.

[5] See J. Baldwin Brown, Misread Passages of Scripture, p. 2. [6] This shows that Jesus, who seems to have been led immediately inside the walls of the Prætorium, had not heard the charges laid against Him before the Procurator.

[1] In Masseketh Sandedrin, vii. 10, a mesîth is defined as an unauthorized person (ίδιώτης)

who leads others astray. (טוירהה תא תיממה טוירה הו תיממה.)

Amid these confused and passionate exclamations the practised ear of Pilate caught the name of "Galilee," and he understood that Galilee had been the chief scene of the ministry of Jesus.[1] Eager for a chance of dismissing a business of which he was best pleased to be free, he proposed, by a master-stroke of astute policy, to get rid of an embarrassing prisoner, to save himself from a disagreeable decision, and to do an unexpected complaisance to the unfriendly Galilæan tetrarch, who, as usual, had come to Jerusalem -- nominally to keep the Passover, really to please his subjects, and to enjoy the sensations and festivities offered at that season by the densely-crowded capital. Accordingly, Pilate, secretly glad to wash his hands of a detestable responsibility, sent Jesus to[2] Herod Antipas, who was probably occupying the old Asmonæan palace, which had been the royal residence at Jerusalem until it had been surpassed by the more splendid one which the prodigal tyrant, his father, had built.[3] And so, through the thronged and narrow streets, amid the jeering, raging multitudes, the weary Sufferer was dragged once more.

[1] Luke xxiii. 6.

[2] Luke xxiii. 7, άνέπεµψεν, "remisit;" "propriam Romani juris vocem usurpavit"[2a] (Grotius): cf. Acts xxv. 21. Mutual jealousies, and tendencies to interfere with each other's authority, are quite sufficient to account for the previous ill-will of Pilate and Herod. Moreover, in all disputes it had been the obvious policy of Antipas to side with the Jews. Renan aptly compares the relations of the Herods to the Procurator with that of the Hindoo Rajahs to the Viceroy of India under the English dominion. [2a] "he sent him," "referred the case," (a Roman law-term). [3] We find the old Asmonæan palace occupied long afterwards by Agrippa II. (Jos. B. J. ii. 16, § 3; Antt. xx. 8, § 11). Sepp, in his fanciful way, points out that Jesus had thus been thrown into connection with a palace of David (at Bethlehem) of the Asmonæans, and of Herod.

We have caught glimpses of this Herod Antipas before, and I do not know that all History, in its gallery of portraits, contains a much more despicable figure than this wretched, dissolute Idumæan Sadducee -- this petty princeling drowned in debauchery and blood. To him was addressed the sole purely contemptuous expression that Jesus is ever recorded to have used.[1] Superstition and incredulity usually go together; avowed atheists have yet believed in augury, and men who do not believe in God will believe in ghosts.[2] Antipas was rejoiced beyond all things to see Jesus. He had long been wanting to see Him because of the rumours he had heard; and this murderer of the prophets hoped that Jesus would, in compliment to royalty, amuse by some miracle his gaping curiosity. He harangued and questioned Him in many words, but gained not so much as one syllable in reply. Oar Lord confronted all his ribald questions with the majesty of silence. To such a man, who even changed scorn into a virtue, speech would clearly have been a profanation. Then all the savage vulgarity of the man came out through the thin veneer of a superficial cultivation. For the second time Jesus is derided -- derided this time as Priest and Prophet. Herod and his corrupt hybrid myrmidons "set Him at nought" -- treated Him with the insolence of a studied contempt. Mocking His innocence and His misery in a festal and shining robe,[3] the empty and wicked prince sent Him back to the Procurator, to whom he now became half-reconciled after a long-standing enmity. But he contented himself with these cruel insults. He resigned to the forum apprehensionis all further responsibility as to the issue of the trial. Though the Chief Priests and Scribes stood about his throne unanimously instigating him to a fresh and more heinous act of murder by their intense accusations,[4] he practically showed that he thought their accusations frivolous, by treating them as a jest. It was the fifth trial of Jesus; it was His second public distinct acquittal.

[1] Luke xiii. 32, "This fox," τή άλώπεκι ταύτη (v. supr., p. 429). [2] Phillippe d'Orleans (Egalité), a professed atheist, when in prison, tried to divine his fate by the grounds in a coffee-cup! This atheistic age swarmed with Chaldaei, mathematici, magicians, sorcerers, charlatans, impostors of every class. "Le monde était affolé de miracles, jamais on ne fut si occupé de présages. Le Dieu Père paraissait avoir voilé sa face; des larves impurs, des monstres sortis d'un limon mystérieux, semblaient errer dans l'air"[2a] (Renan, L'Anterchr., p. 323).

[2a] People doted on miracles, never were they so occupied with omens. God, the Father appeared to have veiled his face; certain unclean spirits, certain monsters which had come forth from a mysterious slime, seemed to wander about in the air. [3] Luke xxiii. 11, έσθήτα λαµπράν, probably "white," as a festive color; but the notion of his being a "candidate" for the kingdom, is quite alien from the passage. [4] εύτόνως. Cf. Acts xviii. 28.

[1] John xix. 13, "Gabbatha." The Roman governors and generals attached great importance to these tessellated pavements on which their tribunals were placed (Suet. Jul. Caes. 46). [2] Deut. xxv. 3. µάστιξιν αίκίζεσθαι[2a] (Jos. B. J. vii. 6, § 4). [2a] "and sorely whipped."

In making this suggestion -- in thus flagrantly tampering with his innate sense of right, and resigning against his will the best prerogative of his authority -- he was already acting in spite of a warning which he had received. That first warning consisted in the deep misgiving, the powerful presentiment, which overcame him as he looked on his bowed and silent prisoner. But, as though to strengthen him in his resolve to prevent an absolute failure of all justice, he now received a second solemn warning -- and one which to an ordinary Roman, and a Roman who remembered Cæsar's murder and Calpurnia's dream, might well have seemed divinely sinister. His own wife -- Claudia Procula[1] -- ventured to send him a public message, even as he sat there on his tribunal, that, in the morning hours, when dreams are true,[2] she had had a troubled and painful dream about that Just Man; and, bolder than her husband, she bade him beware how he molested Him.

[1] Her name is given in the gospel of Nicodemus, which says she was a proselyte. On the possibility of a wife's presence in her husband's province, in spite of the old Leges Oppiae, see Tac. Ann. iii. 33, 34; iv. 20. For similar instances of dreams, see Otho, Lex. Rabb., p. 316; Winer, Realwört., s. v. "Träume."

[2] Matt. xxvii. 19, σήµερον. "Post mediam noctem visus quum somnia vera"[2a] (Hor. Sat. i. 10, 31). "Sub auroram -- tempore quo cerni somnia vera solent"[2b] (Ov. Her. xix. 195). Perhaps she had been awakened that morning by the noise of the crowd. [2a] Presenting himself after midnight, when dreams are true. [2b] Toward morning, at which time true visions are wont be se seen.

Gladly, most gladly, would Pilate have yielded to his own presentiments -- have gratified his pity and his justice -- have obeyed the prohibition conveyed by this mysterious omen. Gladly even would he have yielded to the worse and baser instinct of asserting his power, and thwarting these envious and hated fanatics, whom he knew to be ravening for innocent blood. That they -- to many of whom sedition was as the breath of life -- should be sincere in charging Jesus with sedition was, as he well knew, absurd. Their utterly transparent hypocrisy in this matter only added to his undisguised contempt. If he could have dared to show his real instincts, he would have driven them from his tribunal with all the haughty insouciance of a Gallio. But Pilate was guilty, and guilt is cowardice, and cowardice is weakness. His own past cruelties, recoiling in kind on his own head, forced him now to crush the impulse of pity, and to add to his many cruelties another more heinous still.[1] He knew that serious complaints hung over his head. Those Samaritans whom he had insulted and oppressed -- those Jews whom he had stabbed promiscuously in the crowd by the hands of his disguised and secret emissaries -- those Galilæans whose blood he had mingled with their sacrifices -- was not their blood crying for vengeance? Was not an embassy of complaint against him imminent even now? Would it not be dangerously precipitated if, in so dubious a matter as a charge of claiming a kingdom, he raised a tumult among a people in whose case it was the best interest of the Romans that they should hug their chains? Dare he stand the chance of stirring up a new and apparently terrible rebellion rather than condescend to a simple concession, which was rapidly assuming the aspect of a politic, and even necessary, compromise?

[1] We see the same notions very strikingly at work in his former dispute with the Jews about the shields -- "He was afraid that, if they should send an embassy, they might discuss the many mal-administrations of his government, his extortions, his unjust decrees, his inhuman punishments. This reduced him to the utmost perplexity." (Philo, Leg. ad. Caium, p. 38.) (τάς ύβρεις, τάς άρπαγάς, τάς αίκίας, τάς έπηρείας, τούς άκπίτους καί έπαλλήλους φόνους, τήν άνήνυτον καί άργαλεωτάτην ώµότητα.)[1a]

1a. see footnote kk.

His tortuous policy recoiled on his own head, and rendered impossible his own wishes. The Nemesis of his past wrong-doing was that he could no longer do right. Hounded on[1] by the Priests and Sanhedrists, the people impetuously claimed the Paschal boon of which he had reminded them; but in doing so they unmasked still more decidedly the sinister nature of their hatred against their Redeemer. For while they were professing to rage against the asserted seditiousness of One who was wholly obedient and peaceful, they shouted for the liberation of a man whose notorious sedition had been also stained by brigandage and murder. Loathing the innocent, they loved the guilty, and claimed the Procurator's grace on behalf, not of Jesus of Nazareth, but of a man who, in the fearful irony of circumstance, was also called Jesus -- Jesus Bar-Abbas[2] -- who not only was what they falsely said of Christ, a leader of sedition, but also a robber and a murderer. It was fitting that they, who had preferred an abject Sadducee to their true priest, and an incestuous Idumæan to their Lord and King, should deliberately prefer a murderer to their Messiah.

[1] Mark xv. 11, άνέσεισαν τόν λαόν.[1a] History, down to this day, has given us numberless instances of the utter fickleness of crowds; but it is clear that throughout these scenes the fury and obstinacy of the people are not spontaneous.

[1a] "Stirred up the multitude." (Noyes.)

[2] Bar-Abbas, son of a (distinguished) father; perhaps Bar-Rabban, son of a Rabbi. The reading Jesus Bar-Abbas is as old as Origen, and is far from improbable, although Matt. xxvii. 20 tells a little against it. If, however, Origen (as seems to be the case) only found this reading in verse 17, the probablility of its genuineness is weakened. The ingenious combinations of Ewald, that the Sanhedrists desired his release, as belonging by family to their order, and the people because he had been imprisoned in the Carban riot (Jos. Antt., ubi supr.), are highly uncertain.

It may be that Bar-Abbas had been brought forth, and that thus Jesus the scowling murderer and Jesus the innocent Redeemer stood together on that high tribunal side by side.[1] The people, persuaded by their priests, clamoured for the liberation of the rebel and the robber. To him every hand was pointed; for him every voice was raised. For the Holy, the Harmless, the Undefiled -- for Him whom a thousand Hosannas had greeted but five days before -- no word of pity or of pleading found an utterance. "He was despised and rejected of men."

[1] Matt. xxvii. 21.

Deliberately putting the question to them, Pilate heard with scornful indignation their deliberate choice; and then, venting his bitter disdain and anger in taunts, which did but irritate them more, without serving any good purpose, "What then," he scornfully asked "do ye wish me to do with the King of the Jews?" Then first broke out the mad scream, "Crucify! crucify him!" In vain, again and again, in the pauses of the tumult, Pilate insisted, obstinately indeed, but with more and more feebleness of purpose -- for none but a man more innocent than Pilate, even if he were a Roman governor, could have listened without quailing to the frantic ravings of an Oriental mob[1] -- "Why, what evil hath He done?" "I found no cause of death in Him." "I will chastise Him and let Him go." Such half-willed opposition was wholly unavailing. It only betrayed to the Jews the inward fears of their Procurator,[2] and practically made them masters of the situation. Again and again, with wilder and wilder vehemence, they rent the air with those hideous yells -- "Aîre toûton. Apoluson hemîn Barabbân. Staúroson, staúroson -- "Away with this man." "Loose unto us Bar-Abbas." "Crucify! crucify!"

[1] See Isa. v. 7. These Jewish mobs could, as we see from Josephus, be very abusive. "They came about his (Pilate's) tribunal, and made a clamor at it" (B. J. ii. 9, § 4). "Many myriads of the people got together, and made a clamor against him, and insisted that he should leave off that design. Some of them also used reproaches, and abused the man (Pilate), as crowds of such people usually do ... So he bade the Jews go away, but they, boldly casting reproaches upon him," &c. (Antt. xviii. 3, § 2). [2] Thus, in the affair of the gilt votive shields, the Jewish leaders were confirmed in their purpose, by perceiving the Pilate's mind was wavering (Philo, ubi supr.). This, no doubt, is the kind of άνανδρία with which he is charged in App. Constt. v. 14.

For a moment Pilate seemed utterly to yield to the storm. He let Bar-Abbas free; he delivered Jesus over to be scourged. The word used for the scourging (flagellósas[1]) implies that it was done, not with rods (virgae), for Pilate had no lictors, but with what Horace calls the "horrible flagellum," of which the Russian knout is the only modern representative. This scourging was the ordinary preliminary to crucifixion and other forms of capital punishment.[2] It was a punishment so truly horrible, that the mind revolts at it; and it has long been abolished by that compassion of mankind which has been so greatly intensified, and in some degree even created, by the gradual comprehension of Christian truth. The unhappy sufferer was publicly stripped, was tied by the hands in a bent position to a pillar, and then, on the tense quivering nerves of the naked back, the blows were inflicted with leathern thongs, weighted with jagged edges of bone and lead; sometimes even the blows fell by accident -- sometimes, with terrible barbarity, were purposely struck -- on the face and eyes.[3] It was a punishment so hideous that, under its lacerating agony, the victim generally fainted, often died; still more frequently a man was sent away to perish under the mortification and nervous exhaustion which ensued. And this awful cruelty, on which we dare not dwell -- this cruelty which makes the heart shudder and grow cold -- was followed immediately by the third and bitterest derision -- the derision of Christ as King.

[1] Matt. xxvii. 26. St. Luke, with a deep touch of pathos, merely says that Pilate "gave up Jesus to their will," and then, as though he wished to drop a veil on all that followed, he does not even tell us that they led Him away, but adds, "And as they led Him away" (Luke xxiii. 25, 25).

[2] Matt. xxvii. 26. Lora (µάστιξ) not the ραβδοί (2 Cor. xi. 24, 25). It was illegal for Roman citizens, though sometimes inflicted, especially in the provinces (Acts xxii. 26; cf. Tac. Hist. iv. 27; Cic. Verr. v. 6, 62; Jos. B. J. ii. 14, § 9). We are not told the number of the blows usually inflicted; they depended on the greater or less brutality of the presiding authority. The forty mentioned in the Acts of Pilate are clearly a reminiscence of Jewish customs. In John xix. 1, the word is έµαστίγωσε -- "ego in flagella paratus sum"[2a] (Vulg. Psa. xxxvii. 18); Isa. l. 6. [2a] I am prepared for the scourge

[3] See Cicero, Verr. v. 54; Hor. Sat. i. 3; µάστιξ άστραγαλωτή[3a] (Athen. 153, A; Luc. Asin. 38); "flagrum pecuinis ossibus catenatum"[3b] (Apul. Met. 8), "I lictor, colliga manus"[3c] (Liv. i. 26); "ad palum delegatus, lacerato virgis tergo"[3d] (id. xxvii. 13); "verberati crucibus affixi"[3e] (id. xxxiii. 36).

[3a] "A scourge of strung bones."

[3b] A scourge knotted with bones of animals.

[3c] Go, lictor, bind his hands.

[3d] bound to a stake, his back being lacerated with rods. [3e] scourged and fastened to the cross.

In civilised nations all is done that can be done to spare every needless suffering to a man condemned to death; but among the Romans insult and derision were the customary preliminaries to the last agony. The "et pereuntibus addita ludibria"[1] of Tacitus[2] might stand for their general practice. Such a custom furnished a specimen of that worst and lowest form of human wickedness which delights to inflict pain, which feels an inhuman pleasure in gloating over the agonies of another, even when he has done no wrong. The mere spectacle of agony is agreeable to the degraded soul. The low vile soldiery of the Prætorium -- not Romans, who might have had more sense of the inborn dignity of the silent sufferer, but mostly the mere mercenary scum and dregs of the provinces -- led Him into their barrack-room, and there mocked, in their savage hatred, the King whom they had tortured. It added keenness to their enjoyment to have in their power One who was of Jewish birth, of innocent life, of noblest bearing.[3] The opportunity broke so agreeably the coarse monotony of their life, that they summoned all of the cohort who were disengaged to witness their brutal sport. In sight of these hardened ruffians they went through the whole heartless ceremony of a mock coronation, a mock investiture, a mock homage. Around the brows of Jesus, in wanton mimicry of the Emperor's laurel, they twisted a green wreath of thorny leaves;[4] in His tied and trembling hands they placed a reed for sceptre; from His torn and bleeding shoulders they stripped the white robe with which Herod had mocked Him -- which must now have been all soaked with blood -- and flung on Him an old scarlet paludament -- some cast-off war cloak, with its purple laticlave, from the Prætorian wardrobe.[5] This, with feigned solemnity, they buckled over His right shoulder, with its glittering fibula; and then -- each with his derisive homage of bended knee -- each with his infamous spitting -- each with the blow over the head from the reed sceptre, which His bound hands could not hold -- they kept passing before Him with their mock salutation of "Hail, King of the Jews!"[6] [1] "And in their deaths they were also made the subjects of sport." [2] Ann. xv. 44.

[3] Josephus gives us several instances of the insane wantonness with which the soldiers delighted to insult the detested race among whom they were stationed (B. J. ii. 12, § 1; v. 11, § 1; Antt. xix. 9, § 1).

[4] It cannot be known of what plant this scanthine crown was formed. The nubk (zizyphus lotus) struck me, as it has struck all travellers in Palestine, as being most suitable both for mockery and pain, since its leaves are bright and its thorns singularly strong; but though the nubk is very common on the shores of Galilee, I saw none of it near Jerusalem. There may, however, have been some of it in the garden of Herod's palace, and the soldiers would give themselves no sort of trouble, but merely take the first plant that came to hand. [5] Such presents were sent to allied kings (Liv. xxx. 17; Tac. Ann. xii. 56). (Keim.) Cf. 1 Macc. xiv. 44. -- St. Matthew calls it "scarlet," St. Mark "purple." The ancients discriminated colors very loosely; or rather, very differently from what we do. Our nomenclature dwells chiefly on differences of hue, and their implicit analysis was of another kind. (See some excellent remarks in Mr. Gladstone's Juventus Mundi, p. 540; Ruskin, Modern Painters, iii. 225.) -- For instance of similar mockery see Philo, in Flacc. 980, where Herod Agrippa II. is insulted in the person of an idiot, at Alexandria. Shakespeare's pathetic scene of the insults heaped upon Richard II. will recur to every English reader. [6] John xix. 3.

Even now, even yet, Pilate wished, hoped, even strove to save Him. He might represent this frightful scourging, not as the preliminary to crucifixion, but as an inquiry by torture, which had failed to elicit any further confession. And as Jesus came forth -- as He stood beside him with that martyr-form on the beautiful mosaic of the tribunal -- the spots of blood upon His green wreath of torture, the mark of blows and spitting on His countenance, the weariness of His deathful agony upon the sleepless eyes, the sagum of faded scarlet, darkened by the weals of His lacerated back, and dropping, it may be, its stains of crimson upon the tesselated floor -- even then, even so, in that hour of His extremest humiliation -- yet, as He stood in the grandeur of His holy calm on that lofty tribunal above the yelling crowd, there shone all over Him so Godlike a pre-eminence, so divine a nobleness, that Pilate broke forth with that involuntary exclamation which has thrilled with emotion so many million hearts --

"BEHOLD THE MAN!"

But his appeal only woke a fierce outbreak of the scream, "Crucify! crucify!" The mere sight of Him, even in this His unspeakable shame and sorrow, seemed to add fresh fuel to their hate. In vain the heathen soldier appeals for humanity to the Jewish priest; no heart throbbed with responsive pity; no voice of compassion broke that monotonous yell of "Crucify!" -- the howling refrain of their wild "liturgy of death." The Roman who had shed blood like water, on the field of battle, in open massacre, in secret assassination, might well be supposed to have an icy and a stony heart; but yet icier and stonier was the heart of those scrupulous hypocrites and worldly priests. "Take ye Him, and crucify Him," said Pilate, in utter disgust, "for I find no fault in Him." What an admission from a Roman judge! "So far as I can see, He is wholly innocent; yet if you must crucify Him, take Him and crucify. I cannot approve of, but I will readily connive at, your violation of the law." But even this wretched guilty subterfuge is not permitted him. Satan will have from his servants the full tale of their crimes, and the sign-manual of their own willing assent at last. What the Jews want -- what the Jews will have -- is not tacit connivance, but absolute sanction. They see their power. They see that this blood-stained Governor dares not hold out against them; they know that the Roman statecraft is tolerant of concessions to local superstition. Boldly, therefore, they fling to the winds all question of a political offence, and with all their hypocritical pretences calcined by the heat of their passion, they shout, "We have a law, and by our law He ought to die, because He made Himself a Son of God."[1]

[1] "It is not tiberius's pleasure that any of our laws should be violated." (Philo, ubi supra, and Leg. ad Caium , 1014; and Tac. Ann. i. 9, and the boast of the Monumentum ancyranum, "modestiam apud socios."[1a]) The inscription on the Chél forbidding any Gentile on pain of death to pass beyond it, has recently been discovered built into the wall of a mosque at Jerusalem, and is a relic of the deepest interest.

[1a] Moderation among associates.

A Son of God! The notion was far less strange and repulsive to a heathen than to a Jew; and this word, unheard before, startled Pilate with the third omen, which made him tremble at the crime into which he was being dragged by guilt and fear. Once more, leaving the yelling multitude without, he takes Jesus with him into the quiet Judgment Hall, and -- "jam pro suâ conscientiâ Christianus," as Tertullian so finely observes[1] -- asks Him in awe-struck accents, "Whence art thou?" Alas! it was too late to answer now. Pilate was too deeply committed to his gross cruelty and injustice; for him Jesus had spoken enough already; for the wild beasts who raged without, He had no more to say. He did not answer. Then, almost angrily, Pilate broke out with the exclamation, "Dost thou not speak even to me?[2] Dost Thou not know that I have power to set Thee free, and have power to crucify Thee?" Power -- how so? Was justice nothing, then? truth nothing? innocence nothing? conscience nothing? In the reality of things Pilate had no such power; even in the arbitrary sense of the tyrant it was an idle boast, for at this very moment he was letting "I dare not" wait upon "I would." And Jesus pitied the hopeless bewilderment of this man, whom guilt had changed from a ruler into a slave. Not taunting, not confuting him -- nay, even extenuating rather than aggravating his sin -- Jesus gently answered, "Thou hast no power against Me whatever, had it not been given thee from above; therefore he that betrayed me to thee hath the greater sin." Thou art indeed committing a great crime; but Judas, Annas, Caiaphas, these priests and Jews, are more to blame than thou. Thus, with infinite dignity, and yet with infinite tenderness, did Jesus judge His judge. In the very depths of his inmost soul Pilate felt the truth of the words -- silently acknowledged the superiority of his bound and lacerated victim. All that remained in him of human and of noble --

"Felt how awful Goodness is, and Virtue,

In her shape how lovely; felt and mourned

His fall."

All of his soul that was not eaten away by pride and cruelty thrilled back an unwonted echo to these few calm words of the Son of God. Jesus had condemned his sin, and so far from being offended, the judgment only deepened his awe of this mysterious Being, whose utter impotence seemed grander and more awful than the loftiest power. From that time Pilate was even yet more anxious to save Him. With all his conscience in a tumult, for the third and last time he mounted his tribunal, and made one more desperate effort. He led Jesus forth, and looking at Him, as He stood silent and in agony, but calm, on that shining Gabbatha, above the brutal agitations of the multitude, he said to those frantic rioters, as with a flash of genuine conviction, "BEHOLD YOUR KING!" But to the Jews it sounded like shameful scorn to call that beaten insulted Sufferer their King. A darker stream mingled with the passions of the raging, swaying crowd. Among the shouts of "Crucify," ominous threatenings began for the first time to be mingled. It was now nine o 'clock, and for nearly three hours[3] had they been raging and waiting there. The name of Cæsar began to be heard in wrathful murmurs. "Shall I crucify your King?" he had asked, venting the rage and soreness of his heart in taunts on them. "We have no king but Cæsar," answered the Sadducees and Priests, flinging to the winds every national impulse and every Messianic hope.[4] "If thou let this man go," shouted the mob again and again, "thou art not Cæsar's friend. Every one who tries to make himself a king speaketh against Cæsar."[5] And at that dark terrible name of Cæsar, Pilate trembled. It was a name to conjure with. It mastered him. He thought of that terrible implement of tyranny, the accusation of laesa majestas,[6] into which all other charges merged, which had made confiscation and torture so common, and had caused blood to flow like water in the streets of Rome. He thought of Tiberius, the aged gloomy Emperor, then hiding at Capreæ his ulcerous features, his poisonous suspicions, his sick infamies, his desperate revenge. At this very time he had been maddened into a yet more sanguinary and misanthropic ferocity by the detected falsity and treason of his only friend and minister, Sejanus, and it was to Sejanus himself that Pilate is said to have owed his position. There might be secret delators in that very mob. Panic-stricken, the unjust judge, in obedience to his own terrors, consciously betrayed the innocent victim to the anguish of death. He who had so often prostituted justice, was now unable to achieve the one act of justice which he desired. He who had so often murdered pity, was now forbidden to taste the sweetness of a pity for which he longed. He who had so often abused authority, was now rendered impotent to exercise it, for once, on the side of right. Truly for him, sin had become its own Erinnys, and his pleasant vices had been converted into the instrument of his punishment! Did the solemn and noble words of the Law of the Twelve Tables[7] -- "Vanae voces populi non sunt audiendae, quando aut noxium crimine absolvi, aut innocentem condemnari desiderant"[8] -- come across his memory with accents of reproach as he delivered Bar-Abbas and condemned Jesus? It may have been so. At any rate, his conscience did not leave him at ease. At this, or some early period of the trial, he went through the solemn farce of trying to absolve his conscience from the guilt. He sent for water; he washed his hands before the multitude! he said, "I am innocent of the blood of this just person; see ye to it." Did he think thus to wash away his guilt? He could wash his hands; could be wash his heart? Might he not far more truly have said with the murderous king in the splendid tragedy --

"Can all old Ocean's waters wash this blood

Clean from my hand? Nay, rather would this hand

The multitudinous seas incarnadine,

Making the green -- one red!"

It may be that, as he thus murdered his conscience, such a thought flashed for one moment across his miserable mind, in the words of his native poet --

"Ah nimium faciles qui tristia crimina caedis

Flumineâ tolli posse putatis aquâ!"*[9]

But if so, the thought was instantly drowned in a yell, the most awful, the most hideous, the most memorable that History records. "His blood be on us and on our children." Then Pilate finally gave way. The fatal "Ibis ad crucem"[10] was uttered with reluctant wrath. He delivered Him unto them, that He might be crucified.

[1] Tert. Apol. 21.

[2] The position of the έµοί is empathic (John xix. 10, 11). [3] As to the hour there is a well-known discrepancy between John xix. 12, "And it was ... about the sixth hour; and he saith unto the Jews, Behold your king;" and Mark xv. 25, "And it was the third hour, and they crucified Him...." There are various suggestions for removing this difficulty, but the only ones worth mentioning are: (α.) That in the word "crucified" St. Mark practically includes all the preparations for the crucifixion, and therefore much of the trial: this is untenable, because he uses the aorist, έσταύρωσαν, not the imperfect, (β.) That one of the Evangelists is less accurate than the other . If no other solution of the difficulty were simple and natural, I should feel no difficulty in admitting this; but as the general, and even the minute, accuracy of the Evangelists seems to me demonstrable in innumerable cases, it is contrary to the commonest principles of fairness to insist that there must be an inaccuracy when another explanation is possible. (γ.) That St. John adopts the Roman civil reckoning of hours. But (i.) the Romans had no such reckoning (see. pp. 131, 173; John iv. 6, 52; xi. 9); and (ii.) this will make Pilate's exclamation to have been uttered at six in the morning, in which case the trial could hardly have begun at daylight, as no time is left for the intermediate incidents. (δ.) That the Γ΄ (third) in John xix. 14, has by a very early error been altered into ς (sixth). This is the reading of a few MSS. and versions, and the Chron. Alex. actually appeals for its genuineness not only to τά άκριβή άντίγραφα,[3a] but even to άύτό τό ίδιόχειρον τοΰ Εύαγγελιστοΰ.[3b] Unless great latitude be allowed to the word ώς, this appears to me a possible solution; it is, however, perfectly true that the ancients, as a rule, were much looser than we are in their notes of time.

[3a] the accurate copies.

[3b] the original manuscript itself of the Evangelist.

[4] The formal equivalent of Emperor is, of course, αύτοκράτωρ, ... but the provincials freely spoke of even the Julian Cæsars as βασιλεύς." (Freeman, Essays, II. 316.) [5] Agrippa I. inscribed his coins with the title φιλοκαίσαρ. (Akerman, p. 30.) [6] Tac. Ann. iii. 38 (and passim). "Majestatis crimen omnium accusationum complementum erat."[6a] "He knew very well," says Agrippa (ap. Philon. ubi supr.), "the inflexible severity of Tiberius;" and this was some years earlier -- before the gloom of the Emperor's mind had become so deep and savage as was now the case. An Apocryphal book (Revenges of the Saviour), was scarcely an exaggeration, says that Tiberious was "full of ulcers and fevers, and had nine sorts of leprosy." (See Tac. Ann. iv. 57; Suet. Tib. 68; Julian, Caes., p. 309, &c.) [6a] The charge of high treason gave to all accusations their full weight; or, "a charge which at that time formed the universal resource in accusations." [7] Lex. xii. De Poenis.

[8] The idle voices of the people are not to be regarded, when they desire either the acquittal of the guilty, or the condemnation of the innocent.

[9] Alas! too easy are ye who suppose that sad accusations of murder can be removed by the waters of a river!

*Ov. Fast. ii. 45. The custom, though Jewish (Deut. xxi. 6, 7, "all the elders ... shall wash their hands ... and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it"), was also Greek and Roman.

[10] Thou shalt go to the cross.

And now mark, for one moment, the revenges of History. Has not His blood been on them, and on their children? Has it not fallen most of all on those most nearly concerned in that deep tragedy? Before the dread sacrifice was consummated, Judas died in the horrors of a loathsome suicide. Caiaphas was deposed the year following. Herod died in infamy and exile. Stripped of his Procuratorship very shortly afterwards, on the very charges he had tried by a wicked concession to avoid, Pilate, wearied out with misfortunes, died in suicide and banishment, leaving behind him an execrated name.[1] The house of Annas was destroyed a generation later by an infuriated mob, and his son was dragged through the streets, and scourged and beaten to his place of murder. Some of those who shared in and witnessed the scenes of that day -- and thousands of their children -- also shared in and witnessed the long horrors of that siege of Jerusalem which stands unparalleled in history for its unutterable fearfulness. "It seems," says Renan, "as though the whole race had appointed a rendezvous for extermination." They had shouted, "We have no king but Cæsar!" and they had no king but Cæsar; and leaving only for a time the fantastic shadow of a local and contemptible loyalty, Cæsar after Cæsar outraged, and tyrannised, and pillaged, and oppressed them, till at last they rose in wild revolt against the Cæsar whom they had claimed, and a Cæsar slaked in the blood of its best defenders the red ashes of their burnt and desecrated Temple. They had forced the Romans to crucify their Christ, and though they regarded this punishment with especial horror,[2] they and their children were themselves crucified in myriads by the Romans outside their own walls, till room was wanting and wood failed, and the soldiers had to ransack a fertile inventiveness of cruelty for fresh methods of inflicting this insulting form of death.[3] They had given thirty pieces of silver for their Saviour's blood, and they were themselves sold in thousands for yet smaller sums. They had chosen Bar-Abbas in preference to their Messiah, and for them there has been no Messiah more, while a murderer's dagger swayed the last counsels of their dying nationality. They had accepted the guilt of blood, and the last pages of their history were glued together with the rivers of their blood, and that blood continued to be shed in wanton cruelties from age to age. They who will, may see in incidents like these the mere unmeaning chances of History; but there is in History nothing unmeaning to one who regards it as the Voice of God speaking among the destinies of men; and whether a man sees any significance or not in events like these, he must be blind indeed who does not see that when the murder of Christ was consummated, the axe was laid at the root of the barren tree of Jewish nationality. Since that day Jerusalem and its environs, with their "ever-extending miles of grave-stones and ever-lengthening pavement of tombs and sepulchres," have become little more than one vast cemetery -- an Aceldama, a field of blood, a potter's field to bury strangers in. Like the mark of Cain upon the forehead of their race, the guilt of that blood has seemed to cling to them -- as it ever must until that same blood effaceth it. For, by God's mercy, that blood was shed for them also who made it flow; the voice which they strove to quench in death was uplifted in its last prayer for pity on His murderers. May that blood be efficacious! may that prayer be heard![4]

[1] Euseb. Chron. p. 78, ποικίλαις περιπεσών συµφοραϊς.[1a] His banishment to Vienna Allobrogum, his tomb, his connection with Mount Pilate, &c., are all uncertain traditions. The Paradosis Pilati, Mors Pilati, &c., are as spurious as his "martyrdom," which is observed by the Abyssinian Church on June 25. But Evang. Nicod. i. 13, which speaks of Pilate as "circumcised in heart," shows that the early Christians were not insensible of his efforts to save Jesus. "Upon all murderers," says Bishop Jeremy Taylor, "God hath not thrown a thunderbolt, nor broken all sacrilegious persons upon the wheel of an inconstant and ebbing estate, nor spoken to every oppressor from heaven in a voice of thunder, nor cut off all rebels in the first attempts of insurrection; but because He hath done so to some, we are to look upon those judgments as divine accents and voices of God, threatening all the same crimes with the like events, and with the ruins of eternity." (Life of Christ, III. xv.) -- How much more true and reverent is this than the despairing cynicism which says, "Gardon-nous d'une expression si naïvement impie. Il n'y a pas plus de vengeance dans l'histoire que dans la nature; les revolutions ne sont pas plus justes que le volcan qui éclate ou l'avalanche qui roule."[1b] (Renan.)

[1a] having fallen into various misfortunes.

[1b] Let us beware of an expression so ingenuously impious. There is not more of vengeance in history than in nature; revolutions are not more just than the volcano which belches or the avalanche which rolls.

[2] See Jos. B. J. vii. 6, § 4.

[3] Jos. B. J. v. 11, § 1, προσήλουν οί στρατιώται άλλον άλλω σχήµατι πρός χλεύην καί διά τό πλήθοςχώρατε ένελείπετοτοϊς σταυροϊς καί σταυροί τοϊςσώµασιν.[3a] "So that they who had nothing but 'crucify' in their mouths were therewith paid home in their own bodies" (Sir T. Browne, Vulg. Err. v. 21). The common notion, that having brought Christ for thirty pieces of silver, they were sold by thirties for one piece of silver, seems to be solely derived from a mediæval forgery called The Revenging of the Saviour. Still it is true that "the blood of Jesus shed for the salvation of the world became to them a curse ... So manna turns to worms, and the wine of angels to vinegar and lees, when it is received into impure vessels or tasted by wanton palates, and the sun himself produces rats and serpents when it reflects upon the slime of Nilus." (Jer. Taylor, III. xv.)

[3a] "So the soldiers, [out of the wrath and hatred they bore the Jews,] nailed those they caught, one after one way, and another after another, to the crosses, by way of jest, when their multitude was so great, that room was wanting for the crosses, and crosses wanting for the bodies."

[4] It is in the deepest sincerity that I add these last words. Any opne who traces a spirit of vindictiveness in the last paragraph wholly misjudges the spirit in which it is written. This book may perhaps fall into the hands of Jewish readers. They, of all others, if true to the deepest lessons of the faith in which they have been trained, will acknowledge the hand of God in History. And the events spoken of here are not imaginative; they are indisputable facts. The Jew at least will believe that in external consequences God visits the sins of the fathers upon the children. Often and often in History have the crimes of the guilty seemed to be visited even on their innocent posterity. The apparent injustice of this is but on the surface. There is a fire that purifies, no less than a fire that scathes; and who shall say that the very afflictions of Israel -- afflictions, alas! so largely caused by the sin of Christendom -- may not have been meant for a refining of the pure gold? God's judgments -- it may be the very sternest and most irremediable of them -- come, many a time, in the guise, not of affliction, but of immense earthly prosperity and ease.
