THE RESURRECTION.

"Necesse est pauca dicamus de Christo ut Deo."[1]

-- TERT. Apolog. 21.

[1] We must say a few things respecting Christ as God.

At the moment when Christ died, nothing could have seemed more abjectly weak, more pitifully hopeless, more absolutely doomed to scorn, and extinction, and despair, than the Church which He had founded. It numbered but a handful of weak followers, of which the boldest had denied his Lord with blasphemy, and the most devoted had forsaken Him and fled. They were poor, they were ignorant, they were hopeless. They could not claim a single synagogue or a single sword. If they spoke their own language, it bewrayed them by its mongrel dialect; if they spoke the current Greek, it was despised as a miserable patois. So feeble were they and insignificant, that it would have looked like foolish partiality to prophesy for them the limited existence of a Galilæan sect. How was it that these dull and ignorant men, with their cross of wood, triumphed over the deadly fascinations of sensual mythologies, conquered kings and their armies, and overcame the world?

What was it that thus caused strength to be made perfect out of abject weakness? There is one, and one only possible answer -- the resurrection from the dead. All this vast revolution was due to the power of Christ's resurrection. "If we measure what seemed to be the hopeless ignominy of the catastrophe by which His work was ended, and the Divine prerogatives which are claimed for Him, not in spite of, but in consequence of that suffering and shame, we shall feel the utter hopelessness of reconciling the fact, and that triumphant deduction from it, without some intervening fact as certain as Christ's passion, and glorious enough to transfigure its sorrow."[1]

[1] Westcott, Gospel of the Resurrection, p. 111. He adds: "If Christ did not rise, we have not only to explain how the belief in his resurrection came to be received without any previous hopes which could lead to its reception, but also how it came to be received with that intensity of personal conviction which could invest the life and person of Christ with attributes never before assigned to any one, and that by Jews who had been reared in the strictest monotheism" (p. 112).

The sun was now on the edge of the horizon, and the Sabbath day was near. And "that Sabbath day was a high day," a Sabbath of peculiar splendour and solemnity, because it was at once a Sabbath and a Passover.[1] The Jews had taken every precaution to prevent the ceremonial pollution of a day so sacred, and were anxious that immediately after the death of the victims had been secured, their bodies should be taken from the cross. About the sepulture they did not trouble themselves, leaving it to the chance good offices of friends and relatives to huddle the malefactors into their nameless graves. The dead body of Jesus was left hanging till the last, because a person who could not easily be slighted had gone to obtain leave from Pilate to dispose of it as he wished.

[1] John xix. 31; Deut. xxi. 22, 23; Lev. xxiii. 7.

This was Joseph of Arimathæa,[1] a rich man, of high character and blameless life, and a distinguished member of the Sanhedrin. Although timidity of disposition, or weakness of faith, had hitherto prevented him from openly declaring his belief in Jesus, yet he had abstained from sharing in the vote of the Sanhedrin, or countenancing their crime. And now sorrow and indignation inspired him with courage. Since it was too late to declare his sympathy for Jesus as a living Prophet, he would at least give a sign of his devotion to Him as the martyred victim of a wicked conspiracy. Flinging secrecy and caution to the winds, he no sooner saw that the cross on Golgotha now bore a lifeless burden, than he went to Pilate on the very evening of the crucifixion, and begged that the dead body might be given him. Although the Romans left their crucified slaves to be devoured by dogs and ravens, Pilate had no difficulty in sanctioning the more humane and reverent custom of the Jews, which required, even in extreme cases, the burial of the dead.[2] He was, however, amazed at the speediness with which death had supervened, and sending for the centurion, asked whether it had taken place sufficiently long to distinguish it from a faint or swoon.[3] On ascertaining that such was the fact, he at once assigned the body, doubtless with some real satisfaction, to the care of this "honourable councillor." Without wasting a moment, Joseph purchased a long piece of fine linen,[4] and took the body from its cross. Meanwhile the force of his example had helped to waken a kindred feeling in the soul of the candid but fearful Nicodemus. If, as seems extremely probable, he be identical with the Nakdimon Ben Gorion of the Talmud, he was a man of enormous wealth;[5] and however much he had held back during the life of Jesus, now, on the evening of His death, his heart was filled with a gush of compassion and remorse, and he hurried to His cross and burial with an offering of truly royal munificence. The faith which had once required the curtain of darkness, can now venture at least into the light of sunset, and brightened finally into noonday confidence. Thanks to this glow of kindling sorrow and compassion in the hearts of these two noble and wealthy disciples, He who died as a malefactor, was buried as a king. "He made His grave with the wicked, and with the rich in His death." The fine linen (sindôn) which Joseph had purchased was richly spread with the hundred litras of myrrh and perfumed aloe-wood which Nicodemus had brought,[6] and the lacerated body -- whose divinely-human spirit was now in the calm of its sabbath rest in the Paradise of God -- was thus carried to its loved and peaceful grave.

[1] Arimathæa, or Rama, is a place of uncertain site; it may be Rama in Benjamin (Matt. ii. 18), or Ramathaim in Ephraim (1 Sam. i. 1), but certainly is not Ramleh in Dan. [2] For the Greek and Roman custom, see Herod. iii. 12; Cic. Tusc. Q. i. 43; Plaut. Mil. Glor. ii. 4, 19; Hor. Ep. i. 16, 48, &c.; Suet. Ner. 49; Juv. Sat. xiv. 77. For the Jewish, Deut. xxi. 23; Josh. viii. 29; Jos. Antt. iv. 8, § 24; Mark vi. 29; Acts viii. 2. The request of Joseph was not, however, without danger, and in later martyrdoms such a request cost men their lives, as was the case with the martyr Porphyrios. Pilate might, perhaps, have exacted a bribe (cf. Acts xxiv. 26; Plut. Galb. 28), but apparently did not do so, because the care of teh Jews for burial was well known, and any violation of this usage would have been resented (Jos. B. J. iv. 5, § 2). [3] Such seems to be the significance of εί παλαι άπέθανεν[3a] in Mark xv. 44. The Martyrologies tell us that Victorinus, crucified head-downwards, lived for three days, and Paulinus and Macra for nine; but we cannot be sure of these facts. The average time of survival in the case of a healthy man seems to have been thirty-six hours; withould cold, exposure, &c., the ordinary course of the mortification (which caused death) would require forty-eight hours.

[3a] "if he were already dead."

[4] Another clear indication, even in the Synoptists, that this Friday was not the Passover. The sindôn was probably of white linen, such as that in which Gamaliel II. ordered himself to be buried, in order to discourage the extravagant burial garments of the Jews. The three words used of the cerements of Jesus are σινδών (Mark xv. 46); όθόνια (John xix. 40); σουδάριον (xx. 7); κειρίαι is used of Lazarus (xi. 44).

[5] He and his house are said to have perished at the fall of Jerusalem; and I have already (p. 167) mentioned the dreadful story that his daughter, who had received as her dower a million denarii of gold, was seen picking the grains of corn out of the horses' dung. May not this fable point to Jewish hatred against one who in heart at least was a Christian? [6] Even at the burial of Gamaliel II. only eighty pounds of spices were burnt by Onkelos. At Herod's funeral there had been 500 spice-bearers (Jos. Antt. xvii. 8, § 3).

Close by the place of crucifixion -- if not an actual part of it[1] -- was a garden belonging to Joseph of Arimathæa, and in its enclosure he had caused a new tomb to be hewn for himself out of the solid rock, that he might be buried in the near precincts of the Holy City.[2] The tomb had never been used, but, in spite of the awful sacredness which the Jews attached to their rock-hewn sepulchres, and the sensitive scrupulosity with which they shrank from all contact with a corpse, Joseph never hesitated to give up for the body of Jesus the last home which he had designed for his own use. But the preparations had to be hurried, because when the sun had set the Sabbath would have begun. All that they could do, therefore, was to wash the corpse, to lay it amid the spices, to wrap the head in a white napkin, to roll the fine linen round and round the wounded limbs, and to lay the body reverently in the rocky niche. Then, with the united toil of several men, they rolled a gôlal, or great stone, to the horizontal aperture; and scarcely had they accomplished this when, as the sun sank behind the hills of Jerusalem, the new Sabbath dawned.[3]

[1] ήν δέ έν τώ τ ί π ω, όπου έσταυρώθη, κήπος[1a] (John xix. 41). [1a] "Now in the place where he was crucified, there was a garden." [2] The circuit of Jerusalem is one great graveyard, and such tombs may be seen in Judæa by hundreds.

[3] Luke xxiii. 54. It was not unusual among the Jews to regard the sunset of Friday as the dawn of their Sabbath, and to give it the name of רוא.

Mary of Magdala, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, had seated themselves in the garden to mark well the place of sepulture, and other Galilæan women had also noticed the spot, and had hurried home to prepare fresh spices and ointments before the Sabbath began, that they might hasten back early on the morning of Sunday, and complete that embalming of the body which Joseph and Nicodemus had only hastily begun. They spent in quiet that miserable Sabbath, which, for the broken hearts of all who loved Jesus, was a Sabbath of anguish and despair.

But the enemies of Christ were not so inactive. The awful misgiving of guilty consciences was not removed even by His death upon the cross. They recalled, with dreadful reminiscence, the rumoured prophecies of His resurrection -- the sign of the prophet Jonah, which He had said would alone be given them[1] -- the great utterance about the destroyed Temple, which He would in three days raise up; and these intimations, which were but dim to a crushed and wavering faith, were read, like fiery letters upon the wall, by the illuminating glare of an uneasy guilt. Pretending, therefore, to be afraid lest His body should be stolen by His disciples for purposes of imposture, they begged that, until the third day, the tomb might be securely guarded.

Pilate gave them a brief and haughty permission to do anything they liked;[1] for -- apparently in the evening, when the great Paschal Sabbath was over -- they sent their guard to seal the gôlal, and to watch the sepulchre.

[1] έχετε κουστωδίαν[1a] can hardly be an imperative. It has usually been referred to some soldiers who may possibly have been lent to the Jews to act as a sort of police during the great Paschal gathering. The context seems to preclude the notion of the "guard" being composed of the Temple watchman.

[1a] "Ye have a guard."

Night passed, and before the faint streak of dawn began to silver the darkness of that first great Easterday,[1] the passionate love of those women, who had lingered latest by the cross, made them also the earliest at the tomb. Carrying with them their precious spices, but knowing nothing of the watch or seal, they anxiously inquired among themselves, as they groped their way with sad and timid steps through the glimmering darkness, "Who should roll away for them the great stone which closed the sepulchre?" The two Marys were foremost of this little devoted band, and after them came Salome and Joanna.[2] They found their difficulty solved for them. It became known then, or afterwards, that some dazzling angelic vision in white robes had terrified the keepers of the tomb, and had rolled the stone from the tomb amid the shocks of earthquake. And as they came to the tomb, there they too saw angels in white apparel, who bade them hasten back to the Apostles, and tell them -- and especially Peter -- that Christ, according to His own word, had risen from the dead, and would go before them, like a shepherd, into their own beloved and native Galilee. They hurried back in a tumult of rapture and alarm, telling no one except the disciples; and even to the disciples their words sounded like an idle tale. But Mary of Magdala, who seems to have received a separate and special intimation, hastened at once to Peter and John.[3] No sooner had they received this startling news than they rose to see with their own eyes what had happened. John outstripped in speed his elder companion, and arriving first, stooped down, and gazed in silent wonder into that open grave. The grave was empty, and the linen cerements were lying neatly folded each in its proper place. Then Peter came up, and with his usual impetuosity, heedless of ceremonial pollution, and of every consideration but his love and his astonishment, plunged into the sepulchre. John followed him, and saw, and believed; and the two Apostles took back the undoubted certainty to their wondering brethren.[4] In spite of fear, and anxiety, and that dull intelligence which, by their own confession, was so slow to realise the truths they had been taught, there dawned upon them, even then, the trembling hope, which was so rapidly to become the absolute conviction, that Christ had risen indeed. That on that morning the grave of Christ was untenanted -- that His body had not been removed by His enemies -- that its absence caused to His disciples the profoundest amazement, not unmingled, in the breasts of some of them, with sorrow and alarm[5] -- that they subsequently became convinced, by repeated proofs, that He had indeed risen from the dead -- that for the truth of this belief they were ready at all times themselves to die -- that the belief effected a profound and total change in their character, making the timid courageous, and the weak irresistible -- that they were incapable of a conscious falsehood, and that, even if it had not been so, a conscious falsehood could never have had power to convince the disbelief and regenerate the morality of the world -- that on this belief of the resurrection were built the still universal observance of the first day of the week and the entire foundations of the Christian Church -- these, at any rate, are facts which even scepticism itself, if it desires to be candid, can hardly fail, however reluctantly and slowly, to admit. [1] Those who think it right or fair to find and to press "discrepancies" between writers who simply say the truth to the best of their power in the ordinary language of common life, may find such a discrepancy between the σκοτίας έτι ούσης[1a] of John xx. 1, and the άνατείλαντος τοΰ ήλίου[1b] of Mark xvi. 2. But such criticism scarcely deserves serious notice. I have endeavored throughout the narrative silently to show the perfect possible coherence and truthful simplicity of the fragmentary Gospel accounts. More than this is neither possible nor necessary. I do not hold the nechanical view of inspiration advocated in Gaussen's Theopneustia; but he at least shows how simply these supposed "discrepancies" are accounted for, and how perfectly harmless are the assaults on Christian faith which take them as a basis (Theopn. 218-229, E. Tr.).

[1a] "when it was yet dark."

[1b] "at the rising of the sun."

[2] Mark xvi. 1-7, compared (throughout the paragraph) with John xx. 1; Luke xxiv. 1-10; Matt. xxviii. 1-7.

[3] Any one who will attentively read side by side the narratives of these appearances on the first day of the resurrection, will see that they have only been preserved for us in general, interblended and scattered notices (see Matt. xxviii. 16; Luke xxiv. 34; Acts i. 3), which, in strict exactness, render it impossible, without many arbitrary suppositions, to produce from them a certain narrative of the order of events. The lacunae, the compressions, the variations, the actual differences, the subjectivity of the narrators as affected by spiritual revelations, render all harmonies at the best uncertain. Our belief in the Resurrection, as an historic fact, as absolutely well attested to us by subsequent and contemporary circumstances as any other event in history, rests on grounds far deeper, wider, more spiritual, more eternal, than can be shaken by divergences of which we can only say that they are not necessarily contradictions, but of which the true solution is no longer attainable. Hence the "ten discrepancies" which have been dwelt on since the days of Celsus, have never for one hour shaken the faith of Christendom. The phenomena presented by the narratives are exactly such as we should expect, derived as they are from different witnesses, preserved at first in oral tradition only, and written 1,800 years ago at a period when minute circumstantial accuracy, as distinguished from perfect truthfulness, was little regarded. St. Paul, surely no imbecile or credulous enthusiast, vouches, both for the reality of the appearances, and also for the fact that the vision by which he was himself converted came, at a long interval after the rest, to him as "to the abortive-born" of the Apostolic family (1 Cor. xv. 4-8). If the narratives of Christ's appearance to his disciples were inventions, how came they to possess the severe and simple character which shows no tinge of religious excitement? If those appearances were purely subjective, how can we account for their sudden, rapid, and total cessation? As Lange finely says, the great fugue of the first Easter tidings has not come to us as a "monotonous chorale," and mere boyish verbal criticism cannot understand the common feeling and harmony which inspire the individual vibrations of those enthusiastic and multitudinous voices (v. 61). Professor Westcott, with his usual profundity and insight, points out the differences of purpose in the narrative of the four Evangelists. St. Matthew dwells chiefly on the majesty and glory of the Resurrection; St. Mark, both in the original part and in the addition (Mark xvi. 9-20), insists upon it as a fact; St. Luke, as a spiritual necessity; St. John, as a touchstone of character (Introd. 310-315).

[4] Compare the exactly similar feature in the character of the two Apostles, in John xxi. 7. [5] And that (as the Evangelists honestly admit), in spite of such repeated forewarnings that it should be so, as we find in John ii. 18-22; vi. 61-64; x. 17, 18; xiii. 31; Matt. xii. 38-42; xvi. 13-27; xvii. 1-9; xxvi. 63, 64; Mark ix. 30-32; x. 32-34; Luke ix. 43-45. It is, of course, true that they themselves may not have heard all of these predictions, but they had heard enough to cause our Lord's exclamation ώ άνόητοι και βραδεϊς τή καρδία τοΰ πιστεύειν[5a] (Luke xxiv. 25).

[5a] "O dull of apprehension, and slow of heart to believe."

[1] John xx. 11-18. [Mark xvi. 9-20 is canonical, but almost certainly unauthentic. It is omitted

in א, B, and in the Armenian Version. In L it is greatly altered, and in some MSS. it is marked with asterisks. Eusebius and Jerome testify to its general absence from the Greek MSS. If this external evidence be insufficient against the authority of A, C, D, Irenæus and Hippolytus, yet the internal evidence seems to be decisive -- take, for instance, the fact, that in this short section πορεύοµαι[1a] occurs three times, θεάοµαι[1b] twice, and ό Κύριος[1c] twice, though not found elsewhere in St. Mark.]

[1a] to go.

[1b] to see.

[1c] The Lord.

Jesus saith to her, "Mary!"

That one word, in those awful yet tender tones of voice, at once penetrated to her heart. Turning towards Him, trying apparently to clasp His feet or the hem of His garment, she cried to Him in her native Aramaic, "Rabboni!" "Oh, my Master!" and then remained speechless with her transport. Jesus Himself gently checked the passion of her enthusiasm. "Cling not to Me,"[1] He exclaimed, "for not yet have I ascended to the Father; but go to My brethren, and say to them, I am ascending to My Father and your Father, and My God and your God." Awe-struck, she hastened to obey. She repeated to them that solemn message -- and through all future ages has thrilled that first utterance, which made on the minds of those who heard it so indelible an impression -- "I HAVE SEEN THE LORD."

[1] John xx. 17, Μή µοΰ άπτου. Although άψασθαι is used of the woman who touched the hem of Christ's garment (Matt. ix. 20), yet the "Noli me tangere," "Touch me not," conveys quite a false impression. It meant that the day for personal, physical presence, for merely human affection, for the grasp of human tenderness, was over now. Henceforth He was to be with His people more nearly, more intimately, because in spirit. "Prohibitum tangere Dominum; non eum corporali tactu Dominum, sed fide tangimus"[1a] (Ambr.). The "for" is one of St. John's difficult causal connections, which seem to be dictated far more by the syllogism of emotion than by formal grammar. Perhaps it implies, "Be not clinging to me, for this is but a brief interval between my former close physical society with you, and my future spiritual union." For the τόν πατέρα µου καί πατέρα ύµών,[1b] κ. τ. λ., see Pearson, On the Creed, p. 42. [1a] It is forbidden to touch the Lord; we do not touch him, as Lord, corporeally, but by faith. [1b] my Father and your Father.

[1] Matt. xxviii. 9, 10. Matthew alone mentions this adoration. The προσκυνήσαντες αύτόν[1a] of Luke xxiv. 52 are omitted in some good MSS.

[1a] "And they worshipped him."

It was useless for the guards to stay beside an empty grave. With fear for the consequences, and horror at all that they had seen, they fled to the members of the Sanhedrin who had given them their secret commission. To these hardened hearts belief and investigation were alike out of the question. Their only refuge seemed to be in lies. They instantly tried to hush up the whole matter. They suggested to the soldiers that they must have slept, and that while they did so the disciples had stolen the body of Jesus.[1] But such a tale was too infamous for credence, and too ridiculous for publicity. If it became known, nothing could have saved these soldiers, supposing them to have been Romans, from disgrace and execution. The Sadducees therefore bribed the men to consult their common interests by burying the whole matter in secrecy and silence. It was only gradually and later, and to the initiated, that the base calumny was spread. Within six weeks of the resurrection, that great event was the unshaken faith of every Christian; within a few years of the event the palpable historic proofs of it and the numerous testimonies of its reality -- strengthened by a memorable vision vouchsafed to himself -- had won assent from the acute and noble intellect of a young Pharisaic zealot and persecutor whose name was Saul.[2] But it was only in posthumous and subterranean whispers that the dark falsehood was disseminated which was intended to counteract this overwhelming evidence. St. Matthew says that when he wrote his Gospel it was still commonly bruited among the Jews. It continued to be received among them for centuries, and is one of the blaspheming follies which was repeated and amplified twelve centuries afterwards in the Toldôth Jeshu.[3]

[1] Matt. xxviii. 11-15. Those who are shocked at this suggested possibility of deceit on the part of a few hard, worldly and infatuated Sanhedrists, do not shrink from insinuating that the faith of Christendom was found on most facile and reprehensible credulity, almost amounting to conscious deception, by men who died for the truth of what they asserted, and who have taught the spirit of truthfulness as a primary duty of the religion which they preached. [2] Rom. vi. 4; Eph. i. 20; Gal. i. 1; 1 Cor. xv. 4-8, &c. The latter is the earliest written allusion to the resurrection (AD 54).

[3] Eisenmenger, Entdecktes Judenthum, i. 189.

[1] Luke xxiv. 34; 1 Cor. xv. 5.

[1] Emmaus can hardly be Amwâs (Nicopolis), which is 160 stades (about twenty-two miles) from Jerusalem, even if, with a few bad MSS., we read έκατόν έξήκοντα[1a] in Luke xxiv. 13. The name means "warm springs." Culonieh (see Jos. B. J. vii. 6, § 6) seems to be a more likely site, but nothing whatever depends on the identification of a locality so incidentally alluded to.

[1a] one hundred and sixty.

[2] Luke xxiv. 13-35, verse 17, έστάθησαν σκυθρωποί[2a] (א, A, B, L, and various versions, &c.). This, as well as the somewhat emphatic answer of Cleopas, shows that they were not quite at their ease at the Stranger's intervention. After the recent events such caution was very natural.

[2a] "and they stood sad." (Noyes.)

[3] If, as Keim, &c., suppose, the story is mythic, &c., why was so obscure a name as Cleopas chosen to authenticate it? and why was the other disciple left nameless? Would it not have been just as easy to select two of the most prominent Apostles? It is a mere assumption that Cleopas (or Cleopater) was the same as Clopas, or Alphæus.

Then reproaching them with the dulness of their intelligence and their affections, the Stranger showed them how through all the Old Testament from Moses onwards there was long prophecy of the sufferings no less than of the glory of Christ. In such high converse they drew near to Emmaus, and the Stranger seemed to be going onwards, but they pressed Him to stay, and as they sat down to their simple meal, and He blessed and brake the bread, suddenly their eyes were opened, and in spite of the altered form,[1] they recognised that He who was with them was the Lord. But even as they recognised Him, He was with them no longer. "Did not our heart burn within us," they exclaimed to each other, "while He was speaking with us in the way, while He was opening to us the Scriptures?" Rising instantly, they returned to Jerusalem with the strange and joyous tidings. They found no dubious listeners now. They, too, were received with the rapturous affirmation, "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared unto Simon!"

[1] Mark xvi. 12, έφανερώθη έν έτέρα µορφή.[1a] It must be remembered that the Appendix to this Gospel (xvi. 9-20), though not genuine, has every claim to our respect. Mr. Burgon's elaborate vindication of these verses (Lond. 1871) is quite unconvincing (see Mr. Hort's remarks in the Academy, Nov. 15, 1871).

[1a] "he appeared in another form."

[1] Ignatius (ad Smyrn.). Jesus uses the words, ούκ είµι δαιµόνιον άσώµατον.[1a] Some, from the mention of σάρκα καί όστέα[1b] (Luke xxiv. 39) without αϊµα[1c] which was the sign of the ψυχή, or "animal life"), have perhaps too rashly and literally inferred that the resurrection-body was bloodless. In a very curious translated fragment of Clemens Alexandrinus on John i. 1, a tradition is mentioned that St. John, touching the body, found no substance there; his hand passed through it (quoted by Keim, III. ii. 568).

[1a] I am not an incorporeal Divinity.

[1b] "flesh and bones."

[1c] "blood."

[2] The words καί άπό µελισσίου κηρίου[2a] (omitted in א, A, B, D, &c.) are of dubious authenticity.

[2a] "and of a honeycomb."

[3] The perfects άφέωνται κεκράτηνται, imply permanence of result. On this commission, see supra, pp. 372-374.

[1] Why did they not go to Galilee immediately on receiving our Lord's message? The circumstance is unexplained, for the identification of Galilee with the peak of the Mount of Olives -- now called Viri Galilæi, from Acts. i. 11 -- is wholly absurd. Perhaps the entire message of Jesus to them is not recorded; perhaps they awaited the end of the feast.

[1] John xxi. 1-24.

[2] Perhaps the έπενδύτης is only a subligaculum (λινοΰν τι όθόνιον Theophyl.). It is very common in the East to work naked, or with nothing but a cloth round the waist.

The happy meal ended in silence, and then Jesus said to His weak but fond Apostle, "Simon" -- (it was no time as yet to restore to him the name of Peter) -- "Simon, son of Jonas, honourest thou Me more than these?"

"Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I love Thee."

"Feed My little lambs."

Simon had felt in his inmost heart what was meant by that kind rebuke -- "more than these." It called back to his penitent soul those boastful words, uttered so confidently among his brethren, "Although all shall be offended, yet will not I." Failure had taught him humility, and therefore he will neither claim a pre-eminence in affection, nor adopt the word of the Saviour's question (agapas), which involved deep honour and devotion and esteem; but will substitute for it that weaker word, which yet best expressed the warm human affection of his heart. And the next time the question reminded him less painfully of his old self-confidence, for Jesus said to him only --

"Simon, son of Jonas, honourest thou Me?"

Again the Apostle humbly answered in the same words as before -- "Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I love Thee."

"Tend my sheep."[1]

[1] John xxi. 16. The verb is ποίµαινε, not βόσκε.

But Simon had thrice denied, and therefore it was fitting that he should thrice confess. Again, after a brief pause, came the question -- and this time with the weaker but warmer word which the Apostle himself had chosen --

"Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me?"

And Simon, deeply humbled and distressed, exclaimed, "Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou seest that I love Thee."[1]

[1] Verse 17, οϊδας ... γινώσκεις.

"Feed My beloved sheep."[1] Then very solemnly He added, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast younger thou didst gird thyself, and walk where thou wouldest; but when thou art old thou shalt stretch out thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and shall lead thee where thou willest not."

[1] John xxi. 17, προβάτια (A, B, C).

The Apostle understood Him; he knew that this implied the years of his future service, the pangs of his future martyrdom; but now he was no longer "Simon," but "Peter" -- the heart of rock was in him; he was ready, even to the death, to obey the voice which said to him, "Follow Me." While the conversation had been taking place he had been walking by the side of Jesus, a few steps in front of his comrades. Looking back he saw John, his only favourite companion, and the disciple whom Jesus loved, slowly following them. Pointing to him, he asked, "Lord, and what shall he do?" The answer checked the spirit of idle curiosity -- "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou Me." Peter dared ask no more, and the answer -- which was intentionally vague -- led to the wide misapprehension prevalent in the early Church, that John was not to die until Jesus came. The Apostle quietly corrects the error by quoting the exact words of the risen Christ. The manner of his death we do not know, but we know that he outlived all his brother disciples, and that he survived that terrible overthrow of his nation which, since it rendered impossible strict obedience to the institutions of the Old Covenant, and opened throughout the world an unimpeded path for the establishment of the New Commandment and the Kingdom not of earth, was -- in a sense more true than any other event in human history -- a second coming of the Lord.

[1] The οί δέ έδίστασαν of Matt. xxviii. 17, can only mean, "but some doubted" -- not, as Wetstein and others take it, whether they should worship or not, but respecting the whole scene. All may not have stood near to Him, and even if they did, we have seen in four previous instances (Matt. xxviii. 17; Luke xxiv. 16; id. 37; John xxi. 4) that there was something unusual and not instantly recognizable in his resurrection body. At any rate, here we have another inestimable proof of the candor of the Evangelists, for there is nothing to be said in favor of the conjectural emendation ούδέ. "Dubitatum est ab illis," says St. Leo, "ne dubitaretur a nobis"[1a] (Serm. lxxi., ap. Wordsw. in loc.).

[1a] They doubted in order that we might not doubt.

[1] 1 Cor. xv. 3-8.

[2] Or it may possible have been James the son of Zebedee. [3] Jer. De Viris Illustr. ii. The allusion to the sindôm is curious. See Excursus XV., "Traditional Sayings of Christ."

[1] Luke xxiv. 50. The best reading seems to be έως πρός Βηθανίαν (א, B, C, L, &c.). [2] "It was solitude and retirement in which Jesus kept His vigils; the desert places heard him pray; in a privacy He was born; in the wilderness He fed His thousands; upon a mountain apart He was transfigured; upon a mountain He died; and from a mountain He ascended to His Father" (Petr. Cell. iv. 12, quoted by Jer. Taylor, Life of Christ, I. viii.).

Between us and His visible presence -- between us and that glorified Redeemer who now sitteth at the right hand of God -- that cloud still rolls. But the eye of Faith can pierce it; the incense of true prayer can rise above it; through it the dew of blessing can descend. And if He is gone away, yet He has given us in His Holy Spirit a nearer sense of His presence, a closer infolding in the arms of His tenderness, than we could have enjoyed even if we had lived with Him of old in the home of Nazareth, or sailed with Him in the little boat over the crystal waters of Gennesareth. We may be as near to Him at all times -- and more than all when we kneel down to pray -- as the beloved disciple was when he laid his head upon His breast. The Word of God is very nigh us, even in our mouths and in our hearts. To ears that have been closed His voice may seem indeed to sound no longer. The loud noises of War may shake the world; the calls of Avarice and of Pleasure may drown the gentle utterance which bids us "Follow Me;" after two thousand years of Christianity the incredulous murmurs of an impatient scepticism may make it scarcely possible for Faith to repeat, without insult, the creed which has been the regeneration of the world. Ay, and sadder even than this, every now and then may be heard, even in Christian England, the insolence of some blaspheming tongue which still scoffs at the Son of God as He lies in the agony of the garden, or breathes His last sigh upon the bitter tree. But the secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him, and He will show them His covenant. To all who will listen He still speaks. He promised to be with us always, even to the end of the world, and we have not found His promise fail. It was but for thirty-three short years of a short lifetime that He lived on earth; it was but for three broken and troubled years that He preached the Gospel of the Kingdom; but for ever, even until all the Æons have been closed, and the earth itself, with the heavens that now are, have passed away, shall every one of His true and faithful children find peace and hope and forgiveness in His name, and that name shall be called Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted,

"GOD WITH US."
