APPENDIX.

EXCURSUS I.

THE DATE OF CHRIST'S BIRTH.

Although the date of Christ's birth cannot be established with absolute certainty, there is yet a large amount of evidence to render it at least probable that He was born four years before our present era. It is universally admitted that our received chronology, which is not older than Dionysius Exiguus in the sixth century, is wrong. I ought to say here that I have not pretended to discuss the new theories of chronology proposed by Keim; not only because I am not well gifted for elaborate chronological inquiries, but because (i.) they would have required inordinate space, and (ii.) they depend on views of the Gospels altogether remote from my own.

Now if the 15th year of Tiberius be dated from the death of Augustus (Aug. 19, A.U.C. 767), then Jesus was baptized A.U.C. 782; but since, as we habe seen, he could not have been born later than February, A.U.C. 750, this would make Him at least thirty-two, an age inconsistent with the natural meaning of St. Luke's expression. There is therefore good ground to believe that St. Luke dates the year of the reign of Tiberius from his association with Augustus as joint Emperor in A.U.C. 765, a method of computation which certainly existed, and would be especially likely to prevail in the Provinces. Jesus would then have begun His public teaching A.U.C. 780, a date which exactly agrees with the only secure datum about the year of His birth.

All attempts to discover the month and day of the Nativity are useless. No data whatever exist to enable us to determine them with even approximate accuracy.

The census of Quirnius, the order of the courses of priests, the cycle of lessons in the Jewish Calendar, the consulships, &c., mentioned by Tertullian, the arrival of the Magi, and the astrological conjunction which is supposed to have caused their journey, the third closing by Augustus of the Temple of Janus, and other indications which have been pressed into the service of chronology, are all too vague to be of any use, and are only likely to lead to highly uncertain or entirely erroneous results.

A general confirmation of the conclusion at which we have arrived may be deduced from John ii. 20, "Forty and six years was this Temple in building." Herod's reconstruction of the Temple began in the eighteenth year of his reign, probably in Cisleu, A.U.C. 734. This will bring the forty-sixth year of its continuance to A.U.C. 780, which we have already seen reason to regard as the first year of Christ's ministry, and thirtieth of his age. There is, however, an element of doubt in this computation, owing to St. John's use of the aorist ώκοδοµηθή, unless it be regarded as a less accurate expression for οίκοδµεϊται (cf. Ezra v. 16).

The only difficulties in the data mentioned by Luke iii. 1, 2, are the mention of Annas as High Priest, and of Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene.

complete a consensus of all the best MSS. (א, A, B, C, D, E, &c.) in favor of έπί άρχιερέως, that there can be no doubt of its being the true reading. The same expression occurs in Acts iv. 6. It will then be asked, how is it that St. Luke calls Annas High Priest, when the office was really held by Caiaphas? The question is sufficiently answered supra, p. 589; but we may here observe, (i.) that Annas, having been merely superseded by the will of Valerius Gratus, would, by all serious-minded Jews, be still regarded as HIgh Priest de jure, according to the Mosaic Law (Numb. xxxv. 25). (ii.) That whether he held the office of Sagan or of Nasî, or not, there is sufficient evidence to show that he was at this time the most influential and powerful leader of the aristocratic, sacerdotal, and Sadducæan party at Jerusalem. (iii.) That this leading position of Annas is clearly recognized by Josephus (Antt. xx. 9, § 1), who, like theEvangelist, speaks vaguely about the mere puppets of civil power who at this period became titular High Priests in rapid succession.

For a full commentary on these chronological data of St. Luke see Wieseler, Chron. Synops., E. Tr., pp. 157-175. But enough has been said to show that, so far from the Evangelist having fallen into a demonstrable error, there is every reason to believe that he has independently preserved an obscure historical fact. Unless he had been perfectly well acquainted with the actual circumstances, it is inconceivable that he should have introduced so minute, and apparently superfluous an allusion, at the risk of falling into a needless blunder.

EXCURSUS II.

CHRIST AND THE CHRISTIANS IN THE TALMUD.

The name of Jesus occurs some twenty times only in unexpurgated editions of the Talmud, the last of which appeared at Amsterdam in 1645.[1]

[1] Jost. Gesch. d. Judenth. i. 405, 414.

The allusions to Him are characterized by intense hatred, disguised by intense fear. They are also marked by all the gross and reckless carelessenss of these utterly uncritical and unhistorical writers.

The Christians are usually called -- partly, no doubt, to conceal the allusions to them -- pupils of Balaam, Minîm (heretics), Gentiles, Nazarenes.

In Sanhedr, 43 a Jesus is said to have had five disciples: -- Mattaeus; Thaddaeus; רצנ (which clearly means "Nazarene"); Booni -- apparently meant for Nikdimon Ben Gorion (Nikodemus), or Banus; and Niki -- perhaps some confusion of Nikolaitan.[1]

[1] Grätz, iii. 243. Taanith, f. 19, 2. See Ewald, Gesch. Christ., p. 397.

Our blessed Lord is called --

"That man" (cf. Acts v. 28 and ינולפ, "So and so," ό δεϊνα).

"He whom we may not name."

"Ha-Notzrî," i.e., "The Nazarene."

"The fool."

"The Hung" (י4 ִול ָת). Thus Abn Ezra (on Gen. xxvii. 39) says that Constantine put on his

labarum, "a figure of the hung;" and in Ps. xxx. 14, R. Bechai says that in the word רעָו ִ,מ the

letter ע is suspended, to indicate that it is the "worshippers of the Hung" -- i.e., the Christians -- who devastate the vineyard of Israel.

"Absalom."

"Ben Stada."

"Ben Pandera."

Putting into Hebrew letters the Grecised form of His name (שוזי), they made each letter the first of a Hebrew word, so as to mean "May his memory (ז) be destroyed (י), and his name

(ש) blotted out (ו)."

Little is said about Jesus in the Talmud, except that He was a scholar of Joshua Ben Perachiah (who lived a century before!), accompanied him into Egypt, there learned magic, was a seducer (mesîth) of the people, and was first stoned, then hung as a blasphemer after forty days, during which no one had come forward to speak in his favor.[1]

[1] Lightfoot ad Matt. xii. 24; Bab Sanhedr. 67 a; Shabbath, 104 b; Grätz, iii. 242.

The Toldôth Jeshu is a late and detestable compliation, put together out of fragmentary Talmudic legends, and regarded as utterly contemptible, even by the Jews themselves.[1] It is printed with a Latin translation by Wagenseil, in his Tela Ignea Satanae; but its blasphemies are too gross and grotsque to need further notice.

[1] "Ein elendes Machwerk." (Grätz, iii. 243.)

Some account of the wretched follies blasphemously indicated by the name Ben Stada, Ben Pandera, &c., may be seen in Buxtorf, Lex. Talm., p. 1458, seqq.
