EXCURSUS III.

Jesus and Hillel.

The conjectural dates of Hillel's life are that he was born BC 75; came to Jerusalem BC 36; became Nasî BC 30; and died about BC 10. Geiger, a learned Rabbi of Frankfort, author of Das Judenthum und seine Geschichte, and Urschrift says, "Jesus was a Pharisee(!) who walked in the paths of Hillel; that he uttered no new thought. Hillel, on the contrary, presents us with the picture of a genuine Reformer." This Hillel, he continues, with an undercurrent of contrast, is a really historical personage[1]; others have a halo of legend and miracle about them which merely tends to obscure and conceal their actual personality. Renan improves upon the hint, and, while he acknowledges the superiority of Jesus, says that Hillel was His real master.[2] The Messiah, it seems, was but the pupil and the plagiarist of a Rabbi, who, with less faults than others of his countrymen, is said to have declared "that no such Messiah would ever come."

[1] Does M. Geiger consider it historcial that Hillel knew the language of mountains, hills, valleys, trees, vegetables, wild and tame beasts, and demons (Sofrîm, xvi. 9); that the Bath kôl decided in his favor as against Shammai (Bab. Erubhîn, 13b); that thirty of his scholars were worthy of being overclouded by the Shechina like Moses, and thirty more to make the sun stand still like Joshua (Babha Bathra, 134 a); and that such was the fiery zeal of his most eminent pupil, Jonathan Ben Uzziel, that ,when he was studying the Law, birds who flew over his head were consumed (B. Succa, 28 a)? (See Otho, Lex. Rab. 242; Buxtorf, Lex. Talm., p. 617; Gfrörer, Jahrh d. Heils, i. 37.)

[2] "Par sa pauvreté humblement supportée, par la douceur de son caractère , par l'opposition qu'il faisait aux hypocrites et aux prêtres, Hillel fut le maître de Jésus, s'il est permis de parler de maître quand il s'agit d'une si haute originalité"[2a] (Vie de Jésus, p. 38). Farther on he says, very truly, "Hillel cependent ne passera jamais pur le vrai fondateur du christianisme. Dans la morale, comme dans l'art, dire n'est rien, faire est tout ... La vérité ne prend quelque valeur que si elle passe à l'état de sentiment, et elle n'atteint tout son prix que quand elle se réalise dans le monde à l'état de fait"[2b] (id., p. 96). Geiger's remark, baseless as it is, has, however, found great currency (Grätz, Gesch. d. Juden, iii.). "Jesu Sanftmuth und Demuth erinnern an Hillel, den er sich überhaupt zum Muster genommen zu haben scheint."[2c] Yet it is not too much to say that there is hardly one page in nay one of the Gospels which does not suffice to show its baselessness.

[2a] "By his poverty endured with humility, by the sweetness of his character, by the opposition which he made to the hypocrites and priests, Hillel was the real teacher of Jesus, if we may say teacher when speaking of so lofty an originality." [2b] "Hillel, however, will never be considered the real founder of Christianity. In morality, as in art, words are nothing, deeds are everything. Truth becomes of value only if it pass to the condition of feeling, and it attains all its preciousness only when it is realized in the world as a fact."

[2c] The gentleness and mildness of Jesus remind one of Hillel, whom he seems generally to have taken for a master.

Now I would premise at once that these questions about "originality" seem to me supremely idle and irrelevant in all cases, but most of all when they are irreverently applied ot the teaching of our Lord. The originality of Jesus, even to those who regard Him as a mere human teacher, consists in this -- that His words have touched the hearts of all men in all ages, and have regenerated the moral life of the world. Who but a pedant in art would impugn the originality of Michael Angelo because his Pietà is said to have resembled a statue of Signorelli; or of Raphael, because his earlier works betray the influence of Perugino? Who but an ignoramus would detract from the greatness of Milton because his Paradise Lost offers some points of similarity to the Adam of Battista Andreini? But if there are any who cannot rise above this narrow ground, it is well that they should remember that, according to the Jewish writers themselves, we can never distinguish between the maxims which Hillel originated and those which merely belonged to his school. Since they were not committed to writing till long after the death of Christ, they may easily have been due to Christian teaching, which certainly wold not have been without influence on Hillel’s grandson, the Rabban Gamaliel.

It needs, however, but little knowledge of the real facts to see how utterly imaginary are these Jewish conjectures. The position of Jesus towards the Rabbinism of His nation and all that occupied it – its Hagadôth, or legendary matter, its Halachôth, or traditional customs, its puerile minutiæ, its benumbing ritual, its inflated emptiness, its irreligious arrogance, its servile second-handness, its to-and-fro balancing of conflicting opinions – is one not of submissive reverence, but of uncompromising hostility. Hillel was a “sweet and noble” Rabbi; he is the loftiest figure which Rabbinism has produced; he seems to have been really learned, humble, peaceful, and enlightened; but the distance between him and Jesus is a distance absolutely immeasurable, and the resemblance of his teaching to that of Jesus is the resemblance of a glowworm to the sun. Their whole scope and method are utterly different. Hillel rested on precedent, Jesus spoke with authority. Hillel spoke in the schools to the students and separatists; Jesus in the streets and by the roadsides to publicans and sinners. Hillel confined his teaching to Jerusalem; Jesus traversed the length and breadth of Palestine. Hillel mainly occupied himself with the Levitical law, and modified its regulations to render them more easy and more palatable; Jesus taught only the moral law, and extended its application from external actions to the very thoughts of the heart. Would Christ have ever uttered a sentiment so deeply dyed in Pharisaism at this? – “No uneducated man easily avoids sin; no common person (am ha-arets) is pious.”[1] Is not this the very echo of the haughty exclusive insolence which said, “Have any of the rulers believed on Him, or of the Pharisees? But this mob that knoweth not the Law are cursed?” Is it not the very spirit which Christ’s whole life and practice combated, and which His whole teaching most utterly condemned?

[1] I have already given instances (supra, p. 30) of the contempt poured on the poor am ha-ratsîm, and may add others. Their testimony was not received; they are not admitted into society; no one is to take the trouble to restore to them their lost property; the terms “beasts” and “vermin” are applied to them, their wives, and their daughters; and finally, leave is given

“to rend an am ha-arets like a fish” (גרר יעררל רתומ יירא ... םע) See McCaul, Old Paths, pp. 6, 458, &c.

[1] Joma. 35b.

[1] Shabbath, 31 a. -- I have had repeated occasion to observe how idle is the question of "originality" in teaching of this kind; but we find the same thing long before, not only in the Pentateuch, but even in the Book of Tobit iv. 15: "Do that to no man which thou hatest." The probable date of the Book of Tobit is two centuries before Hillel. For yet earlier and even heathen parallels to the saying, see Ewald, Gesch. Isr. iv. 270. It is also found to all intents and purposes in Confucius (Doctrine of the Mean, xx., and Analects, xv. 23, where he tells Tsze Kung that the one word "reciprocity" [i.e., altruism] will serve him as a rule of practice for all his life) and Buddha (see Barth. St. Hilaire, Le Buddha et sa Religion, p. 92); see, too, Hesiod, Opp. et Dies, i. 284, 312, 330.

[1] A coin apparently worth a denarius, with a head of Zeus on it.

"I have a question to ask."

"Ask on, my son."

"Why have the Babylonians such round heads?"

"An important question, my son," said Hillel, laughing; "it is because they have skilful midwives."

The man turned his back on him, went off, and returned in an hour. The same rude interruption was repeated, and this time the man asked --

"Why have the 'Thermudians'[1] [Palmyrenes] such narrow eye-slits?"

[1] This is a wrong reading for the people of Tadmor or Palmyra. (Buxtorf, Lex. s. v. Ewald, Jahribuch, x. 69.)

"An important question, my son. It is because they live in the middle of a sandy desert."

A third time the man returned as before, and impudently asked --

"Why have the Africans such broad soles to their feet?"

Hillel calmly replied that it was because they live on such loose soil.

"I should have had plenty more questions to ask you were I not afraid that you would get into a passion."

Hillel only drew his mantle more closely round him, and quietly replied --

"Ask on, whatever thou hast to ask."

"So," said the man, thoroughly disarmed, "you are the Hillel whom they call the Nasî of Israel?"

"Yes."

"Well, then, I hope there are not many like you."

"Why, my son?"

"Because through you I have lost 400 zouzim."

"Calm thyself, my son: better that thou shouldest lose for Hillel's sake 400, ay, and 400 more, than that Hillel should lose patience."[1]

[1] Shabbath, 30, 31.

No doubt these are beautiful anecdotes, as is also the story that once for a rich man who had lost his property he hired a horse and an attendant, and, when the latter was not forthcoming, went himself three miles as his attendant.[1] Sometimes, however, we see, even in the few records of him, facts and tendencies which, however well meant, cannot be praised. Thus, in opposition to Shammai, he directed that in the bridal song the beauty of a bride should be praised, however ugly she were; and on one occasion, to avoid any question or dispute with the school of Shammai, he passed off an ox, which was going to be sacrificed for him, as a cow.[2] The Rabbis praise these proceedings, yet we feel instinctively what a shock they would have given us, how injurious they would have been to the world's morality, had they occurred in the life of Christ. He alone, of all who have ever lived in the world, could say, "Which of you convinceth me of sin?" Little as we know by comparison of a Socrates, of a Confucius, of a Sakya Mouni, of a Hillel, or a Mahomet, and much as we know of Jesus, yet in the scanty records of their lives we find much to disapprove; but there is nothing which is not divine and sinless in the fourfold record of the life of Christ.

[1] Other striking anecdotes are mentioned by Ewald, Gesch. Christ. 31-33. [2] Kethubôth, 67b, 16 b. Jost, Gesch. d. Judenthums, i. 267. Delitzsch, Jes. und Hillel, 35; "Er bewegte wedeind den Schweif des Thieres, um dessen Geschiecht zu verbergen."[2a] [2a] He kept wagging the tail of the beast, in order to conceal its sex.

II. Turning from Hillel's life to his teaching, we see how the notion of his being in any way a master of Christ crumbles into dust. Even his noblest answer, already recorded, is gravely defective. It may do for a summary of the second table of the Law, but, unlike the infinitely deeper wisdom of Jesus, it omits all reference to the first table, on which the second is alone founded, and with reference to which it is alone possible. Why did Hillel, in his famous answer, forget the Shema (Deut. vi. 4, 5), and remember only Lev. xix. 18? So did not Jesus (Matt. vii. 12; Luke xi. 31).

It is said, indeed, that Jesus sometimes applies one or other of the seven famous

middôth (תו* ִ,,מ) laid down by Hillel for the interpretation of Scripture. But in point of fact these middôth are a mere summary of existing and perfectly obvious processes (Inference from major to minor or vise versa, Matt. vii. 11, x. 29; analogy, connection, &c., Matt. xii. 5);and, in the next place, these were only contrivances to support the credit and authority of that Oral Law which Jesus utterly rejected and -- it is hardly too much to say -- despised. The instance in which the decisions of Christ coincide with those of Shammai are at least as numerous, and refer to subjects of greater importance (e.g., Matt. v. 32; xix. 9; xviii. 17); yet who has ever thought of saying that He was a disciple of Shammai?

For instance, one of Hillel's most celebrated and elaborate decisions was on a trumpery series of questions as to whether one might or might not eat an egg which a hen had laid on a feast-day, when the feast-day came in connection with a Sabbath. This precious inquiry gives its name, Bîtsa (egg), to an entire Talmudical treatise. Is it possible to imagine that Jesus would have treated it otherwise than with the finest yet tenderest irony? Yet in his decision on this point Hillel was more strict and more Shammaitic that Shammai himself.[1]

[1] All ceremonializing and and particularizing religions are liable to be evaporated into idle cases of casuistry. Some few years ago the Mohammedans at the Cape were agitated by such a dispute. The Sultan had sent some one to look after their spiritual condition. This person found that they were in the habit of eating cray-fish of a particular species, which in an evil hour he pronounced unclean. Objecting to this decision, they said that there was nothing about cray-fish in the Koran. However, he looked up a prohibition to eat spiders, and declared that for all ceremonial purposes a cray-fish was practically a spider. Referring the question to the curator of the Cape Museum, they were (naturally) informed that a cray-fish was not a species of spider. The more scrupulous, however, objected to the decision, and as far as my informant knows, the dispute may be as lively as ever to this day.

In some points, too, Hillel's teaching was, to say the least, very dubious. He ruled, for instance -- owing to a vague expression in Deut. xxiv. 1 -- that a man might put away his wife "even if she cooked his dinner badly" (Git. 90). It is true that Jost (Gesch. d. Judenthums, i. 264) and later writers interpret this to mean "bringing discredit on his home;" but the "even if" (יליפא) evidently points to a minimum. His manner, too, of evading the Mosaic rules about the sabbatical year (mentioned in Excursus IX.) can only be regarded as a disingenuous shuffle. Better specimens of Hillel's teaching are --

"Separate not thyself from the congregation, and have no confidence in thyself till the day of thy death."

"If I do not care for my soul, who will do it for me? If I care only for my own soul, what am I? If not now, when then?" (Abhôth i. 14.)

"Judge not thy neighbor till thou art in his situation."

"Say not, I will repent when I have leisure, lest that leisure should never be thine."

"The passionate man will never be a teacher."

"In the place where there is not a man be thou a man."

"Be of the disciples of Aaron, who loved peace."

"Whoever is ambitious of aggrandizing his name will destroy it."[1]

[1] Some of these (e.g., the last) are obscure in the original, and admit a widely different interpretation. (Ewald, ubi sup.) These and others are in the Pirke Abhôth (Etheridge, Hebr. Lit., p. 36). But it must not be forgotten that even this treatise is not older than the second century after Christ.

Hillel was undoubtedly a great and good man, and he deserved the wail uttered over his grave -- "Ah, the gentle, the holy, the scholar of Ezra!" -- but to compare his teaching with that of the Saviour is absurd. It was legal, casuistic, and narrow, while that of Jesus was religious, moral, and human. If Jesus uttered nothing original, as modern Jewish Rabbis are so fond of saying, how is it that, whereas the very name of Hillel is unknown except to scholars, the words of Jesus wrought the mightiest revolution that has ever been witnessed in the world? Had Humanity nothing better to live on than the words of Hillel, it would be dwarfed and starved indeed. The shortest and slightest of our Saviour's parables is worth all that he ever said.[1] Nay, even the least of the Old Testament prophets is transcendently greater than this "greatest and best of the Pharisees." He and his school, and Shammai and his school, spent a century of unprofitable and groundless jangling on the exegesis of two short words of the Law (ervath dabhar, Deut. xxiv. 1), without approaching a single sound principle, which would have rendered their quarrel needless: but Jesus furnished that principle, and solved the question for ever the moment that it was brought before Him (Matt. xix. 3-9). Let any candid reader consult the translation of the Talmudic treatise Berachôth, by M. Schwab, and see (pp. 264, 266, 314, 375, 404, &c.) the kind of miserably minute questions of infinitely little matters of formalism which occupied the mind and life of Hillel[2], and calmly consider the mixture of scorn and pity with which Jesus would have treated the notion that there was in such questions any intrinsic importance. He will then be able to judge for himself of the folly and untenability of the statement that Hillel was the true master of Jesus!

[1] See further the admirable brochure of Jesus und Hillel by F. Delitzsch (Eriangen, 1867); Ewald, Gesch. Christ., pp. 12-48; Budaeus, Philos. Hebr. 108, seqq.; Geiger, De Hillel et Shammai; Ugolini, xxi.; Grätz, Gesch. d. Judenth. iii. 172-179; Jost, Gesch. d. Jud. 254, seqq.; Herzfeld, Gesch. d. Volkes Isr. i. 257-261.

[2] Ex. gr., Whether, when you are carrying perfumed oil and myrtles, you ought to bless first the myrtles and then the oil; whether you ought to take off your phylacteries or not in certain places of daily resort; whether you ought or ought not to be in a particular position at particular times of studying the Law; whether you ought first to wash your hands and then fill the glasses, or vice versâ; whether you ought to lay the napkin on the table or on the seat, &c., &c. The mere enumeration of one tithe of such points in serious dispute between the schools of Hillel and Shammai is wearisomely repulsive; yet it is of such deadening and frivolous matters -- only very often unspeakably more nauseous -- that the Talmud is full. One cannot blame Hillel for not being before his age; but to compare Rabbinism with Christianity, and Hillel with Christ, requires either a consummate effrontery, or a total paralysis of the critical faculty.

EXCURSUS IV.

GREEK LEARNING.

There is a story, several times repeated in the Talmud, that during the siege of Jerusalem in the civil war between Hyrcanus II. and Aristobulus, a box was daily let down the wall by the adherents of the latter, full of money, in return for which it was re-filled with the victims necessary for the daily sacrifice. But an "ancient" who knew "Greek wisdom" (chôchmath Javanîth) made the besiegers understand that the Temple would never be yielded so long as they supplied the means for continuing the daily sacrifice. Consequently, the next day a pig was put in the box, which, when half-way up the wall, clung to the wall with its feet. An earthquake ensued. On this occasion the Doctors pronounced a curse on all who bred pigs, and on all who taught their children Greek wisdom. (Sota, 49 b; Menachôth 64 b.)[1]

[1] See Gfrörer, Jahrh. d. Heils, i. 114, and Philo und die Alex. Theo.ii. 350.

But, as Grätz (iii. 502) and Derenbourg (Hist. Pal. 114) point out, by "Greek wisdom," elsewhere is probably intended a sort of magic; and, in this instance, the art of secretly communicating with an enemy -- as the traitorous ancient had done -- by means of arrows with letters attached to them. The "ancient" is conjectured to have been Antipater.

It remains, however, true that, although the Rabbis on this, as on most other matters, contradict themselves, many of them wholly despised and discouraged Greek learning. Josephus, at the end of the Antiquities, distinctly tells us that they thought it slavish to be a good linguist, and, necessary as the Greek language was for commercial purposes, very few had attained it with accuracy.

Origen gives us the same testimony, saying that the Jews cared little either for the Greek language or literature.[1]

[1] C. Cels. ii. 34.

Rabbi Akiba says that no Israelite would be a partaker of eternal life who read the books of the gentiles.[1] Gamaliel was the only eminent Rabbi who permitted his pupils to read them -- a circumstance to which we may possibly owe the classical quotations of St. Paul from Aratus, Menander, and Epimenides (Acts xvii. 28; 1 Cor. xv. 33; Titus i. 12).

[1] Bab. Sanhedr. 90 a.
