EXCURSUS V.

THE TALMUD AND THE ORAL LAW.

The Jews believe that the Law falls under two divisions -- the Written Law (Torah shebeketeb), and the Oral, or that "upon the lip" (Torah shebeal pî), of which the latter, or "tradition," is equally authoritative with the former, or even more so.

The Talmud proper consists of the Mishna and the Gemara.

The Oral Law remained absolutely unwritten at least down to the time of the later Tanaîm (about AD 30-80), who, indeed, thought it wrong to commit it to writing. The older Megillath Taanîth -- a collection of Hagadôth ("legends or narrations") and Halachôth ("rules) on times and solemnities -- is supposed to have been drawn up by Hanania Ben Hiskia in the time of our Lord. But the first who reduced the Mishna to writing was the famous Rabbi Jehuda Hakkôdesh, who died AD 190. His reason for doing so was the apparent danger of national extinction after the fearful massacre which ensued on the defeat of Bar-Cochebas and the capture of Bethyr; but although the reduction of the Oral Law to writing was discouraged, secret rolls (megillôth setharîm) of it are said to have existed before. In point of fact, laws are often, by a sort of fiction, supposed to be "unwritten" for centuries after they may be read in print.

The word Mishna means "repetition," and is usually rendered in Greek by δευτέρωσις. Maimonides divides the Oral Law into five classes -- viz., (i.) Perushîm, explanations believed to date from Moses. (ii.)Dinerîm, or "constitutions," which are "modes of conduct" (halachôth) believed to have been delivered by Moses. (iii.) Generally received customs. (iv.) Decisions of

the wise men, regarded as a "hedge about the Law" (הרותל גים). (v.) Experimental suggestions.

Jehuda divided his immense materials into six sedarîm, or "orders," containing sixty-three massiktôth, or "tracts," and 525 perakîm, or "chapters" -- viz.:

[1] The principal edition and translation of the Mishna is that by Surenhusius, Amsterd. 1668-1703. It has been translated into German by Rabe (1763), and Jost (1833); and eighteen treatises have been translated into English by Rabbis De Sola and Raphall (second edition, London, 184); Gfrörer, Jahr. d. Heils, i. 10. I have abridged the above account from Etheridge's Hebr. Literat., pp. 117 seqq. See, too, Dr. Davidson s. v. "Talmud" in Kitto's Bibl. Cycl.

The commentary on the Mishna, which is boundlessly voluminous, is called the Gemara, "complement," and the Mishna and Gemara together form the Talmud, or "That which should be learnt." The Jerusalem Talmud dates from about AD 390, and the Babylonian from about AD 420.

Appendices to the Mishna are called Toseftôth; exegetical additions to the Gemara are called Tosafôth. Supplements to the Mishna, consisting of commentaries (e.g., Sifra, a Midrash or "comment" on Leviticus, Sifri on Numbers and Deuteronomy, and Mechiltha on Exodus), are called Baraithas.

The language of the Talmud is uncouth, corrupt, and often unintelligible. It contains some beautiful and noble things, but far fewer than any other such enormous mass of human writings; and nothing can be conceived more tedious and unprofitable than its "desultory and confused wrangle," teeming with contradictions and mistakes. A sufficient number of Talmudic treatises have been translated to enable any reader to judge of this for himself. Lightfoot, than whom no scholar had a better right to speak, says that "the almost unconquerable difficulty of the style, the frightful roughness of the language, and the amazing emptiness and sophistry of the matters handled, do torture, vex, and tire him that reads them."

For a continuation of this subject see Excursus XII., "Notes on the Talmud."
