EXCURSUS VI.

TRADITIONAL DESCRIPTION OF THE APPEARANCE OF OUR LORD.

The earliest actual descriptions of Jesus are very late, yet it is possible that they may have caught some faint accent of tradition handed down from the days of Irenæus, Papias, and St. John. Nicephorus, quoting from a description given by John of Damascus, in the eighth century, says that He resembled the Virgin Mary; that He was beautiful and strikingly tall, with fair and slightly curling locks, on which no hand but His mother's had ever passed, with dark eyebrows, an oval countenance, a pale and olive complexion, bright eyes, an attitude slightly stooping, and a look expressive of patience, nobility, and wisdom.[1] The famous letter which professes to have been addressed by "Lentulus, president of the people of Jerusalem, to the Roman Senate,"[2] though not older than the twelfth century, is yet so interesting for the history of Christian art, and so clearly derived from long-current traditions, that we may here quote it entire.

[1] See Winer, Realw., s. v. "Jesus;" Nicephorus, Hist. Eccl. i. 40. This description, with that of the pseudo-Lentulus and John of Damascus, was edited by J. G. Carpzov, of Helmstadt, in 1777. The fullest treatment of the subject is in Dr. Lewis Glückselig, Studien uber Jes. Christ und sein wahres Ebenbild. Prag., 1863. (See Quart. Rev. 1867.) The earliest pictures of Christ, in the Catacombs, are purely symbolic (the Lamb, the Fish, Orpheus, &c.). [2] No such office existed, nor did any one of the name fill any analogous position.

"There has appeared in our times," it says, "a man of great virtue, named Christ Jesus ... He is a man of lofty stature, beautiful, having a noble countenance, so that they who look on Him may both love and fear. He has wavy hair, rather crisp, of the color of wine, and glittering as it flows down from His shoulders, with a parting in the middle of the head after the manner of the Nazarenes.[1] His forehead is pure and even, and His face without any spot or wrinkle, but glowing with a delicate flush. His nose and mouth are of faultless beauty; He has a beard abundant and of the same hazel color as His hair, not long, but forked. His eyes are blue and very bright.[2] He is terrible in rebuke, calm and loving in admonition, cheerful but preserving gravity. He has never been seen to laugh, but oftentimes to weep. His stature is erect, and his hands and limbs are beautiful to look upon. In speech He is grave, reserved, and modest; and He is fair among the children of men."[3]

[1] He evidently meant Nazarites.

[2] More than one of these touches recalls the description of the youthful David (1 Sam. xvi. 12). "He was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance (Heb. 'fair of eyes'), and goodly to look to." Cf. xvii. 42, and Cant. v. 10,"My beloved is white and ruddy, and chiefest (Heb. 'a standard-bearer') among ten thousand ... His locks are bushy (Heb. 'curled'), and black as a raven. His eyes are as the eyes of doves," &c.

[3] B. H. Cowper, The Apocr. Gospels, p. 221; Hofmann, pp. 291-294; Hase, p. 80. -- Pictures and statues of Christ are said to have originated on the gems, &c., of the Gnostics -- e.g., Basilidians, Carpocratians, &c.; but symbolic representations were common in the Catacombs (Iren. c. Haer. i. 24; Hippol., Philosoph. vii. 32). A statue of Christ is said to have found its way into the private lararium of the Emperor Alexander Severus (Lamprid., Vit. Alex. Sever. c. 29). The one which has acquired most fame is the supposed representation at Cæsarea Philippi (Paneas) of the healing of the woman with the issue of blood, as related in the apocryphal story of Veronica (Cowper, p. 233; Hofmann, 293, 354, 357), which Eusebius saw, but despised (Hist. Ecc. vii. 18), and which Julian is said to have destroyed (Sozomen, H. E. v. 20; Philostorg., H. E. vii. 3). I need merely allude to the miraculous impression on the napkin of Veronica, the shroud given by Nicodemus, &c.

EXCURSUS VII.

JEWISH ANGELOLOGY AND DEMONOLOGY.

It is the characteristic of the Oriental, and especially of the Semitic mind, to see in every event, even the most trivial, a direct supernatural interference, wrought by the innumerable unseen ministers -- both good and evil -- of the Divine Will. The definite form in which the belief clothed itself was, by the admission of the Jews themselves, derived from Babylon.[1]

[1] Rosh Hashshana, 56; Gfrörer, Jahrh. d. Heils, i. 124. -- The facts in this Excursus are derived mainly from Gfrörer and Frankl, Jews in the East. Göthe's demonology in Faust is mainly Talmudic, and is borrowed from Eisenmenger.

Even the most ordinary forces and phenomena of Nature, and passions of the mind, were by them regarded as angels. Thus, in the Jer. Targum on Deut. ix. 19, it is said that, to punish the Israelites for worshipping the golden calf, God sent five angels -- Indignation, Anger, Fury, Ruin, Wrath. And they would have interpreted quite literally the verse -- "He maketh the winds his angels, and fiery flames his ministers" (Ps. civ. 4).

The number of the angels -- The Tsebha hashamaîm -- was immense. R. Eliezer said that at Sinai 600,000 descended, according to the number of the 600,000 Israelites;[1] and in Bab. Berachôth (32 b) we find the following story: -- "According to R. Rish Lakish, Isa. xlix. 14 is to be understood as follows: The Church of Israel complains to God: 'Lord of the World, even when a man takes a second wife he thinks of the first; but thou hast utterly forgotten me.' But God answered, 'Daughter, I have 12 mazalôth (signs of the zodiac), and to each massal 30 chêl (commanders), and to each chêl 30 legions (generals), and to each legion 30 rabatôn(officers), and to each rabatôn 30 kartôn (captians), and to each kartôn 30 kistra (camps), and to each kistron I have assigned 3,650,000,000 stars. All these have I created for thy sake, and yet thou sayest I have forgotten thee.' "

[1] Pirke Eliezer, 41.

This, it will be seen, makes the number of the Tsebaoth (or Host of Heaven) 12 x 30 x 30 x 30 x 30 x 30 x 3,650,000, which makes 1,064,340,000,000,000, i.e., on the old English plan of notations, one trillion, sixty-four billion, three hundred and forty thousand million; or according to the newer English plan and the French plan (recommended, says M. Littré, by locke), one quintillion, &c. The factors are evidently a muddle of days, months, &c., the same factors being occasionally repeated to make sure of not being under the mark! The military terms (castra, &c.) have an interesting bearing on the Αεγεών of Mark v. 9; for the devils were supposed to be under similar military organization. Wier, De Praestigiis Daemonum, calculates that there are 7,405,926 devils.

These angels were all divided into ranks and classes,

"Thrones, dominations, virtues, princedoms, powers."

to which there seems to be an allusion in Eph. i. 21.

The evil spirits -- offspring, according to various Rabbinic legends, of Adam and Lilith, or of Sammael and Eve, or of "the sons of God and daughters of men" -- were equally numerous. To them were attributed many results which we should undoubtedly assign to purely natural causes, especially the phenomena of epilepsy, as is very clearly described in the Book of Enoch (xv. 8).

Their home was supposed to be the region of the middle air (John xii. 31; xiv. 30; 2 Cor. iv. 4; and especially Eph. ii. 2; vi. 12), and they were regarded as lords of the existing state of things. An exaggeration of this view led to certain Ebionite heresies, and even in the Book Zohar Satan is called "the second God" (El achêr; cf. 2 Cor. iv. 4). R. Joshua Ben Levi says that he has seven names -- Lust, Impurity, the Hater, &c.,and "the Man of Midnight" (Joel ii. 20, Heb.).

In Bab. Berachôth (6 a) we are told that if we could but see the devils no one could stand the shock. Every man has 10,000 at his right hand, and 1,000 at his left. They are remarkably powerful at night; hence no one should great a person by night, for fear of saluting a devil (Sanhedr. 44 a). They live chiefly in ruins, and deserts and sepulchres, and under trees (especially the service-tree) and foul places.

Headaches was caused by a demon name Karadaikoos. On the sabbath-night all hide themselves except one Asiman, who causes the birth of epileptic children.

The belief in these Schedîm, or evil spirits, has continued unabated to this day. "There are houses in Jerusalem in which men and women cannot dwell together; the Schedîm will not allow it; and thus they are occupied by women alone." The celebrated cabalist, Jehuda Bivas of Corfu, explained that they have no power in the West. The chalebi, the old traditional head-dress of the Jewish women, seems to have been invented for the express purpose of keeping off the Schedîm, who sit on the hair of women whose heads are uncovered (see 1 Cor. xi. 10). "Its ugliness is only equalled by the difficulty of describing it:" it seems to be a sort of chignon, except that it is made entirely of linen, and conceals the hair of all who wear it.[1]

[1] See Frankl, Jews in the East, E. Tr., ii. 160, seqq.; i. 227, &c.
