EXCURSUS VIII.

THE UNNAMED FEAST OF JOHN v. 1, AND THE LENGTH OF THE MINISTRY.

"After this" (the healing of the nobleman's son), says St. John, "there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up o Jerusalem."

What this feast was, is in all probability a question which, though interesting and important in settling the length of our Lord's ministry, will never receive a final answer. Whole volumes have been written on it, and to enter upon all the discussions which they open would be idle, and endless, and, after all, unconvincing. In spite of the patient thought and consummate learning which have been devoted to the consideration, the data are clearly insufficient to decide convincingly how long Christ publicly taught on earth, nor shall we ever be able to attain any certainty on that deeply interesting question. The few remarks which I shall make on the subject shall be as brief and clear as possible.

[1] See Browne, Ordo Saeclorum, p. 91.

i. "The Passover of the Jews" (ii. 13), τό πάσχα τών Ίουδαίων.

ii. "A" or "the" "Feast of the Jews" 9v. 1), έορτή or ή έορτή τών Ίουδαίων.[1]

[1] The reading is profoundly uncertain. The Alexandrine and Vatican Manuscripts and the Codex Bezae have not the article; on the other hand, the Codex Ephraemi and the Sinaiticus have it. Yet it is much more likely to have been inserted than to have been omitted, and if we could be sure that it did not exist in the original text, this would seem to be nearly decisive against its being the Passover or Feast of Tabernacles.

iii. The Passover, the Feast of the Jews (vi. 4), τό πάσχα ή έορτή τώνΊουδαίων.

iv. "The Tabernacles, the Feast of the Jews" (vii. 2), ή έορτή τών Ίουδαίων ή σκηνοπηγία.

v. "The Dedication" (x. 22), τά έγκαίνια.

vi. "The Passover of the Jews" (xi. 55), τό πάσχα τών Ίουδαίων.

NISAN 1. Tues. March 16. Jewish New Year's Day.

NISAN 14. Mon. March 29. Passover; the days of unleavened bread

lasting seven days.

SIVAN 6. Wed. May 19. Pentecost.

TISRI 10. Sat. Sept. 18. Day of Atonement.

TISRI 15-21. Sept. 23-29. Tabernacles.

KISLEU 25. Wed. Dec. 1. Dedication.

VEADAR 14. Sat. March 19. Purim.[1]

[1] Wieseler, Chron. Sun. E. Tr., p. 434.

This last feast would thus be nearly a month before the Passover of the ensuing year, AD 29, in which year the Passover fell on April 17th.

If these reasons are not absolutely conclusive, they are at least very weighty, and if admitted, they at once exclude the greater Jewish festivals.

[1] Purim is corrupted from the Persian word bahre, "lots" (cf. pars), which the LXX. and Josephus corrupted into Φρουραί and Φρουραίοι. Ewald long ago pointed out (Morgenland. Zeitschr. iii. 415) that it was regarded as "a preliminary celebration of the Passover."

Mr. Browne, in his very learned and elaborate, but unconvincing Ordo Saeclorum, uses a powerful series of arguments to show that our Lord's ministry only lasted for a single year and a few weeks (pp. 342-391). He relies much on various astronomical arguments, which depend on dubious data, and on traditions which are not only conflicting, but can be easily accounted for.

Origen (De Principiis, iv. 5) says ένιαυτόν καί που καί όλίγους µήνας έδίδαξεν,[1] and argues for our Lord's Divinity from the fact that His brief year of teaching was found adequate -- so "full of grace were His lips" -- to renovate the world.[2] Such seems to have been the most ancient opinion, and yet, as Mr. Browne candidly points out, Melito, Irenæus speaks of it as a certain fact, derived by tradition from St. John, that our Lord, at the time of His death, was between forty and fifty years old (c. Haeres, ii. 22, 5).

[1] He taught for a year, and perhaps also a few months. [2] Even Origen does not seem to be quite consistent with himself. See c. Cels. ii., p. 397, and in Matt. xxiv. 15. (Gieseler, Ch. Hist. i. 55, E. Tr.)

The tradition as to the duration of the ministry for a single year is sufficiently accounted for by Luke iv. 19, to which expression indeed St. Clement of Alexandria directly appeals in confirmation of this view (καί ότι ένιαυτόν µόνον έδει αύτον κηρϋξαι καί τοϋτο γέγραπται οϋτως, ένιαυτόν δεκτόν κυρίου κηρϋξαι άπέστειλέν µε,[1] Strom. i. xxi. § 145). The tradition as to our Lord's age is derived from the surprised remark of the Jews in John xiii. 57.[2] We have already seen that neither of these passages supports the inferences which have been drawn from them. This was early observed, and even Hippolytus, the scholar of Irenæus, says that our Lord died at the age of thrity-three;[3] and Eusebius (H. E. i. 10), Theodoret (in Dan. ix. 27), Jerome (id.), and others agree with him.

[1] He had need to preach a year only, and this is so written: He hath sent me to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.

[2] The reading τεσσαράκοντα[2a] adopted by Chrysostom, Euthymius, &c., is probably a mere correction, and has no good MS. authority. The Jews only mentioned fifty as a round number, expressing complete manhood.

[2a] forty.

[3] In Dan. iv. Wordsw. ad loc.

Mr. Browne proceeds ingeniously to show that if a year's ministry be supposed, and if τό πάσχα be eliminated from John vi. 4, St. John may then be supposed to give the feasts of a year in regular chronological order, viz.:--

But it is surely and finally fatal against this view that, whatever may be the case in the quotations or allusions of some of the Fathers, there is not the very faintest MS. authority for the omission of τό πάσχα in John vi. 4.[1] Such being the case, St. John certainly and definitely mentions three passovers. If, as on other grounds we have seen to be probable, there was one passover in our Lord's ministry which he did not attend, the length of ministry was, as most inquirers have now agreed to believe, three years and some weeks, or possibly months. This would account for the remarkable specification of "three years," and a reprieve for another year, as the time during which the unfruitful tree is spared in Luke xiii. 7, 8. 1. Mr. Browne simply relies on the conjecture that it is an interpolation unknown to Irenæus, Origen, Clement, Tertullian, &c.

EXCURSUS IX.

HYPOCRISY OF THE PHARISEES.

The very raison d'être[1] of the Pharisees was to create "hedges" of oral tradition about the Law. Epiphanius, inventing a very forcible word to describe their character, says that they derived their name from their έθελοπερισσοθρησκεία,[2] voluntary, excessive, eternal service; and yet, in spite of these extragant professions, they were perfectly ready to make devices to evade the law when it interfered with their own conveniences and plans.[3] Perhaps the most flagrant instance of this is the manner in which they managed to absolve themselves from the self-imposed obligation of not exceeding the 2,000 yards at which they fixed a Sabbath day's journey.[4]

[1] motive of existence.

[2] Haeres. xvi. 34.

[3] "Une tendance importante des Pharisiens, celle de transiger avec les obligations de la Loi dans l'intérêt des nouveaux besins[3a] (Derenbourg, Hist. Pal. 144). "To make a hedge round the Law" was one of the lessons of Simon the Just (Pirk. Abhôth, i. 1; Jost, i. 95). For some further remarks see infr., Excursus XIV.

[3a] A leading characteristic of the Pharisees, to manipulate the obligations of the Law in the interest of new wants.

[4] This was founded on elaborate arguments drawn from Exod. xxi. 13; xvi. 29. In the latter passage, "beyond 2,000 cubits" is actually inserted by the Jer. Targum. See the excellent and thoroughly well-informed articles of Dr. Ginsburg on "Sabbath Day's Journey" and "Pharisees" in Kitto's Bible Cyclopedia.

It was the custom of the Pharisees to join in syssitia, or common daily banquets, which they subjected to the most stringent conditions, and which they assimilated in all respects to priestly meals. But as their houses were often more than 2,000 yards from the place of meeting, and as the bearing of burdens on the Sabbath was strictly forbidden (Neh. xiii. 15; Jer. xvii. 21; Exod. xvi. 29), they would, without a little ingenuity, have been prevented from dining in common on the very day on which they most desired it. A little management quite relieved them from their difficulty.

On the evening before the Sabbath, they deposited some food at a distance of 2,000 yards from their own house, thus creating a fictitious home; from this fictitious home they could then go 2,000 yards farther to the place of meeting, thus giving themselves double the real distance! This piece of transparent hyprocrisy was euphemistically described as an ideal amalgamation of distances, or "connection of places," and was called erûbh ("mixture," כורע), a name under which it exists to the present day.[1] In order to get over the second difficulty, a still more miserable subterfuge was adopted, by putting door-posts and lintels at the end of various streets, so that all the spaces between them might be regarded as one large house![2]

[1] Among the Jews of Palestine (especially at Safed) there are many of these contemptible trickeries.

[2] These Erubhîn, or "combinations" -- i.e., the relations of places and limits, as affecting the observation of the Sabbath -- fill ten chapters of the Seder Moed. The invention of these is attributed to Solomon. (Shabb. 14, 2; Reland, Antt. Hebr. 524.)

Could any words of burning denunciation be too strong to denounce such a playing at "fast and loose" with obligations which they professed to regard as infinitely and divinely sacred, and the violation of which they were ready to avenge by inflicting death on the transgressor? They must have thought that both their Deity and their conscience were easily cheated![1]

[1] Similarly it is found in Hindostan that caste is protected with the most minute and scrupulous fidelity, except where it clashes with ordinary interests -- as, e.g., in railway travelling.

The Sadducees got over the difficulty, too, in a manner more daring, but infinitely less despicable, by calmly asserting that their meals were a continuation of the Temple service, and therefore claiming the benefit of the maxim, that there was "no sabbatism in the Temple."

These instances might be indefinitely multiplied: e.g., if a Jew's ox is dying, he may kill it on a holy day, provided he eats a piece of the meat as big as an olive, to make believe that it was killed for a necessary meal. If a Jew wants to buy anything which is sold by weight or measure on a holy day, he may do so, provided that he pays the next day, and does not mention the name, weight, or measure. If a Jew wants to buy cattle, fowls, &c., on a holy day, he may do so, only he must not mention money or the number required. He may buy from a butcher on a holy day, only he must not say, "Give me meat for so much money," but only "Give me a portion, or half a portion," and he pays for it next day.[1] Can any stretch of charity, however tender, avoid calling this the legality of evasion designed to cheat God with the letter instead of the spirit. Is the word "hypocrites" too strong for those who thus reduced shiftiness to a sacred system?

Another instance of the same kind was the way in which they treated the sabbatical year. "Before and in the time of Christ they did away with the law of remitting debts, by regarding it as a meritorious act on the part of the debtor not to avail himself of the Mosaic enactment, but to pay his debts irrespective of the sabbatical year. But not glaringly to counteract the law, these doctors enacted that the creditor should say, 'In accordance with the sabbatical year I remit thee the debt:' whereunto the debtor had to reply, 'I nevertheless wish to pay it,' and then the creditor accepted the payment."[1] A very ingenious farce indeed! but intolerable in men who professed an intense zeal and illimitable devotion for "every sentence, word -- what say I? -- every letter" -- of the Mosaic legislation. Perhaps it may be said that these are simply legal fictions necessitated by a false position: but a far more shameful proof of organized hypocrisy is furnished in the advice given by Rabbi Ila to those who suffered from sensual temptations. It occurs in two separate passages of the Talmud.[2] I cannot quote the passages, but the purport of them amounts to this, that the sin of fornication is permissible if it be effectually concealed. Another Rabbinic rule about divorce is just as thin a disguise, just as cynical a concession. "A man must not marry a woman with the intention of divorcing her; but if he previously inform her that he is going to marry her for a season, it is lawful."[3]

[1] C. D. Ginsburg, "Sabbatic Year" in Kitto, iii. 722. - For the most favorable view that can be given of these legal fictions, see R. Astruc, Studies on the Pentatcuch; and Judah Ben Halévy, The Khosari, iii. §§46, 47, quoted by Cohen, Les Déicides, xi. 3. [1a] Hypocrisy is a vice to which men are by nature very much inclined; if it is thoroughly favored as here by consecrated authorities. [2] Bab. Kiddushim, 40 a; Chagiga, 16 a. See the forcible remarks of Gfrörer. "Heuchelei ist ein Laster zu dem die Menschen von Natur sehr geneigt sind, wird sie vollends durch geheiligte Autoritäten gebilligt, wie hier, so muss sie alle Stande ergreifen."[1a] (Jahrh. des Heils, i. 167.)

[3] McCaul, Old Paths, p. 376.

Again, in spite of their boundless professions of reverence for Scripture, many of their schemes of interpretation -- gematria, notarikon, &c. -- were used to get rid of facts and meanings which they disliked. Instances of this in the LXX. are very numerous, and they occur frequently in the Targums. For instance: disgusted with the notion that Moses should have married an Æthiopian woman (Numb. xii. 1), Jonathan renders Koosith (Cushite) by "of fair face," because the letters of Koosith == 736, and the words Japhath mareh give the same sum! This was to expand the interpretation of Scripture into the number of positive integral solutions of an indeterminate equation!

Shammai, the narrow-minded rival of Hillel, was so scrupulous, that he nearly starved his little son on the Day of Atonement, and made a sort of booth of his daughter-in-law's bed that his little grandson (just born!) might keep the Feast of Tabernacles (Succah, ii. 9). Yet we are told that he was a luxurious and selfish man. It is easier to tithe mint that to live a holy life. Those who venture to say that Jesus was to bitter and severe against the Pharisees, must remember the saying attributed to King Alexander Jannæus, that a "real Pharisee was one who wished to play the part of Cozbi, and to receive the reward of Phinehas."
