EXCURSUS X.

WAS THE LAST SUPPER AN ACTUAL PASSOVER?

It is certain, and is all but universally acknowledged, being expressly stated by all the Evangelists, that our Lord was crucified on Friday,[1] and rose on Sunday, lying during the hours of the Jewish Sabbath in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea. It is therefore certain that He ate His Last Supper, and instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, on the evening of Thursday; but was this Last Supper the actual Paschal Feast, or an anticipation of it? was it eaten on Nisan 13, or Nisan 14 -- i.e., in the year of the Crucifixion did the first day of the Passover begin on the evening of a Thursday or on the evening of a Friday?

[1] Matt. xxvii. 62; Mark xv. 42; Luke xxii. 54; John xix. 31. See, however, Westcott's Introduction, p. 323.

The question would, of course, be settled -- (1) If we knew with certainty the date of our Lord's crucifixion, and (2) could rely on the Jewish calendars with sufficient conviction to be sure on what day of the week in that year the Passover fell. But as neither of these data can be depended on, we must turn for the solution of the question to the Evangelists alone. Let us observe, in passing that, as all the Evangelists are agreed as to the main order of the events, the question of deep interest for us, is not one which directly affects the object of the Evangelists in writing the life of Christ.

Now it must be admitted that the Synoptists are unanimous in the use of expressions which admit of no natural explanation except on the supposition that the Passover did begin on the evening of Thursday, and therefore that Thursday was Nisan 14, and that the Last Supper was in reality the ordinary Paschal Feast.

This appears from the following passages:-- Matt. xxvi. 2 -- "Ye know that after two days is the Passover;" id. 17 -- "Now the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the Passover?" 18 -- "I will keep the Passover at thy house;" 19 -- "They made ready the Passover" [cf. Mark xiv. 14-16; Luke xxii. 11-13].

St. Luke is even more explicit, for he says (xxii. 7) -- "Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the Passover must be killed;" id. 15 --"With desire have I desired to eat this Passover[1] with you before I suffer.

[1] The Greek is τοΰτο τό πάσχα, and therefore cannot of itself be meant to imply "this meal as a sort of Passover," although such a meaning may have been, and probably was, involved in the actual Aramaic words spoken by Jesus. Prof. Westcott argues that though language like this, taken alone, would clearly point to the Paschal meal, yet this natural meaning of the words could not be intended by the Evangelists, since their clear identification of the day of crucifixion, as Nisan 14, excludes such a signification (Introduction, p. 321). We admit at once that our difficulties may arise from imperfect knowledge of ritual and other customs which would be perfectly familiar to the Jews; but it still seems impossible to believe that the Synoptists used these expressions knowing that the meal eaten was not the Passover, when a word of explanation, or the slightest variation of language, would have removed all possibility of mistake.

And every other allusion to the day made by the Evangelists is equally plain; so that if they be correct in their statements, we must suppose that Peter and John procured from the Temple the Paschal Lamb between three and five in the afternoon, which was the Jewish (though not the Samaritan) interpretation of the expression "between the two evenings" -- the time specified by the Law for the slaying of the lamb.

But now when we turn to the Gospel of St. John it seems equally indisputable on his authority that the Last Supper was not the Paschal Feast, and that the Passover really began on the Friday evening, and consequently that Thursday was the 13th, not the 14th, of Nisan.

For, passing over the disputed expression, "Before the Feast of the Passover," in John xiii. 1 (which is capable, though not naturally or probably, of another explanation),[1] we find that some of the disciples imagine that Jesus had sent out Judas to "buy those things that we have need of against the feast;'[2] and that the priests and Pharisees "went not into the judgment-hall lest they should be defiled;[3] but that they might eat the Passover." St. John also says in so many words that the Friday of the crucifixion was "the preparation of the Passover;"[4] and that the following Sabbath was "a high day"[5] -- evidently because it was at once a Sabbath and the first day of the Paschal Feast.

[1] Some refer the words to άγαπήσας or είδώς; but, as Mr. Sanday remarks, we usually date acts, not feelings (Fourth Gospel, p. 202).

[2] If the Passover had actually been eaten at that time, the expression would be quite inappropriate; and it is further probable that during the feast all ordinary business was suspended.

[3] Joseph of Arimathea did indeed "go to Pilate" on this day before the evening (Mark xv. 43); but it cannot be inferred from this that he had eaten his Passover. It may be that he did not actually enter Pilate's house, or his notions of what constituted ceremonial defilement may have been less scrupulous than those of the Pharisees: for that some Jews must even have gone into the judgment-hall without noticing the "defilement" is clear. [4] παρασκευή may indeed merely mean Friday, but it is perfectly incredible that St. John should have spoken of the day of the crucifixion as παρασκευή τοΰ πασχα in the sense of "Friday in Paschal week," if Friday had been actually "the first day of unleavened bread." [5] In John xix. 31, µεγάλη ήµέρα seems to represent yom tôbh, i.e., the first or last day of an octave feast; the intermediate days were called moed katôn (Sepp).

How is this apparent contradiction to be reconciled? It must, I think, be frankly confessed, that many of the solutions offered are eminently unsatisfactory, depending upon the assumption of Jewish customs, and Jewish forms of speech which not only have no authority in their favor, but which even contravene such authority as we have. To go through and to sift them all would require a volume. Here I can only allude to some of the more important solutions, and then give the explanation which, after repeated and careful consideration of the question, appears to me the only satisfactory one.

[1] The chigiga was eaten at other festivals also (Deut. xvi. 16), and there was nothing specifically Paschal about it.

[1] This solution is adopted by Calvin (among others); but we have no reason for supposing that this custom was adopted till some centuries later.

[1] Other theories still more baseless may be found recorded in Andrews, Life of our Lord, pp.369-397: e.g., that of Rauch, that the Passover could be legally killed on the 15th as well as the 14th of Nisan; and that of Schneckenburger, that Jesus was crucified on Wednesday and lay four days in the grave. Professor Westcott's deservedly high authority gives indeed some sanction to the tenability of this latter opinion (Introduction, p. 322), but Luke xxiii. 54, 56 seems alone sufficient to set it aside. Matt. xii. 40 arises from the Jewish custom of regarding "any fragment of a day, however short, as a νυχθήµερον," just as, in reckoning the years of a reign, they counted the shortest fragment of a year as a whole year. [There is something analogous to this in English law. A person born on February 20 legally comes of age at midnight on February 18.]

Such hypotheses might be almost indefinitely multiplied, and some of them have been maintained with much learning; but none of them have commanded any general assent, either from failing to satisfy the natural probabilities of the case, or from being wholly unsupported by any adequate evidence. And even if we can explain how it came to happen that there could be this apparent discrepancy, it seems scarcely consistent with critical honesty to deny that the discrepancy really exists. If we construe the language of the Evangelists in its plain, straightforward, simple sense, and without reference to any preconceived theories, or supposed necessities for harmonizing the different narratives, we should be led to conclude from the Synoptists that the Last Supper was the ordinary Paschal meal, and from St. John that it was not.

Assuming, then, for the moment, that our decision must be formed on conflicting testimonies, must we suppose that strict accuracy here rests with St. John or with the Synoptists?

We answer, that it must be regarded as all but certain that St. John's language is here the most strictly correct, and that the Last Supper was not the actual and legal and ordinary Paschal meal, which we should suppose it to have been if the Synoptists alone had come down to us. The grounds for this conviction are the following:--

[1] Unless, which on other grounds seems most improbable, the Quarto-deciman controversy has anything to do with it.

[1] Joseph buys the "linen cloth" (Mark xv. 46). The women prepare spices and ointments (Luke xxiii. 56); Simon the Cyrenian is coming home (άπ' άγροΰ) apparently from a day's husbandry (Mark xv. 21; Luke xxiii. 26). On the Feast-Sabbaths and mode of observing them, see Lev. xxiii. 7, 8. "Ye shall do no servile work therein," is an ordinance so important that it is twice emphatically repeated. We are told that in Galilee, at any rate, the first day of the Feast was very strictly observed, so that even if Jewish custom had sanctioned all this buying, selling, working, &c., at Jerusalem, we should not expect to find it among the Apostles (John xiii. 29).

[1] So Apollinaris, Clement of Alexandria, Jul. Africanus, Hippolytus, Tertullian ("die prima azymorum quo agnum ut occiderent ad vesperam a Moyse fuerat praeceptum,"[1a] Adv. Jud. 8), &c. See Routh, Rell Sacr. i. 168; Westcott, Introduction, p. 320. The identification of the Last Supper with the Passover appears to date mainly from the time of Chrysostom. Some, who refuse to see a real discrepancy, adopt one of the expedients suggested by Chrysostom, viz., either that by "Passover St. John means the entire feast (John == Synoptists); or that Jesus ate the Passover before the proper time (Synoptists == John). (Keim, III. ii. 464; but compare 476, n. 4).

[1a] "on the first day of unleavened bread, on which they slew the lamb at even, just as had been enjoined by Moses."

[1] The "ninth hour" (Matt. xxvii. 46, &c.), or three o'clock, would be the first legal moment at which the lamb could be slain according to the Jewish interpretation of "the two evenings."

[1] Sanh. vi. 2. (Similarly Erebh. yôm Kippur means the evening before the Day of Atonement.) Salvador and the author of the Sepher Jesuah Hannotseri actually argued that the Romans had far more to do with the crucifixion than the Jews, because the Jews could not have crucified on the first day of the Passover (Sepp); but Jewish traditions themselves here contradict the erroneous common impression.

If, then, we conclude that the view which we derive from St. John's Gospel is literally correct, we may further consider whether it is in any way borne out by incidental notices preserved in the Synoptists. We find that there is incidental confirmation of this kind which we cannot ignore; although the force of it is undoubtedly weakened by the conflicting Jewish testimonies, as to what might and what might not be done on the days of these sacred festivals.

i. We find, for instance, that the disciples (John xiii. 22) suppose Judas to have left the room in order to buy what things they had need of against the feast.

ii. Not only does Judas leave the room, but he is afterwards followed by our Lord and His disciples -- an action which may very possibly have become sanctioned by universal custom, but was not in accordance with the strict injunctions of the law (Exod. xii. 22).

iii. Judas hires a band composed, in part at least, of Levitical officers (Luke xxii. 52), and comes by night to arrest Jesus -- an event which could hardly have been regarded as consonant with a night of peculiar solemnity.

iv. The Sanhedrin had already comes to a distinct conclusion that it would be dangerous and impolitic to kill Jesus on the feast day (Mark xiv. 2); yet if the Last Supper was the Paschal meal this was the very thing which they did. On the other hand, if the Last Supper was not the Passover, we see a reason for precipitating the arrest and hurrying on the execution.[1]

[1] It is true that the hostile members of the Sanhedrin were quite capable of violating the sacredness of the day, or might have defended themselves by the supposed interests of religion (cf. the opinion of R. Akiba, Sanhedr. x. 4). But the two robbers at any rate had committed no theological offence.

v. Herod Agrippa did not indeed arrest Peter during "the days of unleavened bread," but he expressly avoided putting him to death till the feast was over. His execution was to be delayed till after the Passover (Acts xii. 4).

vi. The Synoptists, while they speak of bread and wine, give not the remotest hint which could show that a lamb formed the most remarkable portion of the feast.[1]

[1] Had the lamb been there, then Peter, if not Jesus Himself, would, according to Jewish custom, have been compelled to slay the lamb with his own hands in the Temple precincts, drive through it a spit of pomegranate wood, and carry it away on his shoulders to be roasted whole. For the lambs were slain in a very solemn and formal manner. The people were admitted into the Temple only in groups, and the priests, standing in two long lines from the entrance to the altar with cups of gold and silver, passed the blood of the lambs from hand to hand, and poured it into two opening by the side of the altar. Meanwhile there were alternate blasts of trumpets and chantings of the Hallel. It is impossible to suppose that the Priests would have sanctioned for any one -- and least of all for this little band of Galilæans -- an isolated departure from the universal custom.

vii. The general incidents of the banquet as recorded by them bear no distinctive resemblance to the very peculiar ceremonies of the Paschal feast;[1] some of them, such as the washing of the feet, and the absence of all hurry in the banquet, are incongruous with its meaning and character.

[1] Ex. gr. we have not a word about the lamb, the mazzôth or unleavened bread, the merorîm or bitter herbs, the sauce charoseth, the hagada or announcement, the four or five cups of wine. The "hymn," on the other hand, has been identified with the Hallel, and the "cup of blessing" in 1 Cor. x. 16 with the côs habberâchâh; but the first particular is inconclusive, the second expression metaphorical. The many modifications of the old memorial feast which have now been sanctioned for centuries by Jewish usage, have simply resulted from necessity. After the destruction of Jerusalem the Passover could not any longer be observed in accordance with the Mosaic regulations, and therefore it became a mere secondary question to what extent its observances could be relaxed and altered.

viii. Several incidental expressions faithfully preserved by them seem to show that this Supper was eaten because the true Passover could not be eaten; such as "my time is at hand"(Matt. xxvi. 18) -- as though this were a reason why He should anticipate the ordinary meal. Something, too, of the same kind seems to be involved in the expression of the earnest desire of Jesus to eat "this Passover with them before He suffered," particularly, if we attach any importance to the remarkable passage in Hippolytus, ούκέτι φάγοµαι τό πάσχα, "I shall never again eat the Passover," which, if it be a reminiscence of Luke xxii. 16, would be a prophecy that He was to be put to death before the actual Paschal feast.[1]

[1] Hippolytus expressly says ο ύ κ έ φ α γ ε τό κατά νόµον πασχα.[1a] Hence the Eastern Church always used leavened bread at the Eucharist; as did the Western Church also down to the ninth century.

[1a] He did not eat the passover prescribed by Law.

We conclude, then, that the Last Supper was NOT the Paschal meal. Such a meal could now have had no significance for Him, who, as the True Paschal Lamb, was now about to be offered; nor for the Apostles, who would henceforth recognize Him in that capacity.

But, on the other hand, nothing is easier than the supposition that, before the Synoptic Gospels assumed their final form, the Last Supper (to which the metaphorical name of πάσχα was often given) should have been identified with the ordinary Jewish Passover; and the more so if, as is most probable, Jesus had Himself spoken a few words to show that this sacrament which He thus ordained was to be a new feast which should take the place of the ancient Passover; and if two Paschal customs, gave a certain Paschal tinge to the actual meal. In fact, although the memorial (πάσχα µνηµονευτικόν) as distinguished from the sacrificial Passover (π. θύσιµον) was unknown until after the destruction of Jerusalem, yet the supposition of Grotius, that the meal eaten by Christ bore a sort of general relation to the actual Paschal meal, is by no means improbable.

To sum up, then, it seems to me, from careful and repeated study of much that has been written on this subject by many of the best and most thoughtful writers, that Jesus ate His Last Supper with the disciples on the evening of Thursday, Nisan 13, i.e., at the time when, according to Jewish reckoning, the 14th of Nisan began; that this supper was not, and was not intended to be, the actual Paschal meal, which neither was nor could be legally eaten till the following evening; but by a perfectly natural identification, and one which would have been regarded as unimportant, the Last Supper, which was a quasi-Passover, a new and Christian Passover, and one in which, as in its antitype, memories of joy and sorrow were strangely blended, got to be identified, even in the memory of the Synoptists, with the Jewish Passover, and that St. John, silently but deliberately, corrected this erroneous impression, which, even in his time, had come to be generally prevalent.[1] 1. I have said nothing about the obscure and meagre history of what is called "the Paschal controversy," or dispute between the Eastern and Western Churches as to the proper time of keeping Easter, because it is now generally (though not universally) agreed that it has little or no bearing on the question before us. See Sanday, Fourth Gospel, p. 211; Westcott, Introduction, p. 320; and on the other side, Keim, III. 476-478.

EXCURSUS XI.

OLD TESTAMENT QUOTATIONS.

The subject of the quotations from the Old Testament by the writers of the New is far too wide to be treated in the narrow limits of an excursus. All that I purpose here to do is to furnish the reader with a few facts in support of those principles at which I have glanced more than once in the body of the work, and which appear to me to be the only one adequate to remove the difficulties by which the subject is encompassed.

The general phenomena of these quotations have recently been examined and tabulated with great care by Mr. D. C. Turpie, in his book, The Old Testament in the New. He establishes the following remarkable results:- That there are in the New Testament 275 passages which may be regarded -- all but a very few of them quite indisputably -- as quotations from the Old; and that of these, there are only 53 in which the Hebrew, the Septuagint, and the New Testament agree -- i.e., in which the Hebrew is correctly rendered by the LXX., and quoted from the LXX. by Apostles and Evangelists. Besides these there are 10 passages where in incorrect version of the LXX. has been altered into accordance with the Hebrew; 76 where the version of the LXX. is correct, but has been varied by the New Testament writers into less agreement with the original; 37 where a faulty version of the LXX. has been accepted; and no fewer than 99 where the New Testament differs alike from the Hebrew and from the LXX. This result may be tabulated as follows: --

Passages in which the LXX. version is correctly accepted ... 53

Passages in which the LXX. version is correctly altered ... 10

Passages in which the LXX. version is incorrectly accepted ... 37

Passages in which the LXX. version is incorrectly altered ... 76

Passages in which the Hebrew, the LXX., and the New Testament all differ ... 99

Of course it will be understood that in the above tabulation, (i.) many of the differences are extremely minute, and (ii.) that the words "correct" and "incorrect" merely mean an accurate agreement or disagreement with the original Hebrew. To these must be added three passages (John vii. 38, 42, and Eph. v. 14) which can only be classed as doubtful allusions.

The important bearing of these results on the letter-worshipping theory of "inspired dictation" will be seen at once. It is hardly too much to say that while they leave untouched the doctrine of a Divine grace of inspiration and superintendence, they shatter to pieces the superstitious and anti-scriptural dogmatism which asserts that every "word and letter" of the Holy Book is supernaturally inspired. I dwell upon the subject -- I have repeated referred to it -- because I feel a deep conviction that to hold the theory of inspiration in this latter form is, in the first place, to deny the plain language of Scripture itself, the plain teaching of Christ, and the plain indications deducible from apostolic and prophetic usage; and in the second place, to incur the guilt of setting up a colossal and perilous stumbling-block in the path of all rational godliness.

I have, in the plainest and most candid manner, stated what seem to me the sole truly orthodox and Scriptural views on the subject of Inspiration in some papers printed in Vol. I. of the Bible Educator. To those papers I must refer any theological critic who does not understand my point of view. It is impossible for me here to re-state the full arguments into which I there have entered: but it may warn insufficiently educated readers from uncharitable attacks upon my references to this subject, to know that the views which I have supported are also those of not a few of those living as well as of former theologians whose names stand highest, and whose authority is the most deservedly respected, in the Church of England. Conspicuous among the latter are the names of Luther and Calvin. Any one who will read the comment of Luther on the 20th Psalm, and that of Calvin on Psalms viii., x., and lxviii., will perhaps be surprised to see the freedom with which they have expressed on this subject the common sense and honest view which may startle the supporters of a mechanical theory of inspiration, but would not have startled on the one hand an Origen, a Jerome, an Augustine, a Gregory of Nyssa; or on the other, the leading intellects among the great Reformers.

EXCURSUS XII.

NOTES ON THE TALMUD.

Anything more utterly unhistorical than the Talmud cannot be conceived. It is probable that no human writings ever confounded names, dates, and facts with a more absolute indifference. The genius of the Jews is the reverse of what in these days we should call

historical. By the changes of a ר into a ד Romans find themselves transmogrified into Idumeans; Vespasian is confounded with Titus, Titus with Trajan, Trajan with Hadrian, Herod with Jannæus. When we come to the names of the Rabbis we find an intolerable confusion of inextricable Hanans, Joshuas, and Simeons. As for events, they are, in the language of a profound and admiring student, "transformed for the edification, and even for the amusement of the audience. History is adorned and embellished by the invention of an imagination, poetic, but often extravagant; truth is not sufficiently attractive; everything is magnified and extended." Jerusalem, says a R. Samuel, included twenty-four cities; each city had twenty-four quarters; each quarter twenty-four roads, &c., &c. In Bethyr, one quarter of the city was engaged in song and dance, while, from another, torrents of blood were rolling four or forty miles to the sea.[1]

[1] Gittin, 58 a (Derenbourg. Hist. de la Pal. d'après les Thalmuds, p. 11). It is, however, fair to

add that these and similar passages are meant to be taken not literally (טשפה יפל), but

hyperbolically, in ordinary Oriental fashion ( יאכה ןשל). See Reland, Antt. Hebr., p. 140, "If you cannot find the kernel," says Maimonides, "let the shell alone, and learn to say, 'I cannot understand this.' " The Jews themselves utterly despise many of the Hagadôth or legends of which the Talmud is full.

When to all these sources of doubt is added the immense uncertainty of the readings, the "lapidary brevity" of the style, the dim indirectness of the allusions, and the intentional or affected obscurity of many of the oracular utterances of the Rabbis, it may well be supposed that the Talmud must be used with caution. It is not only probable, but a well-known fact, that many of the apparently wild and absurd stories of the Talmud are only the veil adopted by timidity in the days of persecution. Jewish writers were driven to indicate obscurely and enigmatically the teaching and the notions which they dared not publicly propound. To this class of enigmas (φωνάντα συνετοίσιν) belongthe story about Absalom's eye, the bone of Goliath, &c.

It has been asked by some -- as, for instance, by Mr. Deutsch -- whether it is fair to judge of the Talmud by brief extracts, separated from the context. I answer, first, that any one may now examine for himself whole treatises of the Talmud, both Mishna and Gemara, in translations of unquestionable fidelity; and secondly, that my own views about the Talmud are drawn quite as much from Jewish writers, such as Maimonides, Grätz, Geiger, Jost, Munk, Derebourg, Schwab, Cohen, Frankl, Raphall, Deutsch, Salvador, and others, as from writers like Lightfoot, Schöttgen, Otho, Surenhuys, Buxtorf, Reland, Wetstein, Gfrörer, Etheridge, Pieritz, and others. I have consulted all these writers, and the view which I derive from the professed admirers and adherents of Rabbinic literature is quite as unfavorable as that which I get even from Eisenmenger and Wagenseil.

Some excellent maxims -- even some close parallels to the utterances of Christ -- may be quoted, of course, from the Talmud, where they lie imbedded like pearls in "a sea" of obscurity and mud (רוםלתה מי)! It seems to me indisputable -- and a matter which every one can now verify for himself -- that these are amazingly few, considering the vast bulk of national literature from which they are drawn. And, after all, who shall prove to us that these sayings were always uttered by the Rabbis to whom they were attributed? Who will supply us with the faintest approach to a proof that (when not founded on the Old Testament) they were not directly or indirectly due to Christian influence or Christian thought? And how many of them are there which are independent of the Old Testament? Even Mr. Deutsch, one of the most ardent admirers of the Talmud, says, "These sayings were often tender, poetical, sublime; but they were not absolutely new; there was not one that was not substantially contained in the canonical and uncanonical writings of the Old Testament."[1]

[1] Remains, p. 138. R. Joshua Ben Levi proved (to his own satisfaction doubtless) that the Oral Law had been delivered to Moseson Sinai from Exod. xxiv. 12, because there the Tables == the Ten Commandments; the Law == Pentateuch; commandments == Mishna; "which I have written" == Prophets and Hagiographa; and "that thou mayst teach them" == Gemara (Berachôth, 5 a). (Schwab, id. p. 234.)

Sayings of this kind, which have been brought into comparison with passages in the Gospels, are among others, the following:

Matt. v. 9. -- "Love peace, and pursue it at any cost." Hillel (Pirk Abhôth, i. 12); cf. Ps.

cxxxiii. i.

Id. v. 10. -- "Remember that it is better to be persecuted than to persecute." (Derech

Erets Rab. ii.)

Id. v. 22. -- "Be not prone to anger." (P. Abhôth, ii. 10; Pesachîm, 67.) Id. v. 28. -- A close parallel in Massecheth Kalah.

Id. v. 39. -- "If thy companion call thee an ass, put the saddle on thy back." (Babha

Kama, 8, 7.) Cf. Ecclus. xxviii.; Prov. xx. 22; xxiv. 29.

Id. v. 42; vi. 1-4. -- "He who giveth alms in secret is greater than Moses himself." (Chagiga,

i., &c., &c.) Cf. Ecclus. xxix. 15, 16; Prov. xix. 17, &c.

Id. vi. 7. -- "It is better to utter a short prayer with devotion, than a long one without

fervor." (Shabbath, 10; Menachôth, 110.)

Matt. vi. 31. -- "He who having but one piece of bread in his basket, says, 'What shall I

eat to-morrow?' is a man of little faith." (Sota, 48.) Cf. Ps. xxxiv. 10; cxlvii. 9, &c.

These instances (and they might be multiplied from many sources) are chosen from a number more in Cohen's Les Déicides, E. T., 150, seq. This Jewish writer urges them as diminishing the "originality" of Jesus. Such an argument, common as it is, shows a total want of culture and insight. The "originality" of the Son of God, if such a word can be used at all, consisted in this, that He saved and regenerated a corrupt and dying world, on which the whole series of Jewish doctors -- Sopherîm, Tanaîm, Amoraîm, Seboraîm, and Geonîm -- produced no perceptible effect, and for which, from first to last, they and their "originality" have the smallest possible significance.[1]

[1] For further remarks on this subject I may refer to my Seekers after God, pp. 181, 182, 320; and Witness of History to Christ (Hulsean Lectures), pp. 134, seqq.

It is, however, fair to bear in mind (1) the heterogeneous character of the Talmud, and (2) its character as being in great measure a corpus juris.

(1.) As regards the first point, I cannot do better than quote some of the remarks of Mr. Deutsch, whose premature death, before he had well begun the intended works of his life -- A History of the Talmud -- cannot be too deeply regretted. He says, "All those manifold assemblies wherein a people's mental, social, and religious life are considered and developed, are here represented -- Parliament, Convocation, Law Courts, Academies, Colleges, the Temple, the Synagogue, even the Lobby and the Common Room, have left realistic traces upon it. The authors of this book, who may be counted by hundreds, were always the most prominent designedly, show the fulness of this people's life and progress at every turn." Elsewhere he speaks of it as "those mazes of legal enactments, gorgeous daydreams, masked history, ill-disguised rationalism, and the rest which form the Talmud and the Midrash."[1]

[1] Deutsch, Literary Remains, p. 194.

(2.) But it is chiefly as a corpus juris that the Talmud must be considered. "Speaking of it strictly as a book, the nearest approach to it is Hansard. Like Hansard, it is a law-book -- a miscellaneous collection of parliamentary debates, of bills, motions, and resolutions; with this difference, that in Hansard these proposition, &c., gradually grow into an Act, while in the Talmud the Act is the starting-point ... The Talmud in this wise contains -- besides the social, criminal, international, human and divine law, along with abundant explanations of laws not perfectly comprehended, corollaries, and inferences from the law, which were handed down with more or less religious reverence -- an account also of the education, the arts, the sciences, the history and religion of this people for about a thousand years."[1]

[1] Id. ib., p. 136.

This view of the Talmud as a sort of statute-book makes an important difference in our estimate of it. The following remarks, with which I have been favored by a friend, seem to me so original and so valuable -- they seem, in fact, to place the whole controversy about the Talmud in such a completely new light -- that I have asked his permission to incorporate them into this note:-

"The Talmud seems to be a corpus juris in which the law has not yet been differentiated from morality and religion. There is nothing exceptional in this non-differentiation: perhaps we are exceptional in having outgrown the stage in which it is normal. The strange thing is the prodigious quasi-scientific productiveness of Judaism within a certain area, combined with such pre-historic, not to say embryonic backwardness in the above respect. But even in this respect the contrast is less striking if Judaism be compared with the developments and documents of Hinduism and Islam.

"1. If we remember that the Talmud is a corpus juris one thing is explained immediately -- namely, the rarity of moral or other truths of any value. The wonder is that there are any at all. The Statute Book is more bulky than the Talmud -- at any rate the Reports are -- and they contain no 'beautiful and noble things' at all, unless perhaps in the obsolete parts. We don't look for such things there. If English literature had been developed analogously to Jewish, we should have the great thoughts of Hooker and Bacon, not to say of Spencer and Shakespeare, imbedded in Coke upon Littleton. The arrangement would be objectionable; but not on the ground that there was so little great thought in comparison to the amount of technicality.

"(3.) Casuistry is in a moral point of view the most disastrous, or at least the most obviously disastrous consequence of this anachronous extendedness of the province of jurisprudence; but also it is the least peculiar to Judaism. It is no great harm (besides that the thing is inevitable) if morality is a department of law, as long as things are in the early stage in which law itself is rather elastic. But when law is highly developed in precision and minuteness, morality cannot be stuffed into its pigeon holes without becoming immoral, and in fact irrational. In obedience to logic, it is made immorally as well as irrationally strict; in order to stand in any real relation to the facts of life it is made irrationally as well as immorally lax. The necessity of this laxness will be seen by taking any of the Rabbinnical examples at which you shudder most, and asking what the moralist is to do, if he is to prescribe for the magistrate and policeman as well. See the pleadings in 'Paschal versus Escobar and others,' passim. Pascal's position is untenable, unless it is recognized that morality is not a matter of rules at all. Here the danger of Gospel-interpreters -- and it is a danger from which few of them altogether escape -- is that of representing Christ as occupying the merely negative or revolutionary position of Pascal. Now, that the action of Jesus was not merely negative or revolutionary is sufficiently proved by the result. How expressive is His saying, that there is no place reserved for those whose law-abidingness does not transcend that of the men who are before all things zealous for the Law.

"4. The most obviously disastrous thing about Judaism, in an intellectual point of view, is not, I suppose, a necessary effect of its non-differentiation of law from religion and morality, though surely an easy and natural one. I mean the fact that its quasi-science is not founded even on the supposed necessities of an imaginary or obsolete state of things, but upon the interpretation of a written text. Within the 'four corners' (as our lawyers have it) of this narrow field it cuts itself off from all other intellectual culture. This distinguishes it from Hinduism and Islam in their more energetic days, and still more (thanks partly to the Greeks) from Rome. Mediæval scholasticism makes some approach to the like barrenness. One of the consequences was that folly of follies, the number-and-letter lore.

"It seems to me that the apparent eccentricities of the Talmud cannot be instructively set before the general reader without applying to them something like the above considerations, which in other applications are considered obvious enough."

This view of the Talmud is slightly touched upon by Ewald, though he makes no attempt to illustrate it by the comparative method. "When a supreme law of life," he says, "has been already given, and without troubling themselves about its ultimate foundations, men are only desirous to work it out into detail, and, if necessary, to bring it into actual life by means of a countless multitude of new regulations, ... similar conditions everywhere produce similar results. The scholastic labors of the Middle Ages and those of the Papal jurist ... are essentially the same."[1]

"Les meileurs des hommes," says Renan,[1] "ont été des juifs; les plus malicieux des hommes ont aussi été des juifs. Race éntrange, vraiment marquée du sceau de Dien, qui a su produire parallèlement et comme deux bourgeons d'une même tige l'Église naissante et le fanatisme féroce des revolutionnaires de Jérusalem, Jésus, et Jean de Giscala, les apôtres et les zélotes sicaires, l'Évangile et le Talmud! Faut-il s'étonner si cette gestation mystérieuse fut accompagnée de déchirements, de délire, et d'une fièvre comme on n'en vit jamais?"[2] The turn of expression is open to criticism, but the fact is striking.

[1] L'Antechrist. p. 258. Elsewhere he says, "On peut dire de cette race le bien qu'on voudra et le mal qu'on voudra, sans cesser d'être dans le vrai; car ... le bon juif est un être excellent, et le méchant juif est un être détestable. C'est ce qui explique la possibilité ... que l'idylle évangélique et les horreurs racontées par Josephe aient été des réalités sur la même terre, chez le même peuple, vers le même temps."[1a] (p. 486.) [1a] We may say of this race whatever good we will and whatever evil we will, without deviating from the truth; for the good Jew is an excellent being, and the bad Jew is a detestable being. This it is which explains the possibility that the Gospel idyl and the horrors related by Josephus may have been realities on the same earth, among the same people, at about the same time. [2] The best of men have been Jews; also the worst men have been Jews. A strange race, truly marked with the seal of God, which has known how to produce, side by side and like two shoots from one and the same stalk, the nascent Church and the fierce fanaticism of the revolutionists of Jerusalem, Jesus and John of Giscala, the Apostles and the blood-thirsty Zealots, the Gospel and the Talmud! Is it astonishing if that mysterious gestation was accompanied with such excruciating pains, delirium and fever, as was never seen?

EXCURSUS XIII.

THE SANHEDRIN.

Orthodox Jews ascribe the origin of the Sanhedrin to Moses (Exod. xviii. 24-26, &c.), and identify it with the "elders of Israel" in Ezek. viii. 11, 12, and the "elders of the Jews" in the days of Darius (Ezra vi. 8).[1] Some even saw a germ of the Sanhedrin in the tribunal established by Jehosphaphat (2 Chron. xix. 8-11).[2]

[1] Raphall, Hist. of the Jews, ii. 110.

[2] Munk, Palestine, 194. See Reland, Antt. Hebr. 243, seqq.

The Sanhedrin was the successor of the Great Synagogue, the last member of which died in the person of Simon the Just.

In 1 Macc. xiv. 28, the assembly of the Jews, which bestowed the supreme power on Simon, father of John Hyrcanus, is called "the great congregation of the priests and people, and rulers of the nation, and elders of the country," corresponding to the Hebrew names Kenéseth, Roshî Abhôth, and Zakain ha-Arets; and it appears from coins that the Sanhedrin (the members of which are described much as in Mark xv. 1) are called the Chebher, or "Senate" of the Jews. In this were included both Pharisees and Sadducees. John became a Hellenizer (Phil-hellene: Jos. Antt. xiii. 11, § 3), and a Sadducee, and was the first to adopt on his coins the Greek inscription and title of Ίουδά Βασιλεύς. At the end of a year he was succeeded by his brother Alexander Jannæus, who quarrelled furiously with the Pharisees, but on his deathbed recommended his wife Salome Alexandra to trust true Pharisees while she avoided the painted ones. Salome accordingly gave them such privileges during her reign of nine years that they ultimately ventured to summon her son Hyrcanus II. before their tribunal on the occasion alluded to on p. 607. It is on this occasion that we first find the name

Sanhedrin (ןיררחנם), which, although the Talmud talks of a Sanhedrin in the days of Moses (Buxtorf, Lex. s. v.), is certainly not præ-Asmonæan; indeed, until the Hellenizing days of Jason, this Greek word would never have been adopted by the people in place of their own term Beth Dîn, "House of Judgment," or Kenéseth haggedóla, "the great assembly."

In the Mishna mention is made of two kinds of Sanhedrin -- the provincial, of five or seven members; and the Grand Sanhedrin of seventy-one, with their Nasî and Ab Beth Dîn. These two distinguished functionaries seem to have been regarded as representatives of the ancient Zouggôth, or "couples," who were in their turn representatives of the Eshkolôth, or "grape-clusters." The first Nasî under Hyrcanus II. is said to have been Joshua Ben Perachiah, and the first Ab Beth Dîn Nitai of Arbela.

It is said that in the Temple sat three Sanhedrins, or, as we should perhaps call two of them, "Committees of the Sanhedrin," of twenty-three members each; the Great Sanhedrin of seventy-one met in the Lishcat Haggazîth; another, or a committee of the same, in a chamber

which abutted on the Chêl (לי ֵח), or division between the Court of the Gentiles and of the women; and a third at the gate of the Har ha-Beit, or Temple mountain. Derenbourg conjectures, with some probability, that the Grand Sanhedrin was but the reunion of the three inferior ones of twenty-three (23 x3 + 2) with the two presiding officers, and that these three committees were composed, (i.) of priests, (ii.) of Levites, and (iii.) of "notables," i.e., Sopherîm, Tanaîm , &c.[1] If this conjecture be admitted, we may, perhaps, suppose that the three trials of our Lord took place before these three divisions of the Sanhedrin; or, of the trial before Hanan be regarded as purely informal and extra-judicial, then the trial before Caiaphas may conceivably be the third of these bodies which met at the foot of the Temple-mountain. It gives some support to this conjecture that in Matt. xxvi. 57, "the Scribes and elders" (= the "notables," i.e., the Sopherîm, and Zekênîm) seem to be distinguished from "all the chief priests and elders" -- i.e., the Grand Sanhedrin (id. xxvii. 1).

[1] Hist. Pal., ch. vi., the facts of which I have here summarized. See too Ewald, Gesch. d. Volkes Isr. (E. Tr., V. 168). He says that much which is told us about the Sanhedrin in Talmudic and later writings "flows from the increasing want of the historical spirit which characterized the Jews in the Middle Ages."

But it must be forgotten that the Sanhedrin which condemned our Lord was a dubious and hybrid kind of assembly. When the Sanhedrin had unanimously rejected the claim of Herod on the authority of Deut. xvii. 15, the Talmud (Babha Bathra, 3 b) says that he exterminated them all except Babha Ben Buta, whose eyes he put out; and that the rebuilding of the Temple was undertaken by the advice of the survivor in expiation of the atrocity.[1] Whatever the exact circumstances may have been, Herod, after the execution of Antigonus, seems to have inflicted on the Sanhedrin a frightful vengeance, from which it took them a long time to recover. It was soon after this that he thrust into the High Priesthood creatures of his own, of Egyptian and Babylonian origin, such as Simon and Joazar, the Boëthusians from Alexandria, and a certain obscure Hananel of Babylon (ίερέατών άσηµοτέρων, Jos. Antt. xv. 2, § 4), who may possibly be identical with the Annas of the Gospels. For a time at least the real Sanhedrin seems to have been suspended, and its functions usurped by an assemblage of Herod's own adherents (Jos. Antt. xv. 7; § 4), συναγαγών τούς οίκειοτάτους αίτώ; xvii. 3, § 1, συνέδριον τών φίλων. The dignity of sacerdotalism might give to this spurious assemblage an appearance of dignity, but we have seen reason to believe that the Pharisees -- here meaning of that title the leading doctors -- took little, if any, part either in its deliberations or its proceedings. They left it to the obscure Benî Bethyra,[2] the Boëthusians, the Hananites, the Kantheras, the Kamhiths, the Phabis, and their adherents. The meetings of the Sanhedrin of which Josephus speaks during this period were arbitrary, incompetent, and special gatherings. The Romans and Herod betwen them had abolished the old independent body.[3] It is true that Hillel, after overcoming the priestly pretensions of the Benî Bethyra, by quoting, as a last resource, the authority of Shemaia and Abtalion, is said to have been made Nasî; between Presidency of the Schools and Presidency of the Sanhedrin.[4] At any rate, if Hillel really was a Nasî of the Sanhedrin, his political action must have been amazingly slight, considering that it is uncertain whether Josephus even recognizes his existence[5] or not.

[1] Josephus mentions a massacre of Pharisees (Antt. xvii. 2, § 4). [2] The well-known story of their dispute with Hillel is another indication of the hostile position held by the Doctors towards the priests.

[3] "Von Synedrien ist in der ganzen Herodäer und Römer Zeit keine Spur."[3a] (Jost, i. 278.) [3a] There is no trace of the Sanhedrin in the whole period of the Herods and the Romans. [4] Nasî was a title also given to the Chief of each tribe (Numb. iii. 24; xvi. 2, &c.) who in Numb. iii. 32 is called Nasî of Nasîm. (Munk, p. 195.)

[5] Josippon substitutes the names of Hillel and Shammai for the Pollio and Sameas of Josephus, Antt. xv. 1, § 1. (Munk, p. 545.)

At the time of our Lord's trial it is certain that both Hillel and Shammai were dead. They had left no successors who attained immediate prominence. We hear indeed of a Simeon, son of Hillel, but the sole recorded trait respecting him is the aphorism that "nothing is superior to silence."
