EXCURSUS XIV.

PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES.

The origin of these names is buried in obscurity. All that is clear is that the Pharisees were politically descended from the Chasidîm (1 Macc. ii. 42; vii. 13), and were the heroic-national party; while the Sadducees were the priestly-aristocratic party, who allied themselves always with the ruling power, even when that power was anti-national in its aims.

Derenbourg, who subjects these titles to an elaborate examination, supposes that during the Graecomania which in the days of the Seleucid government began to spread more and more widely among the Jews -- especially under the influence of "ungodly wretches" like Menelaus and Alcimus -- the party which felt it necessary to defend the scrupulous observance of the Law by a closer "hedge," began to urge an extension of that άµιξία, or withdrawal from all intercourse with the heathen, which was called in Hebrew Perishût (תושירפ), a name which thus did not imply either political detachment or worldly separation (Jos. Antt. xiii. 8, § 3; 2 Macc. xiv. 3).

The Asmonæans, however, and their party did not follow the Tanaîm, or Doctors, in these views which they considered exaggerated, but contented themselves with that ordinary obedience to the written law which was not inconsistent with Phil-hellenic tendencies, and for which they retained the title of Tsedakah, or "righteousness" (הקרצ, δικαιοσύνη: cf. Prov. xvi. 31), a name which more easily came into vogue, because the title of the last great and good Asmonæan, Simeon, had been hatstsadîk, "the Just."

But words which had originally described mere tendencies or aspirations, soon developed into the injurious party-titles of Parouschîm or Pharisees, and Tsedûkîm or Sadducees, to describe respectively the party of the Rabbis, whose tendencies were wholly patriotic[1] and popular, and that of the Priests, who were aristocratic and conservative[2] (Acts v. 17). Neither party willingly adopted names which had gradually acquired an insulting force. In our Lord's time, the names had gradually come to connote differences which were religious as well as political. The Sadducees may broadly be described as rationalists, the Pharisees as ritualists, name which, though not rigidly accurate, convey on the whole a true impression of their respective positions.

[1] Φαρισαϊοι καλοΰνται βασιλεΰσιδυνάµενοι µάλισταάντιπράσσειν[1a] (Jos. Antt. xvii. 2, § 4). [1a] ["There are those] that are called [the sect of] the Pharisees , who were in a capacity of greatly apposing kings."

[2] Josephus distinctly says that connection with the priesthood is the one stamp of Jewish nobility.

Geiger, who in his Urschrift and Das Judenthum was perhaps the first to put these parties in their true light, takes a different view of their origin. He derives the name of the Sadducees from Zadok, a descendent of Phinehas, who held the priesthood till the last unworthy representatives of Aaron's elder line were displaced by the sons of Mattathias, who belonged to the less distinguished priestly family of Joarib.[1] But the Sadducees continued to support the new power; while the Pharisees, inheriting the views of the separatist (Nibdalîm, who "separated themselves from the filthiness of the heathen," Ezra vi. 21), combated the pretensions, and usurped the influence of the privileged class. The difficulty in adopting this view rises from the silence of Josephus and the Books of Maccabees.

[1] Geiger (Urschr., p. 105) shows that the story of their origin from Zadok, a pupil of Antigonus of Socho, who carried too far his master's principle that men ought to serve God without desire for reward, is not mentioned in the Mishna or the Talmud, but is first found in the R. Nathan. If,

as Epiphanius (Haeres. i. 4) supposes, the name is derived from קרצ,"justice," the question occurs, why is it not Tsaddikîm instead of Tseaûkîm. Köster's strange and isolated notion, that it is a Hebrew transliteration of Stoics, is hardly worth refuting.

Common as is the name Pharisees in the Gospels, those who are so called seem always to have called themselves by other names in preference -- such as Sopherîm, "scribes," Thalmîdî chakamîn, "pupils of the sages," and Chabheerîm, or "confraternities." In

several passages of the Talmud they are called "plagues of Pharisees" (םישורפ תוכמ, J. Pea, viii. 8; J. Sota iii. 4, &c), and in one of these they are ranked as equally objectionable with "imbecile devotees, sly sinners, and bigoted women." But of course there were good and bad Pharisees, and while Jewish writers themselves admit that "the heavy charges which the Founder of the Christian faith brings against Pharisees are fully confirmed by the Talmud" (Sota, f. 22 b, &c.),[1] yet these were the hypocrites whom Alexander Jannæus called "dyed and varnished" Pharisees; and we may hope that Nicodemus and Gamaliel were not isolated specimens of a nobler class. The Sadducees are seldom mentioned, because with the cessation of the temporal power they practically ceased to exist as a party, although many of their distinctive views were revived by a certain Hanan, and are continued to this day by the Karaites.

[1] Raphall, Hist. of the Jews, ii. 117.

The wealth, rank, conections, and offices of the Sadducees gave them much worldly influence and authority, but in all religious and ritual matters the people sided so absolutely with the Doctors or Pharisees, that the Sadducees, even against their real views, were often compelled to conform. This is the express statement of Josephus,[1] and is confirmed by the Talmud. "All your life you teach without practising," bitterly exclaimed a Boëthusian to the Priest, his father. The reply was a humiliating confession that they could not practise their real theories, but were obliged to conform to the teaching of the Doctors (םיומכח). The Priest and his son in this story are believed to have been Hanan (the Annas of the Gospels), and his son Hanan the younger, who figures in Josephus in no very enviable colors, as the murderer of "James, the Lord's brother."[2]

[1] Antt. xviii. 1, § 4.

[2] Jos. Antt. xx. 9, § 1; Jost. Joma, 1; Geiger, Urschrift, 112.

A striking Rabbinic story (Joma, 71 b) illustrates their want of moral influence over the people. On the great Day of Atonement the High Priest, followed by the people, was leaving the Temple. Suddenly, however, the people caught sight of Shemaia and Abtalion -- the "couple" of the day -- walking undistinguished among the rest. Instantly they abandoned the High Priest to form an escort to the Doctors. "All hail to the men of the peope," said the High Priest bitterly to them, when they took leave of him. "All hail," they replied, "to the men of the people who do the work of Aaron, and no hail to the son of Aaron who does not act lik Aaron." Josephus, though his account of these two sects (Antt. xviii. 1, §§ 3, 4; xiii. 5, § 9; B. J. ii. 8, § 14) is little to be relied on, and is probably borrowed in part from Nicolas of Damascus, is yet undoubtedly right in saying that in spite of the rank of the Sadducees that had no real reverence from the people. "They influence," he says, "the well-to-do" (τούς εύπόρους), "but have no popular following, while the Pharisees have the multitude as their allies."

I have several times spoken of the Sadducees as "worldly," and the epithet is justified by the ostentation which made them desire to be served in vessels of gold and silver, and to demand double dowry for every young girl married to a priest;[1] and by the greed which suffered them to grow rich at the expense of the people. Of the latter propensity two stories are told. One of them is a quarrel which they had with the Pharisees about the supply of victims for the daily sacrifice, which the Pharisees very properly said ought to be provided by the Temple treasury; whereas the Sadducees, regarding the Temple treasure as their own, wanted the victims to be paid for by separate subscriptions. Similarly the Sadducees claimed for the priests (i.e., for themselves) the use of the meat-offerings, which the Pharisees said ought to be burnt on the altar. The Pharisees won the day, and appointed two festivals in honor of the double victory.[2] Thus both Pharisees and Sadducees were constantly driven into extremes by the repulsion of antagonistic errors.

[1] Abhôth de Rabbî Nathan, v.; Kethubhôth, 1, 6. In the former passage we have a sort of deliberate theory of Epicureanism.

[2] Megillath Taanîth, §§ 1, 19. They also arranged that the Temple tribute should be received with great pomp (Jer Shekalîm, 45 d; Grätz, iii. 460).

Another story is that as they sold pigeons at the chanujôth, they multiplied to such an extent the cases in which the sacrifice of a pigeon was necessary, that the price of a single pigeon rose to a gold piece. Then R. Simeon Ben Gamaliel cried, "By the Temple I will not sleep till I have reduced their price to a denarious." Accordingly he pointed out such numerous reductions to the necessity of making this offering, that the price of a pigeon sank to the fourth of a denarius.[1] These shops are expressly called the shops of the sons of Hanan, and the Talmud distinctly alludes to the want of uprightness in the management of them.[2]

[1]Keritôth, i. 7.

[2] J. Pea, i. 6.

The one maxim of the political life of a Sadducee seems to have been quietism, even at the expense of patriotism. No wonder the priestly party were disliked and suspected, when ever since the days of Hyrcanus and Aristobulus the people had found cause to complain of them, that they were seeking to change the goverment of their nation in order to enslave them (Jos. Antt. xiv. 3, § 2).

Josephus, in describing the rupture between John Hyrcanus and the Pharisees (Antt. xiii. 10, § 6), distinctly states that the main difference between the two of the Oral Law or tradition of the elders; and although the assertion may be a little too sweeping, it is undoubtedly founded on a real fact.

Ewald, who, in his History of the People of Israel,[1] enters into a full account of the Pharisees and Sadducees, points out how the Pharisees were led to encourage and defend hypocrisy, and conventionalize all true piety, partly by the character of the Levitical dispensation, partly from motives of ambition, and partly out of strong antagonism to the Sadducees. Wishing to retain the advantages which they had received from the Asmonæan revival of national piety, "under the influences of ambition, and devoted more or less consciously to their own interests, they made piety into a sort of art or trade in order permanently to secure their own power."

[1] Vol. V., p. 366, seqq., E. Tr.

After observing that we only know the Sadducees from the reports of their avowed enemies, he says, "It was the school of freedom of life, of thought, and of action; but it was a freedom which sprang out of the Greek age, with its deep moral degradation, which corresponded with it, and was acceptable to it." but for this the Sadducees might have been of real use in counteracting the rigidity and one-sidedness of Pharisaic development. But in their opposition to this injurious scrupulosity they failed to note the deeper sores which at this time were eating into the Jewish and Gentile world.

He speaks slightingly of the notices of these sects in Josephus (Antt. xiii. 5, § 9; Vit. 2; B.J. i. 5, § 2; ii. 8, § 2) as abrupt, arbitrary, and devoid of deep knowledge, and says -- too uncharitably -- of Jost, Grätz, and Geiger, that their views are baseless, "because they are themselves Pharisees, and desire to be nothing else."
