EXCURSUS XV.

TRADITIONAL SAYINGS OF CHRIST.

The apocryphal sayings (άγραφα δόγµατα) of Christ -- i.e., the sayings attributed to Him by early writers, but unrecorded in the New Testament[1] -- have been collected and arranged by Prof. Westcott (Introd. to the Gosp., App. C.) with his usual care and learning. I here quote only the most remarkable, or those which are not mere variations of his actual words, referring all who are interested in the subject to Prof. Westcott (l. c.), or Hofmann (Leben Jesu, 317-329).

[1] Ex. gr. Acts xx. 35.

from the greater there be a less."

2.)

which is before you." (Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 9, 45.)

(Orig. Hom. in Jerem., iii., p. 778; Didymus in Ps. lxxxviii. 8.)

for those that thirst I suffered thirst." (Orig. in Matt., I. xiii. 2.)

3.)

These are the most remarkable. One or two others have been quoted or alluded to in the body of the work (v. supr., pp. 251, &c.), and of the remainder some are wholly unworthy of our Lord, or spring from a desire to claim His authority for false and exaggerated principles, or are mere amplifications and misquotations of His actual words.

One or two of the Mohammendan legends respecting Christ, preserved n the Koran or elsewhere, are striking -- e.g.,

"Jesus, the Son of Mary, said, 'He who longs to be rich is like a man who drinks sea-water; the more he drinks the more thirsty he becomes, and never leaves off drinking till he perishes.' "

"Jesus once said, 'The world is like a deceitful woman, who, when asked how many husbands she had had, answered, so many that she could not count them.' And Jesus said, 'When they died, did they leave you behind?' 'On the contrary,' said she, 'I murdered and got rid of them.' 'Then,' said Jesus, 'It is strange that the rest had so little wisdom, that when tehy saw how you treated the others they still burned with such love for you, and did not take warning from their predecessors.' " See others in Hofmann, ubi supr., p. 328. An interesting monograph might be written on the picture of Jesus as presented in the Mohammedan writings. In the Koran itself His name is frequently mentioned with those of various prophets; but the special references are not numerous.
