THE NATIVITY.

Αùτòς ένηνθρωπησεν ϊνα ήµετ θεοποιηθώµεν[1]

-- ATHAN., De Incarn., p. 54 (Opp. i. 108).

[1] He became man that we might be made like unto God.

One mile from Bethlehem is a little plain, in which, under a grove of olives, stands the bare and neglected chapel known by the name of "the Angel to the Shepherds."[1] It is built over the traditional site of the fields where, in the beautiful language of St. Luke -- more exquisite than any idyll to Christian ears -- "there were shepherds keeping watch over their flock by night, when, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and, the glory of the Lord[2] shone round about them," and to their happy ears were uttered the good tidings of great joy, that unto them was born that day in the city of David a Saviour, which was Christ the Lord.

[1] "Angelus ad Pastores." Near this spot once stood a tower called Migdal Eder, or "Tower of the Flock" (Gen. xxxv. 21). The present rude chapel is, perhaps, a mere fragment of a church built over the spot by Helena. (See Caspari, Chronologisch-Geographische Einleitung, p. 57.) The prophet Micah (iv. 8; v. 2) had looked to Migdal Eder with Messianic hopes; and St. Jerome (De Loc. Hebr.), writing with views of prophecy which were more current in the ancient than in the modern Church, ventures to say "that by its very name it fore-signified by a sort of prophecy the shepherds at the birth of the Lord."

[2] By δόξα Κνρίον (Luke ii. 9) is probably meant the Shechînah or cloud of brightness which symbolized the Divine presence.

The associations of our Lord's nativity were all of the humblest character, and the very scenery of His birthplace was connected with memories of poverty and toil. On that night, indeed, it seems as though the heavens must burst to disclose their radiant minstrelsies; and the stars, and the feeding sheep, and the "light and sound in the darkness and stillness," and the rapture of faithful hearts, combine to furnish us with a picture painted in the colours of heaven. But in the brief and thrilling verses of the Evangelist we are not told that those angel songs were heard by any except the wakeful shepherds of an obscure village; -- and these shepherds, amid the chill dews of a winter night, were guarding their flocks from the wolf and the robber, in fields where Ruth, their Saviour's ancestress, had gleaned, sick at heart, amid the alien corn, and David, the despised and youngest son of a numerous family, had followed the ewes great with young.[1]

[1] Ps. lxxviii. 71.

"And suddenly," adds the sole Evangelist who has narrated the circumstances of that memorable night in which Jesus was born, amid the indifference of a world unconscious of its Deliverer, "there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among men of good will."[1]

[1] Luke ii. 14, έν άνθρώποις εύδοηιας: such is the reading of the best MSS., א, A, B, D, and some of the best versions, the Vetus Itala, Vulgate, Gothic, &c. Moreover, however dear the other reading may be to us from long and delightful association, this best maintains the obvious poetic parallelism:

Glory to God in the highest,

Peace to men of good will on earth.

By άνθρώποις εύδοηιας we may perhaps understand with Valchnaer, "men with whom God is pleased." As I shall not unfrequently refer to the text of the Greek Testament, I may take this

opportunity of telling the ordinary reader that by א is meant the Codex Sinaiticus, now at St. Petersburgh, discovered by Tischendorf in 1844, and perhaps as old as the fourth century; by A, the Codex Alexandrinus in the British Museum, written in the middle of the fifth century; by B, the Codex Vaticanus in the Vatican, which belongs on the middle of the fourth century; by C, the Codex Ephraemi, a palimpsest in the Imperial Library at Paris, not later than the fifth century; by D, the Codex Bezae in the Univerisity Library at Cambridge, not later than the seventh century; by E, the Codex Basiliensis, about the eighth century; by F, the Codex Boreeli at Utrecht; by L, the Codex Regius Parisiensis, an accurate and important MS. of the eighth century. I shall seldom refer to the readings of any later MSS. A full and convenient account of them may be found in the Rev. F. Scrivener's Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament (1861), and in the Prolegomena to Alford's Greek Testament, i. 99. 83-90.

It might have been expected the Christian piety would have marked the spot by splendid memorials, and enshrined the rude grotto of the shepherds in the marbles and mosaics of some stately church. But, instead of this, the Chapel of the Herald Angel is a mere rude crypt; and as the traveller descends down the broken steps which lead from the olive-grove into its dim recess, he can hardly persuade himself that he is in a consecrated place. Yet a half-unconscious sense of fitness has, perhaps, contributed to this apparent neglect. The poverty of the chapel harmonises well with the humble toil of those whose radiant vision it is intended to commemorate.

"Come now! let us go unto Bethlehem,[1] and see this thing which has come to pass, which the Lord made known to us," said the shepherds, when those angel songs had ceased to break the starry silence. Their way would lead them up the terraced hill, and through the moonlit gardens of Bethlehem, until they reached the summit of the grey ridge on which the little town is built. On that summit stood the village inn. The khan (or caravanserai) of a Syrian village, at that day, was probably identical, in its appearance and accommodation, with those which still exist in modern Palestine. A khan is a low structure, built of rough stones, and generally only a single storey in height. It consists for the most part of a square enclosure, in which the cattle can be tied up in safety for the night, and an arches recess for the accommodation of travellers. The leewan, or paved floor of the recess is raised a foot or two above the level of the court-yard. A large khan -- such, for instance, as that of which the ruins may still be seen at Khan Minyeh, on the shore of the Sea of Galilee -- might contain a series of such recesses, which are, in fact, low small rooms with no front wall to them. They are, of course, perfectly public; everything that takes place in them is visible to every person in the khan. They are also totally devoid of even the most ordinary furniture. The traveller may bring his own carpet if he likes, may sit cross-legged upon it for his meals, and may lie upon it at night.[2] As a rule, too, he must bring his own food, attend to his own cattle, and draw his own water from the neighbouring spring. He would neither expect nor require attendance, and would pay only the merest trifle for the advantage of shelter, safety, and a floor on which to lie. But if he chanced to arrive late, and the leewans were all occupied by earlier guests, he would have no choice but to be content with such accommodation as he could find in the court-yard below, and secure for himself and his family such small amount of cleanliness and decency as are compatible with an unoccupied corner on the filthy area, which must he shared with horses, mules, and camels. The litter, the closeness, the unpleasant smell of the crowded animals, the unwelcome intrusion of the pariah dogs, the necessary society of the very lowest hangers-on of the caravanserai, are adjuncts to such a position which can only be realised by any traveller in the East who happens to have been placed in similar circumstances.

[1] Luke ii. 15, διέλθωµεν δή == agedum. I must remark at the outset that in most of my quotations from the Gospels I do not slavishly follow the English version, but translate from the original Greek.

[2] "It is common to find two sides of the one room where the native farmer resides with his cattle, and the remainder elevated about two feet higher for the accommodation of the family" (Thomson, Land and Book, II., ch. xxxiii.). See, too, Lane's Modern Egyptians, i. 18 -- Leewan is a corruption el-eewán, which signifies any raised place to sit upon. My description is, however, drawn directly from my own experiences, especially one night at a poor and lonely place called Khan Hulda, between Sidon and Beyrout, at which we found ourselves belated. A distinction has been drawn between ηατáλυµα (Luke ii. 7), and πανδοχετον (Luke x. 34), but probably the only distinction is that the former was a free place of shelter, and had no host.

In Palestine it not unfrequently happens that the entire khan, or at any rate the portion of it in which the animals housed, is one of those innumerable caves which abound in the limestone rocks of its central hills. Such seems to have been the case at the little town of Bethlehem-Ephratah, in the land of Judah. Justin Martyr, the Apologist, who, from his birth at Shechem, was familiar with Palestine, and who lived less than a century after the time of our Lord,[1] places the scene of the nativity in a cave. This is, indeed, the ancient and constant tradition both of the Eastern and the Western Churches, and it is one of the few to which, though unrecorded in the Gospel history, we may attach a reasonable probability.[2] Over this cave has risen the Church and Convent of the Nativity, and it was in a cave close beside it that one of the most learned, eloquent, and holy of the Fathers of the Church -- that great St. Jerome to whom we owe the received Latin translation of the Bible -- spent thirty of his declining years in study, and fast, and prayer.[3]

[1] Justin Martyr was born at Flavia Neapolis, AD 103, and died AD 166. The date of his First Apology was about AD 138. (Gieseler, Ch. Hist. i. 153, E. Tr.). [2] It is impossible to stand in the little Chapel of the Nativity, and to look without emotion on the silver star let into the white marble, encircled by its sixteen ever-burning lamps, and surrounded by the inscription, "Hic de Virgine Maria Jesus Christus natus est."[2a] [2a] Here, from the Virgin Mary, was born Jesus Christ. [3] He settled in Bethlehem AD 386 and died AD 420. His allusions to the sacredness of the spot are very touching, and the most splendid offers of preferment were insufficient to tempt him away from that holy ground (Ep. 24 ad Marcell.).

From their northern home at Nazareth, in the mountains of Zabulon, Joseph, the village carpenter, had made his way along the wintry roads with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.[1] Fallen as were their fortunes, they were both of the house and lineage of David, and they were traversing a journey of eighty miles to the village which had been the home of their great ancestor while he was still a ruddy shepherd lad, tending his flocks upon the lonely hills. The object of that toilsome journey, which could not but be disagreeable to the settled habits of Oriental life, was to enrol their names as members of the house of David in a census which had been ordered by Emperor Augustus. In the political condition of the Roman Empire, of which Judæa then formed a part, a single whisper of the Emperor was sufficiently powerful to secure the execution of his mandates in the remotest corners of the civilised world. Great as are the historic difficulties in which the census is involved, there seems to be good independent grounds for believing that it may have been originally ordered by Sentius Saturninus,[2] that it was begun by Publius Sulpicius Quirinus,[3] when he was for the first tie legate of Syria, and that it was completed during his second term of office. In deference to Jewish prejudices, any infringement of which was the certain signal for violent tumults and insurrection, it was not carried out in the ordinary Roman manner, at each person's place of residence, but according to Jewish custom, at the town to which their family originally belonged. The Jews still clung to their genealogies and to the memory of long-extinct tribal relations; and though the journey was a weary and distasteful one, the mind of Joseph may well have been consoled by the remembrance of that heroic descent which would now be authoritatively recognised, and by the glow of those Messianic hopes to which the marvellous circumstances of which he was almost the sole depositary would give a tenfold intensity.[4]

[1] It appears to be uncertain whether the journey of Mary with her husband was obligatory or voluntary. From Dion. Hal. iv. 15 (ed. Sylb., p. 221) and Lact. De mort. persec. 21, the former seems not unlikely. Women were liable to a capitation tax, if this enrollment (άπογ ραΦή) also involved taxation (άποτίµησις). But, apart from any legal necessity, it may easily be imagined that at such a moment Mary would desire not to be left alone. The cruel suspicion of which she had been the subject, and which had almost led to the breaking off of her betrothal (Matt. i. 19), would make her cling all the more to the protection of her husband. [2] Tert. Adv. Marc. v. 19. It has been held impossible that there should have been a census in the kingdom of an independent prince; yet the case of the Clitae ("Clitarum matio, Cappadoci Archelao subjects, quia nostrum in modum deferre census, pati tributa adigebatur,"[2a] &c., Tac. Ann. vi. 41) seems to be closely parallel. That the enrollment should be conducted in the Jewish fasion at the place of family origin, and not in the Roman fasion at the place of residence, may have been a very natural concession of the necessities of Herod's position. It may be perfectly true that this plan would give more trouble; but, in spite of this, it was far less likely to cause offence. Yet although the whole proceeding was probably due to a mere desire on the part of Augustus to make a breviarium imperii, or Doomsday Book, which should include the regna as well as the provinces (Tac. Ann. i. 11), it is very doubtful whether it actually did not cause disturbances at this very time (Jos. Antt. xvii. 2, §2), as we know that it did ten years later. How deeply the disgrace of a heathen census was felt is shown by the Targum of Jonathan, Hab. iii. 17, where for "The flock shall be cut off from the folds, and there shall be no herd in the stalls," he has, "The Romans shall be rooted out; they shall collect no more tribute from Jerusalem" (Kesooma == census, v. Buxtorf, s. v.; Gfrörer, Jahrhund. des Heils, i. 42).

[2a] "The Clitæans, a people subject to Archelaus the Cappadocian, aggrieved at being compelled after the Roman manner to make returns and pay tribute." (Oxford tr., Bohn's Class. Lib.)

[3] Cyrenius (P. Sulp. Quirinus) was a man of low extraction, at once ambitious and avaricious, but faithful to Augustus (Tac. Ann. ii. 30; iii. 22-48). Other passages bearing more or less directly on this famous census are Tac. Ann. i. 11; Suet. Aug. 28, 101; Dio Cass. liv. 35, &c.; Suidas, s. v. άπογραφη. No less than three censuses of Roman citizens are mentioned in the Monumentum Ancyranum; and Strabo (under Tiberius) speaks of them as common. Zumpt has, with incredible industry and research, all but established in this matter the accuracy of St. Luke, by proving the extreme probability that Quirinus was twice governor of Syria -- viz., 750 -- 753 A. U. C., and again 760-765. It was during the former period that he completed the first census which had been commenced by Varus (Zumpt, Das Geburtsjahr Christi; Hist. Chronol. Untersuchungen, Leipz., 1870). The arguments mainly turns on the fact that in A. U. C. 742, Quirinus was consul and afterwards (not before A. U. C. 747) proconsul of Africa: yet some time between this year and A. U. C. 753 (in which year he was appointed rector to C. Cæsar, the grandson of Augustus) he conquered the Homonadenses in Cilicia (Tac. Ann. iii. 48). He must therefore have been at this time propraetor of the imperial province of Syria, to which Cilicia belonged. The other provinces near Cilicia (Asia, Bithynia, Pontus, Galatia) were senatorial, i.e., proconsular, and as a man could not be proconsul twice, Quirinus could not have been governor in any of these. It is not possible here to give the ingenious and elaborate arguments by which Zumpt shows that the Homonadenses must at this time have been under the jurisdiction of the Governor of Syria. Further than this, we know that P. Q. Varus was propraetor of Syria, between BC 6 and BC 4 (A. U. C. 748-750), and it is extremely likely that Varus may have been displaced in favor of Quirinus in the latter year, because the close friendship of the former with Archelaus, who resembled him in character, might have done mischief. It may therefore be regarded as all but certain, on independent grounds, that Quirinus was propraetor of Syria between BC 4 and BC 1. And if such was the case, instead of having been guilty of a flagrant historical error by antedating, by ten years, the propraetorship of Quirinus in Syria, St. Luke has preserved for us the historical fact of his having been twice propraetor, or, to give the full title, Lega tus Augusti pro praetore a fact which we should have been unable to learn from Josephus or Dio Cassius, whose histories are here imperfect. For the full arguments on this point the reader must, however, consult the exhaustive treatise of A. W. Zumpt. The appeals of Tertullian to census-records of Saturninus, and of Justin Martyr to the tables of Quirinus, as proving the genealogy of our Lord, are (so far as we can attach any importance to them) an additional confirmation of these conclusions, which are not overthrown by Mommsen (Res. Gest. Div. Aug., p. 123) and Strauss (Leben Jesu, i. 28); see Merivale, Hist. iv. 45. Quirinus, not Quirinius, is probably the true form of the name (Orelli ad Tac. Ann. ii. 30) For further discussion of the question see Wieseler, Synops. of the Four Gospels, E, Tr., pp. 65-106. I may, however, observe in passing that, although no error has been proved, and, on the accurate, yet I hold no theory of inspiration which would prevent me from frankly admitting, in such matters as these, any mistake or inaccuracy which could be shown really to exist.

[4] That Joseph alone knew these facts appears from Matt. i. 19, where the best reading seems to be not παραδειγµατιδαι, but δειγµατιδαι -- i.e., not "make her an example," but, as Eusebius points out, "reveal her condition to the world." The ένθυµηθέντος of verse 20 means that this intention continued until the explanation had been revealed to him. There is nothing surprising in the fact that the descendant of a royal house should be in a lowly position. Hillel, the great Rabbi, though he, too, was a descendant of David, spent a great part of his life in the deepest poverty as a common workman. The green turban, which marks a descendant of Mahomet, may often be seen in Egypt and Arabia on the head of paupers and beggars. Similar facts exist quite commonly among ourselves; and, ages before this time, we find that the actual grandson of the great Lawgiver himself (Judg. xviii. 30, where the true reading is "Moses," not "Manasseh") was an obscure, wandering, semi-idolatrous Levite, content to serve an irregular ephod for a double suit of apparel and ten shekels (i.e., about thrity shillings) a year (Judg. xvii. 10). On the genealogies given in St. Matthew and St. Luke, see the learned and admirable article by the Bishop of Bath and Wells in Smith's Dict. of the Bible, and his more elaborate work on the same subject. Here I need only add that remarkable confirmations of the descent of Jesus from David are found (1) in the story of Domitian and the Desposyni, alluded to in infr. Chap. IV.; and (2) in a statement of Ulla, a Rabbi, of the third century, that

"Jesus was treated exceptionally because of His royal extraction" ( הוה הונלמל בודקד ושי

ינאש Sanhedrin, 43 a, in non-expurgated editions) (Derenbourg, L'Hist, de la Palestine, p. 349). It is now almost certain that the genealogies in both Gospels are genealogies of Joseph, which, if we may rely on early traditions of their consanguinity, involve genealogies of Mary also. The Davidic descent of Mary is implied in Acts ii. 30; xiii. 23; Rom. i. 3; Luke i. 32, &c. St. Matthew gives the legal descent of Joseph, through the elder and regal line, as heir to the throne of David; St. Luke gives the natural descent. Thus the real father of Salathiel was heir of the house of Nathan, but the childless Jeconiah (Jer. xxii. 30) was the last leneal representative of the elder kingly line. The omission of some obscure names and the symmetrical arrangement into tesseradecads were common Jewish customs. It is not too much to say that after the labors of Mill (On the Mythical Interpretation of the Gospels, pp. 147-217) and Lord A. C. Hervey (On the Genealogies of Our Lord, 1853), scarcely a single serious difficulty remains in reconciling the apparent divergencies. And thus, in this, as in so many other instances, the very discrepancies which appear to be most irreconcilable, and most fatal to the historic accuracy of the four Evangelists, turn out, on closer and more patient investigation, to be fresh proofs that they are not only entirely independent, but also entirely trustworthy.

Travelling in the East is a very slow and leisurely affair, and was likely to be still more so if, as is probable, the country was at that time agitated by political animosities. Beeroth, which is fifteen miles distant from Bethlehem,[1] or possibly even Jerusalem, which is only six miles off, may have been the resting-place of Mary and Joseph before this last stage of their journey. But the heavy langour, or even the commencing pangs of travail, must necessarily have retarded the progress of the maiden-mother. Others who were travelling on the same errand, would easily have passed them on the road, and when, after toiling up the steep hill-side, by David's well, they arrived at the khan -- probably the very one which had been known for centuries as the House of Chimham,[2] and if so, covering perhaps the very ground on which, one thousand years before, had stood the hereditary house of Boaz, of Jesse, and of David -- every leewan was occupied. The enrolment had drawn so many strangers to the little town, that "there was no room for them at the inn." In the rude limestone grotto attached to it as a stable, among the hay and straw spread for the food and rest of the cattle, weary with their day's journey, far from home, in the midst of strangers, in the chilly winter night -- in circumstances so devoid of all earthly comfort or splendour that it is impossible to imagine a humbler nativity -- Christ was born.[3]

[1] St. Matthew calls it Bethlehem of Judæ (ii. 1) to distinguish it from Bethlehem in Zebulun (Josh. xix. 15). It is the Ephrath of Gen. xlviii. 7. Cf. Micah v. 2.

[2] Or rather "hostel" ( הוּדֵּג) (Jer. xli. 17; 2 Sam. xix. 37, 38). One tradition says that the khan was on the ruins of a fortress built by David which had gradually fallen to ruin. The suggestion that the House of Chimham was the khan of Bethlehem is made by Mr. W. Hepworth Dixon (Holy Land, I., ch. xiii.). He gives a good description of Syrian khans. [3] That "it is the winter wild," at the end of BC 5 or the beginning of BC 4 of our Dionysian era, is all but certain; but neither the day nor the month can be fixed (ειδίν δέ δι περιεργότερον ... ηαί τήν ήµέραν προδτιθέντες;[3a] Clem. Alex. Strom. i. 21, §145). that the actual place of Christ's birth was a cave is, as we have seen, a very ancient tradition, and this cave used to be shown as the scene of the event even so early (AD 150) as the time of Justin Martyr (Dial. c. Tryph., c. 78, 305, έν δπηλαιω τινι συνεγγύς τής ηώµης[3b]. Cf. Orig. c. Cels., i. 51). There is therefore nothing improbable in the tradition which points out the actual cave as having been the one now covered by the Church of the Nativity at Bethlehem. Hadrian is said to have profaned it by establishing there the worship of Adonis. (Sepp, Leben Jesu, i. 7.) It is fair, however, to add that the tradition of the cave may have arisen from the LXX. rendering of Isa. xxxiii. 16, just as the subsequent words in the LXX., άρτος δοθήσεται αύτώ, were fancifully referred to Bethlehem, "the house of bread." There seems to be no proof of the assertion (mentioned by Stanley, Sin. and Pal., p. 441), that the Arabs,when they plundered the church, found that the Grotto of the Nativity was an ancient sepulchre. If such had been the case, is it likely that the Empress Helena (AD 330) would have built her church there? [3a] And there are some over-curious ones who even add the day. [3b] in a certain cave quite near to the village.

Distant but a few miles, on the plateau of the abrupt and singular hill now called Jebel Fureidis, or "Little Paradise Mountain," towered the palace fortress of the Great Herod. The magnificent houses of his friends and courtiers crowded around it base. The humble wayfarers, as they passed near it, might have heard the hired and voluptuous minstrelsy with which its feasts were celebrated, or the shouting of the rough mercenaries whose arms enforced obedience to its despotic lord. But the true King of the Jews -- the rightful Lord of the Universe -- was not to be found in the palace or fortress. They who wear soft clothing are in king's houses. The cattle-stables of the lowly caravanserai were a more fitting birthplace for Him who came to reveal that the soul of the greatest monarch was no dearer or greater in God's sight than the soul of his meanest slave; for him who had not where to lay His head; for him who, from His cross of shame, was to rule the world.[1]

[1] Ps. xcvi. 10, LXX. έβασίλευσεν [άπό τού ξύλου] (J. Mart., Dial c. Tryph. §73, p. 298). Tert. Ade. Marc. iii. 19, "Age nune si legisti penes David 'Dominus regnavit a ligno,' exspecto quid intelligas nisi forte lignarium aliquem regem Judae-orum et non Christum, qui exinde a

passione ligni superata morte regnavit."[1a] Some suggest that the LXX. read ץֵע for ף ַא, but it is more probable that the words wre added by Christians, than that they wre erased by Jews. The admission of the rendering quoted by Tertullian from the Vetus Itala, made some of the Western fathers attach great importance to a phrase which, though interesting, is certainly spurious.

[1a] "Come now, when you read in the words of David, how that the Lord reigneth from the trees, I want to know what you understand by it. Perhaps you think some wooden king of the Jews is meant, and not Christ, who overcame death by his suffering on the cross, and thence reigned." (Ante-Nic. Lib.)

Guided by the lamp which usually swings from the centre of a rope hung across the entrance of the khan, the shepherds made their way to the inn of Bethlehem, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the Babe lying in the manger. The fancy of poet and painter has revelled in the imaginary glories of the scene. They have sung of the "bright harnessed angels" who hovered there, and of the stars lingering beyond their time to shed their sweet influences upon that smiling infancy. They have painted the radiation of light from his manger-cradle, illuminating all the place till the bystanders are forced to shade their eyes from that heavenly splendour.[1] But all this is wide of reality. Such glories as the simple shepherds saw were seen only by the eye of faith; and all which met their gaze was a peasant of Galilee, already beyond the prime of life, and a young mother, of whom they could not know that she was wedded maid and virgin wife, with an Infant Child, whom, since there were none to help her, her own hands had wrapped in swaddling-clothes The light that shined in the darkness was no physical, but a spiritual beam; the Dayspring from on high, which had now visited mankind, dawned only in a few faithful and humble hearts.[2]

[1] As in the splendid picture, "La Notte," of Correggio. See Arab. Gospel of the Infancy, ch. iii.: "And, lo! it (the cave) was filled with lights more beautiful than the glittering of lamps and candles, and brighter than the light of the sun." Protev. ch. xix.: "There appeared a great light in the cave, so that their eyes could not bear it." (Gospel Pseud. Matth. xiii.: "A cave below a cavern, in which there was never any light, but always darkness. And when the blessed Mary had entered it, it began to become all light with brightness," &c. "Praesepe jam fulget tuum"[1a] (Ambros. De Adv. Dom. 86). "Quando Christus natus est corpus ejus resplenduit ut sol quando oritur"[1b] (Vincent Lerin. Serm. de Nativitate, referring to Isa. ix. 2) [1a] Now does thy manger shine.

[1b] When Christ was born his body was resplendent as the sun when it rises. [2] The apocryphal Gospels, with their fondness for circumstantiality, and their readiness on all occasions to invent imaginary names, say that there were four shepherds, and that their names were Misael, Acheel, Cyriacus, and Stephanus (see Hofmann, Leben Jesu nach den Apokryphen, p. 117). The little village of Beit-Sahur is pointed out as their native place.

And the Gospels, always truthful and bearing on every page that simplicity which is the stamp of honest narrative, indicate this fact without comment. There is in them nothing of the exuberance of marvel, and mystery, and miracle, which appears alike in the Jewish imaginations about their coming Messiah, and in the apocryphal narratives about the Infant Christ. There is no more decisive criterion of their absolute credibility as simple histories, than the marked and violent contrast which they offer to all the spurious gospels of the early centuries, and all the imaginative legends which have clustered about them. Had our Gospels been unauthentic, they too must inevitably have partaken of the characteristics which mark, without exception, every early fiction about the Saviour's life. To the unilluminated fancy it would have seemed incredible that the most stupendous event in the world's history should have taken place without convulsions and catastrophes. In the Gospel of St. James[1] there is a really striking chapter, describing how, at the awful moment of the nativity, the pole of the heaven stood motionless, and the birds were still, and there were workmen lying on the earth with their hands in a vessel, "and those who handled did not handle it, and those who took did not lift, and those who presented it to their mouth did not present it, but the faces of all were looking up; and I saw the sheep scattered, and the sheep stood, and the shepherd lifted up his hand to strike, and his hand remained up; and I looked at the stream of the river, and the mouths of the kids were down, and were not drinking; and everything which was being propelled forward was intercepted in its course." But of this sudden hush and pause of awe-struck Nature,[2] of the parhelions and mysterious splendours which blazed in many places of the world, of the painless childbirth,[3] of the perpetual virginity,[4] of the ox and the ass kneeling to worship Him in the manger,[5] of the voice with which immediately after His birth He told his mother that He was the Son of God,[6] and of many another wonder which rooted itself in the earliest traditions, there is no trace whatever in the New Testament. The inventions of man differ wholly from the dealings of God. In His designs there is no hast, no rest, no weariness, no discontinuity; all things are done by him in the majesty of silence, and they are seen under a light that shineth quietly in the darkness, "showing all things in the slow history of their ripening." "The unfathomable depths of the Divine counsels," it has been said, "were moved; the fountains of the great deep were broken up; the healing of the nations was issuing forth; but nothing was seen on the surface of human society but this slight rippling of the water; the course of human things went on as usual, while each was taken up with little projects of his own."

[1] Commonly known as the Protevangelium, ch. xviii. [2] "Credibile est in aliis partibus mundi aliqua indicia nativitatis Christi apparuisse"[2a] (S. Thom. Aquin., Summa iii. qu. 36, art. 3. Hofmann, p. 115, seqq.). [2a] It is credible that some indications of the nativity of Christ appeared in other parts of the world.

[3] "Nulla ibi obstetrix, nulla muliercularum sedulitas intercessit"[3a] (Jer. Adv. Helvid.), probably with reference to Ps. xxii. 9 -- "Thou art He who tookest me out of my mother's womb." This is, however, involved in Luke ii. 7, έσπαργάνωδεν. [3a] There is no midwife, no sedulity of little women intervended. [4] "Virgo ante partum, in partu, post partum"[4a] (Aug. Serm. 123). "Claustrum pudoris permanet"[4b] (Ambros. De Adv. Dom. 10). This was a mere fantastic inference from Ezek. xliv. 2. (See Jer. Taylor, Life of Christ, ed. Eden, p. 65, n.) [4a] A virgin before, during, and after parturition.

[4b] The bar of modesty remains.

[5] Gosp. Pseud. Matth. xiv. An incident imagined with reference to Isa. i. 3, "The ox knoweth his owner," &c., and Hab. iii. 2, mistranslated in the LXX., "Between two animals Thou shalt be made known" (έν µέσω δύο ζώων γνωσθηση), and the Vet. Itala ("In medio duorum animalium innotesceris."[5a]) "Cognovit bos et asinus Quod puer erat Dominus"[5b] (Pister, De Nativ. Dom. 5).

[5a] "Between two animals thou shalt be made known." [5b] The ox and the ass knew that the boy was the Lord. [6] Arab. Gosp. of Inf. i.

How long the Virgin Mother and her holy Child stayed in this cave, or cattle-enclosure, we cannot tell, but probably it was not for long. The word rendered "manger" in Luke ii. 7,[1] is of very uncertain meaning, nor can we discover more about it than that it means a place where animals were fed.[2] It is probable that the crown in the khan would not be permanent, and common humanity would have dictated an early removal of the mother and her child to some more appropriate resting-place. The Magi, as we see from St. Matthew, visited Mary in "the house."[3] But on all these minor incidents the Gospels do not dwell. The fullest of them is St. Luke, and the singular sweetness of his narrative, its almost idyllic grace, its sweet calm tone of noble reticence, seem clearly to indicate that he derived it, though but in fragmentary notices, from the lips of Mary herself. It is, indeed, difficult to imagine from whom else it could have come, for mothers are the natural historians of infant years; but it is interesting to find, in the actual style, that "colouring of a woman's memory and a woman's view," which we should naturally have expecting in confirmation of a conjecture so obvious and so interesting.[4] To one who was giving the reins to his imagination, the minutest incidents would have claimed a description; to Mary they would have seemed trivial and irrelevant. Others might wonder, but in her all wonder was lost in the one overwhelming revelation -- the one absorbing consciousness. Of such things she could not lightly speak; "she kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart."[5] The very depth and sacredness of that reticence is the natural and probable explanation of the fact, that some of the details of the Saviour's infancy are fully recorded by St. Luke alone.

[1] φάτνη (from πατέοµαι, "I eat:" Curtius, Grundzüge Griech. Etym., ii. 84). It is used for סוּב ֵא

A. V., "crib," in Prov. xiv. 4 (Targ., אהודוא, "barn;" cf. Isa. i. 3; Job xxxix. 9), and for ה ָדָוּ ֻא, "stable," in 2 Chron. xxxii. 28; cf. Hab. iii. 17. In Luke xiii. 15 it is rendered "stall." But actual mangers, built as they are in the shape of a kneading-trough, may be, and are, used as cradles in the East (Thomson, Land and Book, ii. 533). Even where these are wanting, there is often a projecting ledge on which the cattle can rest their nosebags. Mangers are certainly ancient (Hom. Il. x. 568; Hdt. ix. 70). On the whole I conclude that φάτνη means primarily "an enclosure where cattle are fed:" and secondly, "the place from which they eat," and hence is used both for a stable and a manger.

[2] Vulg. "praesepe." Hence Mr. Grove (Bibl. Dict. s. v. "Bethlehem") goes a little too far in saying that "the stable and its accompaniments are the creation of the imagination of poets and painters, with no support from the Gospel narrative." [3] Matt. ii. 11.

[4] See Lange i. 325.

[5] Luke ii. 19.
