THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT, AND THE MASSACRE OF THE INNOCENTS.

"Salvete flores martyrum

quos, lucis ipso in limine,

Christi insecutor sustulit,

Ceu turbo nascentes rosas."[1]

-- PRUDENT, De SS. Innocentt.

[1] "Hail infant martyrs! new-born victims, hail!

Hail earliest flowerets of the Christian spring!

O'er whom, like rose-buds scattered by the gale,

The cruel sward such havoc dared to fling."

(Chandler's Hymns of the Primitive Church.)

When they had offered their gifts, the Wise Men would naturally have returned to Herod, but being warned by God in a dream, they returned to their own land another way. Neither in Scripture, nor in authentic history, nor even in early apocryphal tradition, do we find any further traces of their existence; but their visit led to very memorable events.

The dream which warned them of danger may very probably have fallen in with their own doubts about the cruel and crafty tyrant who had expressed a hypocritical desire to pay his homage to the Infant King; and if, as we may suppose, they imparted to Joseph any hint as to their misgivings, he too would be prepared for the warning dream which bade him fly to Egypt to save the young child from Herod's jealousy.

Egypt has, in all ages, been the natural place of refuge for all who were driven from Palestine by distress, persecution, or discontent. Rhinokolura, the river of Egypt, or as Milton, with his usual exquisite and learned accuracy calls it, --

"The brook that parts

Egypt from Syrian ground,"[1]

might have been reached by the fugitives in three days; and once upon the farther bank, they were beyond the reach of Herod's jurisdiction.

[1] Milton has, however, been misled by the word wady, and its translation by "brook" in our version. Mr. Grove informs me that Rhinocolura, now Wady el-Areesh) in the Nachal Mitzraîm, or "river of Egypt," (Numb. xxxiv. 5, &c.), is a broad shallow wady with scarcely a trace of a bank. Still, as is usual in desert valleys, a torrent does flow through the bottom of it after winter rains.

Of the flight, and its duration, Scripture gives us no further particulars; telling us only that the Holy Family fled, by night from Bethlehem, and returned when Joseph had again been assured by a dream that it would be safe to take back the Saviour to the land of his nativity. It is left to apocryphal legends, immortalised by the genius of Italian art, to tell us how, on the way, the dragons came and bowed to Him, the lions and leopards adored Him, the roses of Jericho blossomed wherever His footsteps trod, the palm-trees at His command bent down to give them dates, the robbers were overawed by His majesty, and the journey was miraculously shortened.[1] They tell us further how, at His entrance into the country, all the idols of the land of Egypt fell from their pedestals with a sudden crash, and lay shattered and broken upon their faces, and how many wonderful cures of leprosy and demoniac possession were wrought by His word. All this wealth and prodigality of superfluous, aimless, and unmeaning miracle -- arising in part from a mere craving for the supernatural, and in part from a fanciful application of Old Testament prophecies -- furnishes a strong contrast to the truthful simplicity of the Gospel narrative. St. Matthew neither tells us where the holy Family abode in Egypt, nor how long their exile continued; but ancient legends say that they remained two[2] years absent from Palestine, and lived at Mataréëh,[3] a few miles northeast of Cairo, where a fountain was long shown of which Jesus had made the water fresh, and an ancient sycamore under which they had rested. The Evangelist alludes only to the causes of their flight and of their return, and finds in the latter a new and deeper significance for the words of the prophet Hosea, "Out of Egypt have I called my Son."[4]

[1] See the Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew xviii -- xxiv.; Arab. Gospel of the Infancy, xii -- xxv.; B. H. Cowper, The Apocr. Gospels, pp. 56-64, 178-191; Hofmann, pp. 140-183. Many of these legends are mere fanciful representations of Ps. cxlviii. 7; Isa. xi. 6-9; lxv. 25; xix. 1, &c. From the dissemination of the Gospel of the Infancy in Arabia, many of these fables have exercised a strong influence on the Mohammedan legends of Jesus. Some of the Rabbis took occasion from the visit to Egypt to charge Christ with a knowledge of magic. Matathia, in the Nizzachon, says that as Jesus did not know the Tetragrammaton, or ineffable name of God, His miracles (the reality of which is not denied) were due to sorcery learnt in Egypt (Sepp, Leben Jesu, § xiii.). It is hardly worth while to refer to the preposterous story in the Toldôth Jeshû (Wagenseil, Tela Ignea, ii. p. 7).

[2] St. Bonaventure (De Vita Christi) says seven years. [3] This town is sometimes identified with On, or Heliopolis, where lived Asenath, the wife of Joseph, and where, under the name of Osarsiph, Moses had been a priest. Onias, at the head of a large colony of Jewish refugees, flying from the rage of Antiochus, had founded a temple there, and was thus believed to have fulfilled the prophecy of Isa. xix. 19. (Sepp.) [4] "Finds a new and deeper significance, or, in other words, totally misunderstands," is the marginal comment of a friend who saw these pages. And so, no doubt, it might at first appear to our Western and Northern conceptions and methods of criticism; but not so to an Oriental and an Analogist. Trained to regard every word, nay, every letter of Scriptures as mystical and divine, accustomed to the application of passages in various senses, all of which were supposed to be latent, in some mysterious fashion, under the original utterance, St. Matthew would have regarded his least apparently relevant quotations from, and allusions to, the Old Testament, not in the light of occasional illustrations, but in the light of most solemn prophetic references to the events about which he writes. And in so doing he would be arguing in strict accordance with the views in which those for whom he wrote had been trained from their earliest infancy. Nor is there, even to our modern conceptions, anything erroneous or unnatural in the fact that the Evangelist transfers to the Messiah the language which Hosea had applied to the ideal Israel. The ideal Israel -- i.e., the ideal "Jashar" or "Upright Man" -- was the obvious and accepted type of the coming Christ -- The quotation is from Hosea xi. 1, and St. Matthew has here referred to the original, and corrected the faulty rendering of the LXX., which is έξ ΑΙγύπτου µετεηάλεσα τά τέηνα αύτοΰ.[4a] See Excursus XI., "Old Testament Quotations in the Evangelists."

[4a] out of Egypt I called his children.

The flight into Egypt led to a very memorable event. Seeing that the Wise Men had not returned to him, the alarm and jealousy of Herod assumed a still darker and more malignant aspect. He had no means of identifying the royal infant of the seed of David, and least of all would he have been likely to seek for him in the cavern stable of the village khan. But he knew that the child whom the visit of the Magi had taught him to regard as a future rival of himself or of his house was yet an infant at the breast; and as Eastern mothers usually suckle their children for two years,[1] he issued his fell mandate to slay all the children of Bethlehem and its neighbourhood "from two years old and under." Of the method by which the decree was carried out we know nothing. The children may have been slain secretly, gradually, and by various forms of murder; or, as has been generally supposed, there may have been one single hour of dreadful butchery.[2] The decrees of tyrants like Herod are usually involved in a deadly obscurity; they reduce the world to a torpor in which it is hardly safe to speak above a whisper. But the wild wail of anguish which rose from the mothers thus cruelly robbed of their infant children could not be hushed, and they who heard it might well imagine that Rachel, the great ancestress of their race, whose tomb stands by the roadside about a mile from Bethlehem, once more, as in the pathetic image of the prophet, mingled her voice with the mourning and lamentation of those who wept so inconsolably for their murdered little ones.[3]

[1] Ketubhôth, 59 b; 2 Macc. vii. 27, "gave thee suck three years." Other refer the calculation to the previous appearance of the planetary conjunction; and if this took place A. U. C. 747, and Jesus was born (as is all but certain) A. U. C. 750, it is a curious coincidence that Abarbanel, as we have already mentioned, places the astrological "aspect" which foreshadowed the birth of Moses three years before that event took place. [2] The Protevang. says (xxi. 1) that he dispatched the assassins to Bethlehem (έπεµψε τούς φονευτάς[2a].)

[2a] "he dispatched the assassins".

[3] Jer. xxxi. 15, applied originally to the Captivity. In this quotation also St. Matthew has translated freely from the Hebrew original. The remark of Calvin, that "Matthew does not mean that the prophet had predicted what Herod should do, but that, at the advent of Christ, that mourning was renewed which many years before the women of Bethlehem had made," is characterized by his usual strong and honest common sense, and must be borne in mind in considering several of the Gospel references to ancient prophecy. It applies to St. Matthew more strongly than to the other Evangelists. On this, as on other points of exegesis, there can be no question whatever, in the mind of any competent scholar, that the theology of the Reformation, and even of the Fathers, was freer, manlier, less shackled by false theories about inspiration, and less timid of ignorant criticism, than that which claims to be the sole orthodox theology of the present day.

To us there seems something inconceivable in a crime so atrocious; but our thoughts have been softened by eighteen centuries of Christianity, and such deeds are by no means unparalleled in the history of heathen despots and of the ancient world. Infanticide of a deeper dye than this of Herod's was a crime dreadfully rife in the days of the Empire; and the Massacre of the Innocents, as well as the motives which led to it, can be illustrated by several circumstances in the history of this very epoch. Suetonius, in his Life of Augustus, quotes from the life of the Emperor by his freedman Julius Marathus, a story to the effect that shortly before his birth there was a prophecy in Rome that a king over the Roman people would soon be born. To obviate this danger to the Republic, the Senate ordered that all the male children born in that year should be abandoned or exposed; but the Senators whose wives were pregnant took means to prevent the ratification of the stature, because each of them hoped that the prophecy might refer to his own child.[1] Again, Eusebius[2] quotes from Hegesippus, a Jew by birth, a story that Domitian, alarmed by the growing power of the name of Christ, issued an order to destroy all the descendants of the house of David. Two grandchildren of St. Jude -- "the Lord's brother" -- were still living, and were known as the Desposyni.[3] They were betrayed to the Emperor by a certain Jocatus, and other Nazaræan heretics, and were brought into the imperial presence; but when Domitian observed that they only held the rank of peasants, and that their hands were hard with manual toil, he dismissed them in safety with a mixture of pity and contempt.

[1]a Suet. Vit. Aug., p. 94 -- As history, no doubt the anecdote is perfectly worthless, but it is not worthless as illustrating what we otherwise know to have been possible in an age in which, as is still the case in China, infanticide was hardly regarded as a disgrace. [2] Hist. Ecc. iii. 15.

[3] This fact is mentioned by Julius Africanus, who was born at Emmaus, about the beginning of the third century, and who says that he knew some of the Desposyni personally. (Euseb. Hist. Ecc. i. 7.)

Although doubts have been thrown on the Massacre of the Innocents, it is profoundly in accordance with all that we know of Herod's character. The master-passions of that able but wicked prince were a most unbounded ambition, and, a most excruciating jealousy.[1] His whole career was red with the blood of murder. He had massacred priests and nobles; he had decimated the Sanhedrin; he had caused the High Priest, his brother-in-law, the young and noble Aristobulus, to be drowned in pretended sport before his eyes; he had ordered the strangulation of his favourite wife, the beautiful Asmonæan princess Mariamne, though she seems to have been the only human being he passionately loved.[2] His sons Alexander, Aristobulus, and Antipater -- his uncle Joseph -- Antigonus and Alexander, the uncle and father of his wife -- his mother-in-law Alexandra -- his kinsman Cortobanus -- his friends Dositheus and Gadias, were but a few of the multitudes who fell victims to his sanguinary, suspicious, and guilty terrors. His brother Pheroras and his son Archelaus barely and narrowly escaped execution by his orders. Neither the blooming youth of the prince Aristobulus, nor the white hairs of the king Hyrcanus, had protected them from his fawning and treacherous fury. Deaths by strangulation, deaths by burning, deaths by being cleft asunder, deaths by secret assassination, confessions forced by unutterable torture, acts of insolent and inhuman lust, mark the annals of a reign which was so cruel that, in the energetic language of the Jewish ambassadors to the Emperor Augustus, "the survivors during his lifetime were even more miserable than the sufferers."[3] And as in the case of Henry VIII., every dark and brutal instinct of his character seemed to acquire fresh intensity as his life drew towards its close. Haunted by the spectres of his murdered wife and murdered sons, agitated by the conflicting furies of remorse and blood, the pitiless monster, as Josephus calls him, was seized in his last days by a black and bitter ferocity, which broke out against all with whom he came in contact.[4] There is no conceivable difficulty in supposing that such a man -- a savage barbarian with a thin veneer of corrupt and superficial civilisation -- would have acted in the exact manner which St. Matthew describes; and the belief in the fact receives independent confirmation from various sources. "On Augustus being informed," says Macrobius, "that among the boys under two years of age whom Herod ordered to be slain in Syria, his own son also had been slain," "It is better," said he, "to be Herod's pig (ûν) than his son (uìòν).[5] "Although Marcrobius is a late writer, and made the mistake of supposing that Herod's son Antipater, who was put to death about the same time as the Massacre of the Innocents, had actually perished in that massacre, it is clear that the form in which he narrates the bon mot of Augustus, points to some dim reminiscence of this cruel slaughter.

[1] Jos. Antt. xvi. 5, § 4.

[2] The feelings of Herod towards Mariamne, who, as a Maccabæan princess, had far more right to the sovereignty than himself, were not unlike those of Henry VII. towards Elizabeth of York, and in a less degree those of William III. towards Mary. Herod was well aware that he owed his sovereignty solely to "the almighty Romans." Aristobulus was murdered at the age of eighteen, Hyrcanus at the age of eighty; and he hated them alike for their popularity, and for their Maccabæan origin. More ghosts must have gathered round the dying bed of this "gorgeous criminal" than thoe which the fancy Shakespeare has collected round the bed of Richard III.

[3] Jos. Antt. xvii. 11, § 2.

[4] Jos. Antt. xvii. 6, § 5, µέλαινα χολή αύτόν ήρει έπί πάσιν έξαγριαι-νουσα;[4a] B. J. i. 30, § 4, έπτόητο τώ φόβω ηαί πρός πάσαν ύπόνοιαν έξρριπτίζετο.[4b] -- "Most miserable family, even to the third generation, to be imbued so deep beyond any other in blood; one steeped in the blood of infant martyrs, the other in that of John the Baptist, and the third who slew James the Apostle with the sword -- all three conspicuous in the persecution of Christ." (Williams, The Nativ. 132.)

[4a] "he grew so choleric that it brought him to do all things like a madman" [4b] "he was in great consternation himself, and inflamed upon every suspicion" [5] Saturnal. ii. 4, "Augustus cum audisset, inter pueros, quos in Syria Herodes infra bimatum (cf. Matt. ii. 16, άπό διετοΰς ηα$ ηατωέρω; Vulg., "a bimatu et infra") interfici jussit, filiun quoque ejus occisum, ait, Melius est Herodis porcum (ΰν) esse quam puerum (υιόν)."[5a] The pun cannot be preserved in English. Augustus meant that Herod's pig, since, as a Jew, he could not eat it, would be safer than his son. Herod had to ask the Emperor's leave before putting his sons to death; and Antipater, whom he ordered to be executed only five days before his death, was the third who had undergone this fate -- Macrobius lived about AD 400, but he used early materials, and the pun is almost certainly historical. [5a] For translation see text.

Why then, it has been asked, does Josephus make no mention of so infamous an atrocity? Perhaps because it was performed so secretly that he did not even know of it. Perhaps because, it those terrible days, the murder of a score of children, in consequence of a transient suspicion, would have been regarded as an item utterly insignificant in the list of Herod's murders.[1] Perhaps because it was passed over in silence by Nikolaus of Damascus, who, writing in the true spirit of those Hellenising courtiers, who wanted to make a political Messiah out of a corrupt and blood-stained usurper, magnified all his patron's achievements, and concealed or palliated all his crimes.[2] But the more probable reason is that Josephus, whom, in spite of all the immense literary debt which we owe to him, we can only regard as a renegade and a sycophant, did not choose to make any allusion to facts which were even remotely connected with the life of Christ. The single passage in which he alludes to Him is interpolated, if not wholly spurious*, and no one can doubt that his silence on the subject of Christianity was as deliberate as it was dishonest.[3]

[1] The probable number of the Innocents has been extraordinarily exaggerated. An Æthiopian legend makes them 14,000! Considering that Bethlehem was but a village of perhaps 2,000 inhabitants, we may safely hope that, even in all its boundaries, not more than twenty were sacrificed, and perhaps not half that number; especially as the άπό διετοΰς may mean (as Greswell supposes) "just beyond the age of one year." [2] Nikolaus was to Herod what Velleius Paterculus was to Tiberius. Josephus's own opinion of the kind of men who were Herod's creatures and parasites may be found in his Antt. xvi. 5, § 4. As to Josephus, his own narrative is his worst condemnation, and De Quincey's estimate of him (Works, vi. 272-275) is not too severe. His works betray some of the worst characteristics of the Oriental and the Pharisee. He may have omitted all mention of Christ out of sheer perplexity, although he certainly rejected His Messiahship (Orig. c. Cels. i. 35). Nothing is more common in historians and biographers than the deliberate suppression of awkard and disagreeable facts. Justus of Tiberius, another contemporary historian, was also purposely reticent. Does any one doubt the murder of Cripus because Eusebius takes no notice of it in his life of Constantine? But perhaps, after all, there is an allusion -- though guarded and distant -- to this crime, or at any rate to the circumstances which led to it, in the Antiquities of Josephus (xvi. ii, § 7; xvii. 2, § 4), where it is narrated that Herod slew a number of Pharisees and others because the foretold "how God had decreed that Herod's government should cease, and his posterity should be deprived of it." Possibly another allusion (though out of place) may be found in xiv. 9, § 4, where we hear of a clamor against Herod, raised by "The mothers of those who had been slain by him."

[3] This celebrated passage is as follows: -- Antt. xviii. 3, § 3: Γίγνεται δέ ηατά τοΰτον τόν χρόνον Ίησοΰς, σοφός άνήρ [εϊ γε αύτόν άνδρα λέγειν χρή. ήν γάρ] παραδόξων έργων ποιητής [διδάσηαλος άνθρώπων τών σύν ήδονή τάληθή δεχοµένων] ηαι πολλούς µέν τών Ίουδαιων πολλούς δέ ηαί άπό τοΰ Έλληνιηοΰ έπηγάγετο [Ό Χριστός, ούτος ήν.] Και αύτόν έν-δείξει τών πρώτων άνδρών παρ' ήµίν σταυρώ έπιτετιµηηότος ΙΙτλάτου, ούη έπαύσαντο οϊ γε πρώτον αύτόν άγαπήσαντες . [Έφάνη γάρ αύτοϊς τριτην έχων ήµέραν πάλιν ζών, τών θειων προφητών ταΰτά τε ηαί άλλα µυρια περι αύτοΰ θαυµάσια είρηκότων .] Είς έτι νΰν τών Χριστιανών άπό τοΰδε ώνοµασµένων όυκ έπέλιπε τό φΰλον.[3a] The only other allusion to Jesus in Josephus is also of dubious authenticity (Antt. xx. 9, § 1), where he calls James τόν άδελφόν Ίησοΰ τοΰ λεγοµένου Χριστοΰ.[3b]

[3a] "Now there was about this time Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a man, for he was a doer of wonderful works, a teacher of such men as receive the truth with pleasure. He drew over to him both many of the Jews, and many of the Gentiles. He was [the] Christ. And when Pilate, at the suggestion of the principal men amongst us, had condemned him to the cross, those that loved him at the first did not forsake him; for he appeared to them alive again the third day, as the divine prophets had foretold these and ten thousand other wonderful things concerning him. And the tribe of Christians, so named from him, are not extinct at this day.

[3b] "the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ"

[*Web publisher's note: Unfortunately, Farrar did not have access to the following:

Although the passage is so worded as early as Eusebius (c. AD 324), scholars have long

suspected a Christian interpolation, since Josephus would not have believed Jesus to be the Messiah or in his resurrection and have remained, as he did, a non-Christian Jew. In 1972, however, Professor Schlomo Pines of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem announced his discovery of an Arabic manuscript by the tenth-century Melkite historian Agapius, in which this Josephan passage is expressed in a manner appropriate to a Jew, and which corresponds so precisely to previous scholarly projections of what Josephus originally wrote that it is substituted in the text above. While the final sentence is not in Agapius, Pines justifiably concludes that it was in the original Josephan text.

Josephus, The Essential Works, by Paul L. Maier, p. 283 Kregel Publications, ISBN 0-8254-3260-X]

But although Josephus does not distinctly mention the event, yet every single circumstance which he does tell us about this very period of Herod's life supports its probability. At this very time two eloquent Jewish teachers, Judas and Matthias, had incited their scholars to pull down the large golden eagle which Herod had placed above the great gate of the Temple. Josephus connects this bold attempt with premature rumours of Herod's death; but Lardner's conjecture that it may have been further encouraged by the Messianic hopes freshly kindled by the visit of the Wise Men, is by no means impossible. The attempt, however, was defeated, and Judas and Matthias, with forty of their scholars, were burned alive. With such crimes as this before him on every page, Josephus might well have ignored the secret assassination of a few unweaned infants in a little village. Their blood was but a drop in that crimson river in which Herod was steeped to the very lips.

It must have been very shortly after the murder of the Innocents that Herod died. Only five days before his death he had made a frantic attempt at suicide, and had ordered the execution of his eldest son Antipater. His death-bed, which once more reminds us of Henry VIII., was accompanied by circumstances of peculiar horror, and it has been noticed that the loathsome disease[1] of which he died is hardly mentioned in history, except in the case of men who have been rendered infamous by the atrocity of persecuting zeal.[2] On his bed of intolerable anguish, in that splendid and luxurious palace which he had built for himself under the palms of Jericho, swollen with disease and scorched by thirst -- ulcerated externally and glowing inwardly with a "soft slow fire" -- surrounded by plotting sons and plundering slaves, detesting all and detested by all -- longing for death as a release from his tortures, yet dreading it as the beginning of worse terrors -- stung by remorse, yet still unslaked with murder -- a horror to all around him, yet in his guilty conscience a worse terror to himself -- devoured by the premature corruption of an anticipated grave -- eaten of worms as though visibly smitten by the finger of God's wrath, after seventy years of successful villany -- the wretched old man, whom men had called the Great, lay in savage frenzy awaiting his last hour.[3] As he knew that none would shed one tear for him, he determined that they should shed many for themselves, and issued an order that, under pain of death, the principal families in the kingdom and the chiefs of the tribes should come to Jericho. They came, and then, shutting them in the hippodrome, he secretly commanded his sister Salome that at the moment of his death they should all be massacred. And so, choking as were with blood, devising massacres in its very delirium, the soul of Herod passed forth into the night.

[1] The morbus pedicularis, or phthiriasis. See Lactantius, De Mortibus persecutorum, cap. xxxiii., where, describing the disease of Maximian in terms which would serve equally well to record what is told us of the death of Herod, he says, "Percussit eum Deus insanabili plagâ. Nascitur ei ulcus malum in inferiori parte genitalium, serpitque latius ... proxima quæque cancer invadit ... jam non longe pernicies aberat, et inferiora omnia corripuerat. Computrescunt forinsecus viscera, et in tabem sedes tota dilabitur ... Vermes intus creantur. Odor it autem non modo per palatium, sed totam pervadit civitatem."[1a] There is more and worse, which I spare the reader, especially since it is very doubtful whether there is such a disease as the morbus pedicularis -- There is a somewhat similar account of the deathbed of Henry VIII. in Forster's Essay on Popular Progress. "Now Herod died the worst kind of death, suffering punishment for the shed blood of the children," &c. (Hist. of Jos. the Carpenter, ix.) [1a] The purport of this passage is sufficiently indicated in the text. [2] E.g., Antiochus Epiphanes, Sylla, Maximian, Diocletian, Herod the Great, Herod Agrippa, the Duke of Alva, Henry VIII. &c. [3] The title first occurs in Jos. Antt. xviii. 5, § 4. He was beginning the thirty-eighth year of his

reign. It has been suggested that "the Great" is a mistaken rendering of אבר, "the elder." "Nur aus Missverständniss eines Hebräischen Ausdruckes;" cf. Έγκίας ό µέγας (Antt. xviii. 8, § 4). Ewald (Gesch. iv. 473) thinks that the name may possibly have originated from coins, as Agrippa I. is called βασιλεύς µέγας on a coin. In this case it may merely imply that he was not a mere tetrarch, or ethnarch, but a king of Palestine -- just as Indian princes call themselves Maharajah. In any case, "L'épithète de grand que l'histoire lui a donnée est une amère dérision: sa grandeur consistait à être un magnifique esclave, portant des chaînes d'or"[3a] (Munk, Palest., 560).

[3a] The epithet "Great" which history has given to him is a bitter derision; his greatness consisted in being a magnificent slave, bearing chains of gold.

In purple robes, with crown and sceptre and precious stones, the corpse was placed upon its splendid bier, and accompanied with military pomp and burning incense to its grave in the Herodium, not far from the place were Christ was born. But the spell of the Herodian dominion was broken, and the people saw how illusory had been its glittering fascination. The day of Herod's death was, as he had foreseen, observed as a festival. His will was disputed; his kingdom disintegrated; his last order was disobeyed; his sons died for the most part in infamy and exile; the curse of God was on his house, and though, by ten wives and many concubines, he seems to have had nine sons and five daughters, yet within a hundred years the family of the heirodoulos of Ascalon had perished by disease or violence, and there was no living descendant to perpetuate his name.[1]

[1] Antipater, father of Herod, is said to have been a hierodoulos or servitor in a temple of Apollo at Ascalon. Compare the rapid extinction of the sons of Philip the Fair.

If the intimation of Herod's death[1] was speedily given to Joseph, the stay in Egypt must have been too short to influence in any way the human development of our Lord. This may perhaps be the reason why St. Luke passes it over in silence.

[1] The plural τεθνκασι may be merely general, or it is perhaps a reference to Exod. iv. 19.

It seems to have been the first intention of Joseph to fix his home in Bethlehem. It was the city of his ancestors, and was hallowed by many beautiful and heroic associations. It would have been easy to find a living there by a trade which must almost anywhere have supplied the simple wants of a peasant family. It is true that an Oriental rarely leaves his home, but when he has been compelled by circumstances to do so, he finds it comparatively easy to settle elsewhere. Having once been summoned to Bethlehem, Joseph might find a powerful attraction in the vicinity of the little town of Jerusalem; and the more so since it had recently been the scene of such memorable circumstances. But, on his way, he was met by the news that Archelaus ruled in the room of his father Herod.[1] The people would only too gladly have got rid of the whole Idumæan race: at the worst they would have preferred Antipas to Archelaus. But Augustus had unexpectedly decided in favour of Archelaus, who, though younger than Antipas, was the heir nominated by the last will of his father and as though anxious to show that he was the true son of that father, Archelaus, even before his inheritance had been confirmed by Roman authority, "had," as Josephus[2] scornfully remarks, "given to his subjects a specimen of his future virtue, by ordering a slaughter of 3,000 of his own countrymen at the Temple." It was clear that under such a government there could bee neither hope nor safety; and Joseph, obedient once more to an intimation of God's will, seeking once more the original home of himself and Mary, "turned aside into the parts of Galilee,"[3] where, in remote obscurity, sheltered by poverty and insignificance, the Holy Family might live secure under the sway of another son of Herod -- the equally unscrupulous, but more indolent and indifferent Antipas.

[1] Matt. ii. 22. He was saluted "king" by the army, though he declined the title. Similarly Josephus gives the name of "kingdom" to the tetrarchy of Lysanias (B. J. ii. 11, § 5). The word βασιλεύει seems, however -- if taken quite strictly -- to show that the return from Egypt was very shortly after the flight thither; for it was only during a short time after his father's death that Archelaus strictly had the title of king (cf Jos. B. J. ii. 1, § 1). When he went to Rome for the confirmation of his title, Augustus only allowed him to be called ethnarch; but before this time his assumptions of royalty, by sitting on a golden throne, &c., were actually part of Antipater's charges against him, and at this period Josephus distinctly calls him the "king" (Antt. xvii. 9, § 2). It is remarkable how near the Evangelists often seem to be to an inaccuracy, while yet closer inspection shows them to be, in these very points, minutely accurate. [2] Antt. xvii. 11, § 2. Augustus afterwards banished him for his tyranny and insolence, and he died at Vienne in Gaul, AD 7 (id. 13, § 2).

[3] Matt. ii 22, άνεχώρησεν, not "returned," but "retired." The same word is used of the flight into Egypt (Matt. ii. 14). St. Luke (ii. 39) was either unaware of the flight into Egypt, or passed it over as having no bearing on his subject.
