THE HOME AT NAZARETH.

Αύξάνων κατά τό κοινόν άπάντωνάνθρώπων.[1]

-- JUST. MART. Dial. c. Tryph. 88.

[1] Growing in common with all men.

Such, then, is the "solitary floweret out of the wonderful enclosed garden of the thirty years, plucked precisely there where the swollen bud, at a distinctive crisis, bursts into flower."[1]

[1] Stier, i. 18.

But if of the first twelve years of His human life we have only this single anecdote, of the next eighteen years of His life we possess no record whatever save such as is implied in a single word.

That word occurs in Mark vi. 3: "Is not this the carpenter?"[1]

[1] it is, no doubt, on dogmatical grounds that this was altered into "the son of the carpenter" in the later MSS., though not in a single uncial. Some were offended that the Lord of All should have worked in the shop of a poor artisan; but how alien to the true spirit of Christianity is this feeling of offence! Origen, indeed, says (c. Cels. vi. 36) that nowhere in the Gospels is Jesus himself called a carpenter; but this is probably a mere slip of memory, or may only prove how eary the Christians grew ashamed of their Divine Master's condescensions, and how greatly they needed the lessons which it involves. That even "the carpenter's son" became a term of reproach among the Gentiles, is clear from the story of Libanius's question to a Christian during Julian's expedition into Persia, "What is the Carpenter's Son doing now?" The Christian answered, "He is making a coffin;" and soon came the news of Julian's death. The omission of Joseph's name in Mark vi. 3 has been universally accepted as an indication that he was dead; otherwise we might suppose that something contemptuous was intended by only mentioing the mother's name (see Ewald, Gram. Arabica, ii. 4, note). For this reference I am indebted to Mr. C. J. Monro.

We may be indeed thankful that the word remains, for it is full of meaning, and has exercised a very noble and blessed influence over the fortunes of mankind. It has tended to console and sanctify the estate of poverty; to ennoble the duty of labour; to elevate the entire conception of manhood, as of a condition which in itself alone, and apart from every adventitious circumstance, has its own grandeur and dignity in the sight of God.

[1] Arab. Gosp. Inf. xxxviii. Unfortunately, Pagan writers do not add one single fact to our knowledge of the life of Jesus (Tac. Ann. xv. 44; Plin. Epp. x. 97; Suet. Claud. 25; Lucian, De Mort. Peregr. 11; Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 29, 43). A few passages in the Vera Hist. or the Pseudo-Lucian are probably meant to ridicule Gospel narratives, and a few passages in the Life of Apollonius of Tyana by Philostratus, and the Life of Pythagoras by Jamblichus -- the "cloudy romances of Pagan sophists" -- are perhaps intended by way of parallel. Jewish writers are just as barren. Josephus and Justus of Tiberias passed over the subject with obvious and unworthy reticence. The Talmudists simply preserved or invented a few turbid and worthless calumnies.

[2] Philo, in Flac. 977 f.

[1] To the Greeks and Romans all mechanical trade was βάναυόος, i.e., mean, vulgar, contemptible, and was therefore left to slaves. The Jews, with a truer and nobler wisdom, enacted that every boy should learn a trade, and said with R. Juda b. Ilai, "the wise," that "labor honors the laborer." Saul was a tentmaker. Up to the age of forty, R. Johanan, son of Zakkai, afterwards president of the Sanhedrin, was, like Mahomet, a merchant; the Rabbis Juda and Menahem were bakers; R. Eliezer, supreme president of the schools of Alexandria, was a smith; R. Ismael, a needle-maker; R. Joza Ben Chalaphta, a tanner. (Sepp, § 19; Ginsburg, in Kitto's Cyclop., s. v. "Education"). The rabbis even assumed and rejoiced in the titles of R. Johanan, the shoemaker; R. Simon, the weaver, &c. Labor and learning were, in the eyes of the Rabbis, good antidotes against sinful thoughts (Pirke Abhôth, fol. 2, 2) -- Even the Rabbis, however, were not far enough advanced to honor labor without learning, and, as we shall see hereafter, they spoke contemptuously of uneducated artisans and common tillers of the soil (vid. infra, p. 92).

[2] Justin Mart. Dial c. Tryph. 88, τεκτονικά έργα είργάζετο έν άνθρώποις ών, άροτρα καί ζύγα, διά τουτων τά τής δικαιοσύνης σύµβολα διδάσκων καί ένεργή βίον[2a] (There is no necessity, with Neander, to translate ζύγα, "scales.") The supposed allusions to the trade of a carpenter in Matt. vi. 27; Luke xxiii. 31, &c., are obviously too vague to have any bearing on this question.

[2a] "He was in the habit of working as a carpenter when among men, making ploughs and yokes; by which he taught the symbols of righteousness and an active life." (Ante-Nic. Lib.)

"His place, in all the pomp that fills

The circuit of the summer hills,

Is that his grave is green."

[1] "Tu homo, TANTUM NOMEN, si intelligas te"[1a] (Tert. Apol. adv. Gent. xlviii.)

"We are greater than we know" -- Wordsworth.

[1a] "Thou, man, of nature so exalted, if thou understandest thyself" [2] If thou dost wish to be divine, lie hid as God [does].

contempt for the am ha-aretz ( ץראה םצ) or illiterate countryman. The stereotyped intelligence of the nation, accustomed, if I may use the expression, to that mummified form of a dead religion, which had been embalmed by the Oral Law, was incapable of appreciating the divine originality of a wisdom learnt from God alone. They could not get beyond the sententious error of the son of Sirach, that "the wisdom of the learned man cometh by opportunity of leisure."[3] Had Jesus received the slightest tincture of their technical training he would have been less, not more, effectually armed for putting to shame the supercilious exclusiveness of their narrow erudition.

[1] The Talmud certainly proves their later existence, and that the sopherîm and chazanîm of the synagogues acted as mikredardike -- i.e., mikrodidaktici, or private teachers of the young. But the chazzan of our Lord's day was in a much humbler position than was the case later. The regular foundation of schools for infants is said to have been due to Jesus the son of Gamaliel I. See the whole question examined by Winer, Realwörterb., s. v. Unterricht; Jost, Gesch. d. Volkes Israel, iii. 163; and Keim, Jesu, i. 428. On the familiarity of Jewish children with the Law, see Jos. Antt. iv. 8, § 12; Gfrörer, Jahrh d. Heils, i. 118. [2] Mark vi. 2; John vi. 42; vii. 15. The am ha-aretz, according to R. Eliezer, is one who does not say the Shema (Hear, O Israel) morning and evening. According to R. Joshua, one who wore no tephillîn (phylacteries): according to Ben Assai, one who did not wear tsîtsith (tassels); according to R. Nathan, one who had no mezuzah above his door; according to R. Nathan Ben Joseph, one who did not train his sons in the Law; but according to R. Hona the true Halachah ("rule") was with those who, even if they had read the Scriptures and the Mishna, had not attended the school of any Rabbi. (Bab. Berachôth, fol. 47, 6; v. infr., p. 324; Gfrörer, Jahrhund. d. Heils, i. 188.)

[3] Ecclus. xxxviii. 24. For the continuation of the passage, v. infra, p. 92.

[1] Jos. Antt. xv. 10, § 5. Sometimes an educated slave acted as home-tutor.

[2] םרב, "vineyard;" אררם, "array," and other similar names, were given by the Jews to their schools (Dr. Ginsburg, in Kitto's Cyclop. i. 728).

[3] For numerous monographs on all these theories, see Hase, Leben Jesu, p. 73. [4] Jos. B. J. ii. 8, § 3.

[5] Philo was probably born BC 20, and lived till about AD 50. As we know that he once visited Jerusalem, it is just possible (no more) that he may have seen Jesus. The tendency of his spiritualism was "to exalt knowledge in place of action; its home was in the cells of the recluse, and not in the field or the market; its truest disciples were visionary Therapeutæ, and not Apostles charged with a Gospel to the world." Alexandrianism "was the ideal of heathen religion and the negation of Christianity ... It suppressed the instincts of civil and domestic society which Christianity ennobled; it perpetuated the barriers which Christianity removed; it abandoned the conflict which Christianity carries out to victory." (Westcott, Introd., p. 77.) [6] We shall see hereafter that in all questions such as that respecting divorce, the decisions of Jesus were wholly different from those either of Hillel or of Shammai. Can it be regarded as certain that Hillel occupied among his contemporaries anything like the space which he occupies in tradition? Unless he be the same as Pollio (Antt. xv. 1, § 1; 10, § 4) -- which, to say the least, is very doubtful, for Pollio seems to be Abtalion who preceded Hillel -- Josephus does not even mention him, though there could be no possible reason, whether of timidity or of uncertainty, to pass over his name, as he passes over that of Jesus. I shall speak of the supposed relation of Jesus to Hillel in Excursus III., "Jesus and Hillel," and may refer to Ewald, Gesch. Christ. 28-39.

The education of a Jewish boy of the humbler classes was almost solely scriptural and moral,[1] and his parents were, as a rule, his sole teachers. We can hardly doubt that the child Jesus was taught by Joseph and Mary to read the Shema (Deut. vi. 4), and the Hallel (Ps. cxiv -- cxviii.), and the simpler parts of those holy books, on whose pages His divine wisdom was hereafter to pour such floods of lift.

[1] Exod. xii. 26; Deut. passim; Acts xxii. 3; 2 Tim. iii. 15. In Ecclus. xxxviii. 24 seqq., there is a striking contrast between the limited studies and opportunities of the poor and the range and leisure of the rich. "The wisdom of a learned man cometh by opportunity of leisure ... How can he get wisdom that holdeth the plough, ... that driveth oxen, ... and whose talk is of bullocks? ... So every carpenter and workmaster that laboreth night and day ... All these trust to their hands ... They shall not be sought for in public counsel, nor set high in the congregation, ... and they shall not be found where parables are spoken; ... but ... their desire is in the work of their craft."

But He had evidently received a further culture than this.

(i.) The art of writing is by no means commonly known, even in these days, in the East; but more than one allusion to the form of the Hebrew letters,[1] no less than the stooping to write with His finger on the ground,[2] show that our Lord could write.

[1] Matt. v. 18. Eusebius (H. E. i. 13) gives the spurious letter which Christ was asserted to have written (Cedrenus, Hist., p. 145, adds ίδαις χερσί[1a]) to Abgarus, King of Edessa. Cf. Arab. Gosp. Inf. xlviii.; Ps. Matth. xxxi.

[1a] with his own hands.

[2] John viii. 6 (in MS. U), τώ δακτύλω έγραφεν έκάστου αύτών τάς άµαρτίας.[2a] (See Hofmann, p. 309; Fabr. Cod. ap. N. T. i. 315; Wagenseil, ad Sot. p. 33.) The common use of the mezuzôth (Deut. vi. 9) and tephillîn hardly show that the art of writing was common. [2a] with his finger he wrote the sins of each one of them.

(ii.) That His knowledge of the sacred writings was deep and extensive -- that, in fact, He must almost have known them by heart -- is clear, not only from His direct quotations, but also from the numerous allusions which He made to the Law and to the Hagiographa, as well as to Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, Joel, Hosea, Micah, Zechariah, Malachi, and, above all, to the Book of Psalms.[1] It is probable, though not certain, that He was acquainted with the uncanonical Jewish books.[2] This profound and ready knowledge of the Scriptures gave more point to the half-indignant question, so often repeated, "Have ye not read?"

[1] These all occur in St. Matthew's Gospel.

[2] Cf. Matt. xi. 28 seq. with Ecclus. li. 26, &c., and Luke xiv. 28 with 2 Macc. li. 29, 30 (Keim, i. 455). Every respectable family possessed at least a portion of the sacred books. Prof. Plumptre (Christ and Christendom, p. 96) has observed that James "the Lord's brother" certainly makes allusions to the Apocrypha (cf. James i. 6, 8, 25 with Ecclus. vii. 10; i. 28; xiv. 23.)

(iii.) The language which our Lord commonly spoke was Aramaic; and at that period Hebrew was completely a dead language, known only to the more educated, and only to be acquired by labour; yet it is clear that Jesus was acquainted with it, for some of His scriptural quotations[1] directly refer to the Hebrew original. Greek, too, He must have known, for it was currently spoken in towns so near His home as Sepphoris, Cæarea, and Tiberias.[2] Meleager, the poet of the Greek anthology, in his epitaph on himself, assumes that his Greek will be intelligible to Syrians and Phœnicians: he also speaks of his native Gadara, which was at no great distance from Nazareth, as though it were a sort of Syrian Athens. Ever since the days of Alexander the Great, alike in the contact of the Jews with Ptolemies and with Seleucids, Hellenic influences had been at work in Palestine. Greek was, indeed, the common medium of intercourse, and without it Jesus could have had no conversation with strangers -- with the centurion, for instance, whose servant He healed, or with Pilate, or with the Greeks who desired an interview with Him in the last week of His life.[3] Some, too, of His scriptural quotations, if we can venture to assume a reproduction of the ipsissima verba,[4] are taken directly from the Greek version of the Septuagint, even where it differs from the Hebrew original.[5] Whether He was acquainted with Latin is much more doubtful, though not impossible. The Romans in Judæ must by this time have been very numerous, and Latin was inscribed upon the coins in ordinary use.[6] But to whatever extent He may have known these languages, it is clear that they exercised little or no influence on His human development, nor is there in all His teaching a single indisputable allusion to the literature, philosophy, or history of Greece or Rome.[7] And that Jesus habitually thought in that Syriac which was His native tongue may be conjectured, without improbability, from some curious plays on words which are lost in the Greek of the Gospels, but which would have given greater point and beauty to some of His utterances, as spoken in their original tongue.[8]

[1] Mark xii. 29, 30; Luke xxii. 37; Matt. xxvii. 46.

[2] The coinage of the Herods has Greek inscriptions (De Sauley, Hist. d'Herode, p. 385). The study of Greek was encouraged by some Rabbis; they said that the tallîth of Shem and the pallium of Japhet ought to be united (Midrash Rabba, Gen. xxxiv.). As a rule, however, they did not value the acquisition of languages (Jos. Antt. xx. 11, § 2); and the learning of Greek was absolutely forbidden during the Roman war (Sota, ix. 14).Gamaliel alone, of the Rabbis, permitted his scholars to study Greek literature (chochmath Javanith); and Rabbi Ismael said that Greek wisdom should only be taught at the hour which was neither day nor night, since the Law was to be studied day and night (Menachôth, 19 b). But see Excursus IV., "Greek Learning."

[3] Matt. viii. 6-9; xxvii. 11; John xii. 21.

[4] Of course we cannot assume this in all cases. χαλεπόν τήν άκρίβεταν αύτήν τών λεχθέντων διαµνηµονεΰσαι[4a] (Thuc. i. 22), and although the Holy Evangelists have been guided from above to reveal all that is essential to our salvation in the life of Christ, yet their variations show that they were not endowed with a verbal exactitude, which would have been at once supernatural and needless.

[4a] "It was hard to remember the exact words of what was said." [5] Matt. iv. 7; xiii. 14, 15.

[6] Matt. xxii. 19. Wernsdorf wrote a treatise De Christo Latine loquente. The Latin words, µόδιον , κοδράντην, λεγεών, &c., occur in our Lord's teaching. [7] It is surely very far-fetched to find, as some have done, a possible allusion to the death of Socrates in Mark xvi. 18. On the other hand, there is a (perhaps accidental) resemblance between the άγραφον δόγµα of our Lord preserved by St. Paul in Acts xx. 35, and the Epicurean maxim ήδιον τό εύ ποιείν τοΰ εΰ πάσ-χειν.[7a] (Cf. Athen. Deipnos. viii. 5; Arist. Eth. Nic. iv. 1.) J. F. Mayer wrote a pamphlet, Utrum Christus legerit Platonem vel Terentium?[7b] Hamb. 1701.

[7a] It is sweeter to do good than to receive good.

[7b] Whether Christ read Plato or Terence.

[8] See Winer, Realwörterb. ii. 501. s. v. Sprache; Glass, Philologia Sacra, p. 918, seq., "We

have piped unto you, and ye have not danced ( ןוּ ּח ְר ְק ַד, rakedtoon); we have mourned unto

you, and ye have not wept ( ןוּ ּח ְר ֵק ְר ַא, arkêdtoon);" other supposed instances are adduced in Heinsius's Aristarchus. The words, γολγοθά, ταλιθά, κΰµι, άββά, κήφας, &c., are all Aramaic (or, as it is called, Syro-Chaldee); as is the cry upon the cross, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani." The particular dialect of Galilee was marked by a change of gutturals, and a general πλατειασµός. (Lightfoot and Schöttgen, Hor. Hebr. in Matt. xxvi. 73.)

[1] Matt. xi. 16.

Nor must we lose sight of the fact that it was in these silent, unrecorded years that a great part of His work was done. He was not only "girding His sword upon His thigh," but also wielding it in that warfare which has no discharge.[1] That noiseless battle, in which no clash of weapons sounds, but in which the combatants against us are none the less terrible because they are not seen, went on though all the years of His redeeming obedience. In these years He "began to do" long before He "began to teach."[2] They were the years of a sinless childhood, a sinless boyhood, a sinless youth, a sinless manhood, spent in that humility, toil, obscurity, submission, contentment, prayer, to make them an eternal example to all our race. We cannot imitate Him in the occupations of His ministry, nor can we even remotely reproduce in our own experience the external circumstances of His life during those three crowning years. But the vast majority of us are placed, by God's own appointment, amid those quiet duties of a commonplace and uneventful routine which are most closely analogous to the thirty years of His retirement; it was during these years that His life is for us the main example of how we ought to live. "Take notice here," says the saintly Bonaventura, "that his doing nothing wonderful was in itself a kind of wonder. For His whole life is a mystery; and as there was power in His actions, so was there power in His silence, in His inactivity, and in His retirement. This sovereign Master, who was to teach all virtues, and to point out the way of life, began, from His youth up, by sanctifying in His own person the practice of the virtuous life He came to teach, but in a wondrous, unfathomable, and, till then, unheard-of manner."

[1] Ps. xlv. 3; Eccles. viii. 8.

[2] Acts i. 1. See further on this subject the note at the end of Chap. IX.

His mere presence in that home of His childhood must have made it a happy one. The hour of strife, the hour of the sword, the hour when many in Israel should rise or fall because of Him, the hour when the thoughts of many hearts should be revealed, the hour when the kingdom of heaven should suffer violence, and the violent take it by force, was not yet come. In any family circle the gentle influence of one loving soul is sufficient to breathe around it an unspeakable calm; it has a soothing power like the shining of the sunlight, or the voice of doves heard at evening

"It droppeth like the gentle dew from heaven,

Upon the place beneath."

Nothing vulgar, nothing tyrannous, nothing restless can permanently resist its beneficent sorcery; no jangling discord can long break in upon its harmonising spell. But the home of Jesus was no ordinary home. With Joseph to guide and support, with Mary to hallow and sweeten it, with the youthful Jesus to illuminate it with the very light of heaven, we may well believe that it was a home of trustful piety, of angelic purity, of almost perfect peace; a home for the sake of which all the earth would be dearer and more awful to the watchers and holy ones, and where, if the fancy be permitted us, they would love to stay their waving wings. The legends of early Christianity tell us that night and day, where Jesus moved and Jesus slept, the cloud of light shone round about Him. And so it was; but that light was no visible Shechînah; it was the beauty of holiness; it was the peace of God.

This passage, which I quote for the sake of the picture which it offers of the unity which prevailed in the home at Nazareth, reminds us of the perplexed question, Had our Lord any actual uterine brothers and sisters? and if not, who wee those who in the Gospels are so often called "the brethren of the Lord?" Whole volumes have been written on this controversy, and I shall not largely enter on it here, both because I do not wish these pages to be contoversial, and because I have treated it elsewhere.[1] The evidence is so evenly balanced, the difficulties of each opinion are so clear, that to insist very dogmatically on any positive solution of the problem would be uncandid and contentious. Some, in accordance certainly with the primâ facie evidence of the Gospels, have accepted the natural supposition that, after the miraculous conception of our Lord, Joseph and Mary lived together in the married state, and that James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon, with daughters, whose names are not recorded, were subsequently born to them. According to this view, Jesus would be the eldest, and on the death of Joseph, which, if we may follow tradition, took place when He was nineteen, would assume the natural headship and support of the orphaned family.[2] But according to another view, of which St. Jerome may be called the inventor, these brethren of our Lord were in reality His cousins. Mary, it is believed, had a sister or half-sister of the same name,[3] who was married to Alphæus or Clophas, and these were their children. Each person can form upon that evidence a decided conviction of his own, but it is too scanty to admit of any positive conclusion in which we may expect a general acquiescence. In any case, it is clear that our Lord, from His earliest infancy, must have been thrown into close connection with several kinsmen, or brothers, a little older or a little younger than Himself, who were men of marked individuality, of burning zeal, of a simplicity almost bordering on Essenic ascetism, of overpowering hostility to every form of corruption, disorder, or impurity, of strong devotion to the Messianic hopes, and even to the ritual observances of their country.[4] We know that, though afterwards they became pillars of the infant Church, at first they did not believe in our Lord's Divinity, or at any rate held views which ran strongly counter to the divine plan of His self-manifestation.[5] Not among these, in any case, did Jesus during His lifetime find His most faithful followers, or His most beloved companions. There seemed to be in them a certain strong opinionativeness, a Judaic obstinacy, a lack of sympathy, a deficiency in the elements of tenderness and reverence. Peter, affectionate even in his worst weakness, generous even in his least controlled impulse; James the son of Zebedee, calm and watchful, reticent and true; above all, John, whose impetuosity lay involved in a soul of the most heavenly tenderness, as the lightning slumbers in the dewdrop -- these were more to Him and dearer than His brethren or kinsmen according to the flesh. A hard aggressive morality is less beautiful than an absorbing and adoring love.[6]

[1] In Smith's Dict. of the Bible, s. v. "Brother." Certainly the Hieronymian and Epiphanian theories (see next note) are an afterthought, caused by a growing tendency to magnify the άειπαρθενια. This notion was partly due to the development of ascetic opinions, partly to a fantastic allegorical interpretation of Ezek. xliv. 2.

[2] So much, and so much that is most easily accessible, has been written on this point -- a point which is, after all, incapable of positive solution -- that it will be needless to enter elaborately upon it here, especially as Dr. Lightfoot, in an appendix to his edition of the Epistle to the Galatians, has treated it with his usual exhaustive learning and accuracy. Dismissing all minor and arbitrary combinations, there are three main views: (1) The Helvidian -- that the brethren of the Lord were the actual children of Joseph and Mary; (2) the Hieronymian -- that they were his first cousins, being sons of Mary and Alphæus; (3) the Epiphanian -- that they were the sons of Joseph by a former marriage. Of these three theories, the second -- that of St. Jerome -- is decidedly the most popular, and the one which has least to be said for it. It has not a particle of tradition before the time of St. Jerome in its favor, since the Papias, who is quoted as having held it, is, as Dr. Lightfoot shows, a writer of the eleventh century. Even St. Jerome, after his residence in Palestine, seems to have abandoned it; and it is perhaps sufficient to observe that, as it assumes three at least of these "brethren" to have been actual apostles, it is in flagrant contradiction to John vii. 5, to say nothing of the fact that it depends on a number of very dubious hypotheses. The Epiphanian theory seems to have been the tradition of Palestine, and is the one current in the Apocryphal Gospels (see Hofmann, Leben Jesu, 4); but I still believe that the Helvidian has an overwhelming preponderance of argument in its favor. The only two serious arguments against it are: (α) The fact that our Lord entrusted His mother to the care of St. John, not of her own children; but this is accounted for by their acknowledged want of sympathy with Him up to that time. It is true that the appearance of the risen Christ to James (1 Cor. xv. 7, see LIghtfoot ubi supr., p. 260) seems to have wholly converted them; but there may have been many reasons why Mary should still live with the Apostle to whom the Lord had entrusted her. (β) The fact that the names of the sons of Alphæus were identical with those of the Lord's brethren; but this argument loses all force from the extreme commonness of these names, which were as common among Jews as John and William among us. The genealogies of Joseph show, moreover, that they were in part family and ancestral names. The imagined necessity of the άειπαρθενια is no argument whatever, since it is abundantly clear that, had the Evangelists believed in the importance of such a view, or held the superior sacredness of celibacy over marriage, they would either have stated their belief, or would at any rate have abstained from language which, in its obvious and only natural significance, conveys the reverse notion. For undoubtedly the Helvidian view -- that they were actual sons of Joseph and Mary -- is most in accordance with the simple interpretation of the Gospel narratives. Not to dwell on the πρωτότοκος of Luke ii. 7, and the έως οί of Matt. i. 25, and the πρίν ή συνελθείν αύτούς of Matt. i. 18, we have (α) the fact that they are always called άδελφοί, never άνέψιοι or συγγενείς (a fact which appears to me to be alone decisive against the Hieronymian view, for reasons which I have given s. v. "Brother" in Smith's Dict. of the Bible); and (β) the fact that they are always found accompanying the Virgin (John ii. 13; Matt. xii. 46), and not their own (supposed) mother, without the slightest hint that they were not in reality her own children. To these I would add, as against the Epiphanian theory, that, had the "brethren" been elder sons of Joseph, Jesus would not have been regarded by any of His followers as legal heir to the throne of David (see not only Matt. i. 16; Luke i. 27; but also Rom. i. 3; 2 Tim. ii. 8; Rev. xxii. 16). [3] That two sisters should both have received the same name seems very improbable. The custom of the Herodian family would be little likely to prevail among the peasants of Nazareth. I have, however, discovered one modern instance of such a fact, and there are doubtless others.

[4] Especially Jude and James, if, as seems at least possible, they were "the Lord's brethren," and authors of the epistles which pass by their names, but were not actual apostles (see James i. 1; Jude 17).

[5] John vii. 3, 4; Mark iii. 21. Can there be any stronger evidence of the perfect simplicity and truthfulness of the Gospel evidence than the fact that they faithfully record what sceptics are pleased to consider so damaging an admission? It is exactly the reverse of what is said in the Apocr. Gospels, e.g. Apocr. Gosp. Matt. xliii.

[6] If, as Wieseler (Die Sohne Zebedäi, Vettern des Herrn., Stud. und Krit. 1840) with great probability supposes, there be any truth in the tradition (Nicephorus, Hist. Ecc. ii. 3) that Salome was the sister of Mary, delicately alluded to but unnamed in John xix. 25 (as compared with Matt. xxvii. 56; Mark xv. 40), then James and John the sons of Zebedee were actually first cousins of our Lord. In that case there would still be nothing surprising in their having first been disciples of the Baptist, for Mary and Elizabeth were related (Luke i. 36), and the ministry of John preceded that of Jesus. [Ewald even supposes that the Virgin was of the tribe of Levi, and connects with this not only the fact that Jesus wore a seamless coat (John xix. 23), but also the story (Polycrates in Euseb. Hist. Ecc. iii. 31, v. 24) that St. John in his old age wore the priestly πέταλον (Deut. xxxiii. 8) (see Gesch. Christ., p. 246). He accepts the conjecture and tradition that St. John was related to Jesus, id. p. 239.]

[1] Stanley, Sin. and Pal., p. 194.

[2] Neby Ismaîl.

[3] Now called El Buttauf.

[4] The present town of Safed is of much later date; but a city or fortress most probably existed there in our Lord's time.

[5] The epithet is so far accurate, that even in September snow would be found in the ravines and crevices of Hermon. (Report of Pal. Explor. Fund, 1870 p. 230.) [6] I describe the scene as I saw it on Easter Sunday, April 17, 1870.

The scene which lay there outspread before the eyes of the youthful Jesus was indeed a central spot in the world which He came to save. It was in the heart of the Land of Israel, and yet -- separated from it only by a narrow boundary of hills and streams -- Phœnicia, Syria, Arabia, Babylonia, and Egypt lay close at hand. The Isles of the Gentiles, and all the glorious regions of Europe, were almost visible over the shining waters of that Western sea. The standards of Rome were planted on the plain before Him; the language of Greece was spoken in the towns below. And however peaceful it then might look, green as a pavement of emeralds, rich with its gleams of vivid sunlight, and the purpling shadows which floated over it from the clouds of the latter rain, it had been for centuries a battle-field of nations. Pharaohs and Ptolemies, Emîrs and Arsacids, Judges and Consuls, had all contended for the mastery of that smiling tract. It had glittered with the lances of the Amalekites; it had trembled under the chariot-wheels of Sesostris; it had echoes the twanging bow-strings of Sennacherib; it had been trodden by the phalanxes of Macedonia; it had clashed with the broadswords of Rome; it was destined hereafter to ring with the battle-cry of the Crusaders, and thunder with the artillery of England and of France. In that Plain of Jezreel, Europe and Asia, Judaism and Heathenism, Barbarism and Civilisation, the Old and the New Covenant, the history of the past and the hopes of the present, seemed all to meet. No scene of deeper significance for the destinies of humanity could possibly have arrested the youthful Saviour's gaze.
