THE BAPTISM OF JOHN.

"John than which man a sadder or a greater

Not till this day has been of woman born;

John like some iron peak by the Creator

Fired with the red glow of the rushing morn."

-- MYERS.

Thus then His boyhood, and youth, and early manhood had passed away in humble submission and holy silence, and Jesus was now thirty years old.[1] That deep lesson for all classes of men in every age, which was involved in the long toil and obscurity of those thirty years, had been taught more powerfully than mere words could teach it, and the hour for His ministry and for the great work of His redemption had now arrived. He was to be the Saviour not only by example, but also by revelation, and by death.

[1] On the elaborate chronological data for the commencement of the Baptist's ministry given by St. Luke (iii. 1, 2), see Excursus I., "Date of Christ's Birth."

And already there had begun to ring that Voice in the Wilderness which was stirring the inmost heart of the nation with its cry, "Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand."

It was an age of transition, of uncertainty, of doubt. In the growth of general corruption, in the wreck of sacred institutions, in those dense clouds which were gathering more and more darkly on the political horizon, it must have seemed to many a pious Jew as if the fountains of the great deep were again being broken up. Already the sceptre had departed from his race; already its high-priesthood was contemptuously tampered with by Idumæan tetrarchs or Roman procurators; already the chief influence over his degraded Sanhedrin was in the hands of supple Herodians or wily Sadducees. It seemed as if nothing were left for his consolation but an increased fidelity to Mosaic institutions, and a deepening intensity of Messianic hopes. At an epoch so troubled, and so restless -- when old things were rapidly passing away, and the new continued unrevealed -- it might almost seem excusable for a Pharisee to watch for every opportunity of revolution; and still more excusable for an Essene to embrace a life of celibacy, and retire from the society of man. There was a general expectation of that "wrath to come," which was to be the birth-throe of the coming kingdom -- the darkness deepest before the dawn.[1] The world had grown old, and the dotage of its paganism was marked by hideous excesses. Atheism in belief was followed, as among nations if has always been, by degradation of morals. Iniquity seemed to have run its course to the very farthest goal. Philosophy had abrogated its boasted functions except for the favoured few. Crime was universal, and there was no known remedy for the horror and ruin which it was causing in a thousand hearts. Remorse itself seemed to be exhausted, so that men were "past feeling."[2] There was a callosity of heart, a petrifying of the moral sense, which even those who suffered from it felt to be abnormal and portentous.[3] Even the heathen world felt that "the fulness of the time" had come.

[1] Mal. iii. 1; iv. 2. The έκκόπτεται and βάλλεται of Mat. iii. 10 are the so-called praesens futurascens -- i.e., they imply that the fiat had gone forth; that the law had already begun to work; that the doom was now in course of accomplishment. Probably the words "kingdom of heaven" (malkûth shamajîm) and "coming time" (olam ha-ba) were frequent at this time on pious lips; but the Zealots were expecting a warrior as Messiah; and the school of Shammai a legalist; and the Essenes an ascetic; and the philosophic schools some divine vision (Philo, De Execratt. ii. 435; Grätz, Gesch. d. Juden, iii. 218). It has been impossible for me here to enter into the vast literature about the Messianic conception prevalent at the time of our Lord; but it seems clear that Ewald, Hilgenfeld, Keim (as against Volkmar, &c.) are right in believing that there was at this time a fully-developed Messianic tradition. The decision depends mainly on the date of various Apocryphal writings -- the Book of Enoch, the Fourth Book of Esdras, the Ascension of Moses, the Psalms of Solomon, the third book of the the Sibylline prophecies, &c. See especially Hilgenfeld's Messias Judaeorum. He certainly proves that the 2nd Psalm of Solomon was written about BC 48.

[2] πάν εϊδος κακιας διεξελθοΰσα ή φύσις ή άνθρωπίνη έδεϊτο θεραπείς[2a] (Theophyl.); Eph. iv. 19, άπηλγηκότες.[2b] I have slightly sketched the characteristics of this age in Seekers after God, pp. 36-53; a powerful picture of its frightful enormities may be seen in Renan, L'Antechrist, or Döllinger, The Jew and the Gentile. It were better to know nothing of it, than to seek a notion of its condition in the pages of Juvenal, Martial, Suetonius, Apuleius, and Petronius. Even in the case of Dr. Döllinger's book, one cannot but feel that he might have attended to the noble rule of Tacitus, "Scelera ostendi oportet dum puniuntur, abscondi flagitia"[2c] (Tac. Germ. 12). Too much of what has been written on the abysmal degradations of a decadent Paganism resembles the Pharos lights which sometimes caused the shipwreck of those whom they were meant to save. There are some things which, as a Church Father says of the ancient pantomimes, "ne accusari quidem possunt honeste."[2d] [2a] Human nature, having passed through every form of vice, stood in need of care. [2b] "being past feeling."

[2c] "villainy should be exposed while it is punished, but turpitude concealed." [2d] Cannot with propriety be even arraigned in public. [3] πώρωσις τής καρδίας[3a] (Eph. iv. 17-19). άπολίθωσις[3b] (Epict. Diss. i. 53) [3a] hardness of the heart.

[3b] petrifaction.

At such periods the impulse to an ascetic seclusion becomes very strong. Solitary communion with God amid the wildest scenes of nature seems preferable to the harassing speculations of a dispirited society. Self-dependence, and subsistence upon the very scantiest resources which can supply the merest necessities of life, are more attractive than the fretting anxieties and corroding misery of a crushed and struggling poverty. The wildness and silence of indifferent Nature appear at such times to offer a delightful refuge from the noise, the meanness, and the malignity of men. Banus, the Pharisee, who retired into the wilderness, and lived much as the hermits of the Thebaid lived in after years, was only one of many who were actuated by these convictions. Josephus, who for three years[1] had lived with him in his mountain-caves, describes his stern self-mortifications and hardy life, his clothing of woven leaves, his food of the chance roots which he could gather from the soil, and his daily and nightly plunge in the cold water, that his body might be clean and his heart pure.

[1] Joseph. Vit. 2, if the reading παρ' αύτώ and not παρ' αυτοϊς be right.

But asceticism may spring from very different motives. It may result from the arrogance of the cynic who wishes to stand apart from all men; or from the disgusted satiety of the epicurean who would fain find a refuge even from himself; or from the selfish terror of the fanatic, intent only on his own salvation. Far different and far nobler was the hard simplicity and noble self-denial of the Baptist. It is by no idle fancy that the mediaeval painters represent him as emaciated by a proleptic asceticism.[1] The tendency to the life of a recluse had shown itself in the youthful Nazarite from his earliest years; but in him it resulted from the consciousness of a glorious mission -- it was from the desire to fulfil a destiny inspired by burning hopes. St. John was a dweller in the wilderness, only that he might thereby become the prophet of the Highest. The light which was within him should be kindled, if need be, into a self-consuming flame, not for his own glory, but that it might illuminate the pathway of the coming King.

[1] As, for instance, in a fine picture by Sandro Botticelli in the Borghees Palace at Rome. Compare the early life of St. Benedict of Nursia.

The nature of St. John the Baptist was full of impetuosity and fire. The long struggle which had given him so powerful a mastery over himself -- which had made him content with self-obliteration before the presence of his Lord -- which had inspired him with fearlessness in the face of danger, and humility in the midst of applause -- had left its traces in the stern character, and aspect, and teaching of the man. If he had won peace in the long prayer and penitence of his life in the wilderness, it was not the spontaneous peace of a placid and holy soul. The victory he had won was still encumbered with traces of the battle; the calm he had attained still echoed with the distant mutter of the storm. His very teaching reflected the imagery of the wilderness -- the rock, the serpent, the barren tree. "In his manifestation and agency," it has been said, "he was like a burning torch; his public life was quite an earthquake -- the whole man was a sermon; he might well call himself a voice -- the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord."[1]

[1] Lange, ii., p. 11, E. Tr.

While he was musing the fire burned, and at the last he spake with his tongue. Almost from boyhood he had been a voluntary eremite. In solitude he had learnt things unspeakable; there the unseen world had become to him a reality; there his spirit had caught "a touch of phantasy and flame." Communing with his own great lonely heart -- communing with the high thoughts of that long line of prophets, his predecessors, to a rebellious people -- communing with the utterances that came to him from the voices of the mountain and the sea -- he had learnt a deeper lore than he could have ever learnt at Hillel's or Shammai's feet. In the tropic noonday of the deep Jordan valley, where the air seems to be full of a subtle and quivering flame -- in listening to the howl of the wild beasts in the long night, under the lustre of stars "that seemed to hang like balls of fire in a purple sky" -- in wandering by the sluggish cobalt-coloured waters of that dead and accursed lake, until before his eyes, dazzled by the saline efflorescence of the shore strewn with its wrecks of death, the ghosts of the guilty seemed to start out of the sulphurous ashes under which they were submerged -- he had learnt a language, he had received a revelation, not vouchsafed to ordinary men -- attained, not in the schools of the Rabbis, but in the school of solitude, in the school of God.[1]

[1] The Jews of that day had but little sense of the truth expressed by the very greatest of Greek thinkers, Herakleitos, πολύµαθίη νόον ού διδάσκει.[1a] "Dass aber Jesu auch innerlich der Hohen Schule jener Zeit nicht bedurfte," says Ewald, "zeigt uns nur umso deutlicher welcher Geist von anfang an in Ihm waltete"[1b] (Gesch. Christ., p. 250. The remarks which follow are also worthy of profound study).

[1a] Overlearning does not train the spirit. [1b] But the fact that Jesus likewise did not subjectively stand in need of the higher learning of that time, shows to us only so much the more clearly what a spririt ruled in him from the beginning.

Such teachers are suited for such times. There was enough and to spare of those respectable, conventional teachers, who spake smooth things and prophesied deceits. The ordinary Scribe or Pharisee, sleek with good living and supercilious with general respect, might get up in the synagogue, with his broad phylacteries and luxurious robes, and might, perhaps, minister to some sleepy edification with his midrash of hair-splitting puerilities and threadbare precedents; but the very aspect of John the Baptist would have shown that there was another style of teacher here. Even before the first vibrating tone of a voice that rang with scorn and indignation, the bronzed countenance, the unshorn locks, the close-pressed lips, the leathern girdle, the mantle of camel's hair,[1] would at once betoken that here at last was a man who was a man indeed in all his natural grandeur and dauntless force, and who, like the rough Bedawy prophet who was his antitype, would stand unquailing before purple Ahabs and adulterous Jezebels. And then his life was known. It was known that his drink was water of the river, and that he lived on locusts[2] and wild honey.[3] Men felt in him that power of mastery which is always granted to perfect self-denial. He who is superior to the common ambitions of man is superior also to their common timidities. If he have little to hope from the favour of his fellows he has little to fear from their dislike; with nothing to gain from the administration of servile flattery, he has nothing to lose by the expression of just rebuke. He sits as it were above his brethren, on a sunlit eminence of peace and purity, unblinded by the petty mists that dim their vision, untroubled by the petty influences that disturb their life.

[1] Cf. 2 Kings i. 8; Zech. xiii. 4; Heb. xi. 37.

[2] Lev. xi. 22; Plin. ii. 29. The fancy that it means the pods of the so-called locust-tree (carob) is a mistake. Locusts are sold as articles of food in regular shops for the purpose at Medina, they are plunged into salt boiling water, dried in the sun, and eaten with butter, but only by the poorest beggars. Most Bedawîn speak of eating them with digust and loathing (Thomson, Land and Book, II. xxviii.).

[3] 1 Sam. xiv. 25; Ps. lxxxi. 16.

No wonder that such a man at once made himself felt as a power in the midst of his people. It became widely rumoured that, in the wilderness of Judæa, lived one whose burning words it was worth while to hear; one who recalled Isaiah by his expressions,[1] Elijah by his life. A Tiberius was polluting by his infamies the throne of the Empire; a Pontius Pilate, with his insolences, cruelties, extortions, massacres, was maddening a fanatic people;[2] Herod Antipas was exhibiting to facile learners the example of calculated apostacy and reckless lust; Caiaphas and Annas were dividing the functions of the priesthood which they disgraced. Yet the talk of the new Prophet was not of political circumstance such as these: the lessons he had to teach were deeper and more universal in their moral and social significance. Whatever might be the class who flocked to his stern solitude, his teaching was intensely practical, painfully heart-searching, fearlessly downright. And so Pharisee and Sadducee, scribe and soldier, priest and publican, all thronged to listen to his words.[3] The place where he preached was that wild range of uncultivated and untenanted wilderness, which stretches southward from Jericho and the fords of Jordan to the shores of the Dead Sea. The cliffs that overhung the narrow defile which led from Jerusalem to Jericho were the haunt of dangerous robbers; the wild beasts and the crocodiles were not yet extinct in the reed-beds that marked the swellings of Jordan; yet from every quarter of the country -- from priestly Hebron, from holy Jerusalem, from smiling Galilee -- they came streaming forth,[4] to catch the accents of this strange voice. And the words of that voice were like a hammer to dash in pieces the flintiest heart, like a flame to pierce into the most hidden thoughts. Without a shadow of euphemism, without an accent of subservience, without a tremor of hesitation, he rebuked the tax-gatherers for their extortionateness; the soldiers for their violence, unfairness, and discontent;[5] the wealthy Sadducees, and stately Pharisees, for a formalism and falsity which made them vipers of a viperous brood.[6] The whole people he warned that their cherished privileges were worse than valueless if, without repentance, they regarded them as a protection against the wrath to come. They prided themselves upon their high descent; but God, as He had created Adam out of the earth, so even out of these flints upon the strand of Jordan was able to raise up children unto Abraham.[7] They listened with accusing consciences and stricken hearts; and since he had chose baptism as his symbol of their penitence and purification, "they were baptised of him in Jordan, confessing their sins." Even those who did not submit to his baptism were yet "willing for a season to rejoice in his light."

[1] Compare Isa. lix. 5 with Matt. iii. 7; Isa. iv. 4 and xliv. 3 with Matt. iii. 11; Isa. xl. 3 with Luke iii. 4; Isa. lii. 10 with Luke iii. 6, &c.

[2] Τάς δωροδοκίας, τάς ϋβρεις, τάς άρπαγάς, τάς αίκίας, τάς έπηρείας, τους άκρίτους καί έπαλλήλους φόνους, τήν άνήνυτον καί ά ργαλεωτάτην ώµότητα, κ. τ. λ.[2a] (Philo, Leg. 1033.) [2a] "In respect of his corruption, and his acts of insolence, and his rapine, and his habit of insulting people, and his cruelty, and his continual murders of his people untried and uncondemned, and his never-ending, and gratuitous, and most grievous inhumanity." (Yonge's tr. in Bohn's Eccl. Lib.)

[3] But the Pharisees "were not baptized of him" (Luke vii. 30). St. John expresses the frankest and most contemptuous amazement at their presence (Matt. iii. 7). And their brief willingness to listen was soon followed by the violent and summary judgment, "He hath a devil" (Matt. xi. 18). This was not the only age in which such a remark has served as an angry and self-deceiving synonym for "we cannot and will not accept his words." [4] Matt. iii. 5, έξεπορεύετο.

[5] στρατευόµενι (Luke iii. 14) means "soldiers on the march;" what the occasion was we do not know.

[6] "Offspring of vipers," "Serpentes e serpentibus" (Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr., in Matt. iii. 7). Cf. Ps. lviii. 4; Isa. xiv. 29.

[7] Cf. John viii. 33; Rom. ii. 28; iv. 16; ix. 6. Comp. Jer. vii. 4. µή άρξησθε λέγειν έν έαυτοϊς (Luke iii. 8), "do not even for a moment begin to imagine." "Omnem excusationis etiam conatum præcidit." [7a] (Bengel).

[7a] "He cuts off by anticipation every even attempt at self-excuse."

But he had another and stranger message -- a message sterner, yet more hopeful -- to deliver; for himself he would claim no authority, save as the forerunner of another; for his own baptism no value, save as an initiation into the kingdom that was at hand.[1] When the deputation from the Sanhedrin asked him who he was -- when all the people were musing in their hearts whether he were the Christ or no -- he never for a moment hesitated to say that he was not the Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet.[2] He was "a voice in the wilderness," and nothing more; but after him -- and this was the announcement that stirred most powerfully the hearts of men -- after he was coming One who was preferred before him, for He was before him[3] -- One whose shoe's latchet he was unworthy to unloose[4] -- One who should baptise, not with water, but with the Holy Ghost, and with fire[5] -- One whose fan was in His hand, and who should thoroughly purge His floor -- who should gather his wheat into the garner, but burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. The hour for the sudden coming of their long-promised, long-expected Messiah was at hand. His awful presence was near them, was among them, but they knew Him not.

[1] It was, as Olshausen says, "a baptism of repentance," not "a laver of regeneration" (Titus iii. 5).

[2] i.e., one of the great prophets like Jeremiah (cf. 2 Macc. ii. 7), whose return was expected as a precursor of the Messiah, and who was especially alluded to in Dent. xviii. 15, 18; Acts iii. 22; vii. 37.

[3] The πρώτός µου of John i. 30 means something more than merely έµπροσθέν µου, viz., "long before me." (See Ewald, Gesch. Christus, p. 232.) [4] Or, "to carry his shoes" (Matt. iii. 11). Both were servile functions. [5] The most immediate and obvious interpretation of these words is to be found in Acts ii. 3; but there may also be a reference to fiery trials (Luke xii. 49; 1 Pet. i. 7) and fiery judgments (1 Cor. iii. 13).

Thus repentance and the kingdom of heaven were the two cardinal points of his preaching, and though he did not claim the credentials of a single miracle,[1] yet while he threatened detection to the hypocrite and destruction to the hardened, he promised also pardon to the penitent and admission into the kingdom of heaven to the pure and clean. "The two great utterances," it has been said, "which he brings from the desert, contain the two capital revelations to which all the preparation of the Gospel has been tending. Law and prophecy; denunciation of sin and promise of pardon; the flame which consumes and the light which consoles -- is not this the whole of the covenant?"

[1] This should be noted as a most powerful argument of the Gospel truthfulness. If, as the schools of modern rationalists argue, the miracles be mere myths woven into a circle of imaginative legends devised to glorify the Founder of Christianity, why was no miracle attributed to St. John? Not certainly from any deficient sense of his greatness, nor from any disinclination to accept miraculous evidence. Surely if it were so easy and so natural as has been assumed to weave a garland of myth and miracle round the brow of a great teacher, John was conspicuously worthy of such an honor. Why then? because "John did no miracles," and because the Evangelists speak the words of soberness and truth.

To this preaching, to this baptism, in the thirtieth year of His age,[1] came Jesus of Galilee. John was his kinsman by birth,[2] but the circumstances of their life had entirely separated them. John, as a child in the house of the blameless priest his father, had lived at Juttah, in the far south of the tribe of Judah, and not far from Hebron;[3] Jesus lived in the deep seclusion of the carpenter's shop in the valley of Galilee. When He first came to the banks of the Jordan, the great forerunner, according to his own emphatic and twice repeated testimony, "knew Him not." And yet, though Jesus was not yet revealed as the Messiah to His great herald-prophet, there was something in His look, something in the sinless beauty of His ways, something in the solemn majesty of His aspect, which at once overawed and captivated the soul of John. To others he was the uncompromising prophet; kings he could confront with rebuke; Pharisees he could unmask with indignation; but before this Presence all his lofty bearing falls. As when some unknown dread checks the flight of the eagle, and makes him settle with hushed scream and drooping plumage on the ground, so before "the royalty of inward happiness," before the purity of sinless life, the wild prophet of the desert becomes like a submissive and timid child.[4] The battle-brunt which legionaries could not daunt -- the lofty manhood before which hierarchs trembled and princes grew pale -- resigns itself, submits, adores before a moral force which is weak in every external attribute and armed only in an invisible mail. John bowed to the simple stainless manhood before he had been inspired to recognise the Divine commission. He earnestly tried to forbid the purposes of Jesus.[5] He who had received the confessions of all others, now reverently and humbly makes his own, "I have need to be baptised of Thee, and comest Thou to me?"[6]

[1] The arguments in favor of our Lord's having been fifty years of age, although adopted by Irenæus (Adv. Haer. ii. 22), partly apparently from tradition, partly on fanciful grounds, and partly by mistaken inference from John viii. 57, are wholly insufficient to outweigh the distinct statement by St. Luke, and the manifold probabilities of the case. [2] The relationship between Mary and Elisabeth does not prove that Mary was of the tribe of Levi, since intermarriage between the tribes was freely permitted (2 Chron. xxii. 11). [3] On Juttah, see Luke i. 39, where the reading Ίούτα (first suggested by Reland, Pal. p. 870), though unconfirmed by any existing MS., is not impossible (Josh. xv. 55); it was a priestly city (id. xxi. 16).

[4] Stier beautifully says, "He has baptized many; has seen, and in some sense seen through men of all kinds; but no one like this had as yet come before him. They have all bowed down before him; but before this Man bows down, in the irrepressible emotion of his own most profound contrition, the sinful man in the greatest prophet." (Reden Jesu i. 28.) [5] Matt. iii. 14, διεκώλυεν.

[6] "Tu ad me? aurum ad lutum? ad scintillam fax? ad lucernam sol? ad servum Filius? ad peccatorem Angus sine maculâ?"[6a] (Lucas Brugensis.) [6a] Thou to me? the gold to the mud? the torch to the spark? the sun to the lamp? the Son to the slave? the Lamb without spot to the sinner?

The answer contains the second recorded utterance of Jesus, and the first word of his public ministry -- "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness."

"I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean."[1] -- such seems to have been the burden of John's message to the sinners who had become sincerely penitent.

[1] Ezek. xxxvi. 25.

But, if so, why did our Lord receive baptism at His servant's hands? His own words tell us; it was to fulfil every requirement to which God's will might seem to point (Ps. xl. 7, 8). He did not accept it as subsequent to a confession, for He was sinless; and in this respect, even before he recognised Him as the Christ, the Baptist clearly implied that the rite would be in His case exceptional.[1] But he received it a ratifying the mission of His great forerunner -- the last and greatest child of the Old Dispensation, the earliest herald of the New; and He also received it as the beautiful symbol of moral purification, and the humble inauguration of a ministry which came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfil. His own words obviate all possibility of misconception. He does not say, "I must," but "Thus it becometh us.' He does not say, "I have need to be baptised;" nor does He say, "Thou hast no need to be baptised of me," but He says, "Suffer it to be so now." This is, indeed, but the baptism of repentance; yet it may serve to prefigure the "laver of regeneration."[2]

[1] ϊνα τό ϋδωρ καθαρίση[1a] (Ignat. Eph. 18). "Baptisatur Christus non ut purificetur aquis, sed ut aquas ipse sanctificet"[1b] (Maxim, Serm. 7 de Epiphan.). "In baptismo non tam lavit aqua quam lota est, purgantur potius fluenta quam purgant"[1c] (Aug. Serm. 135, 4; Hofmann, p. 166).

[1a] that the water may be purified.

[1b] Christ is baptized not that he may be purified by the water, but that he may himself sanctify the water.

[1c] In baptism the water does not so much wash as be washed; the streams are cleansed rather than cleanse.

[2] πάσαν δικαιοσύνην (Matt. iii. 15) has been sometimes taken to mean "every observance" (cf. vi. 1). Others, as Schenkel, have supposed that He submitted to baptism as it were vicariously -- i.e., as the representative of a guilty people. Others, again (as Lange), say that the act was solidary in its character -- that "social righteousness drew Him down into the stream;" i.e., that according to the Old Testament legistation, His baptism was required because He was, as it were, ceremonially unclean, as representing an unclean people. Compare the remark of Cato, "Scito dominum pro totâ familiâ rem divinam facere"[2a] (De Re Rusticâ, 143). Justin Martyr held this view, ούχ ώς ένδεά ... άλλ' ύπέρ τοΰ γένους τοΰ τών άνθρώπων[2b] (Dial. c. Tryph. 88). And so, too, the antiphon of the Benedictus in the Romish office for the Epiphany: "This day the Church is united to her heavenly Spouse, for in Jordan Christ has washed away her sins." St. Bernard and St. Bonaventura (and perhaps in myriads of instances the profound intuition of a saint may give a view far more true and lofty than the minute criticism of a theologian) mainly see in the act its deep humility. "Thus lacing the confirmation of perfect righteousness in the perfection of humility." (St. Bern. Serm. 47 in Cant.; St. Bonavent. Vita Christi, cap. xiii.)

[2a] Know that the master of the house performs divine worship in behalf of the whole household.

[2b] "not because he needed such things... but because of the human race."

So Jesus descended into the waters of Jordan, and there the awful sign was given that this was indeed "He that should come." From the cloven[1] heaven streamed the Spirit of God in a dovelike radiance that seemed to hover over His head in lambent flame,[2] and the Bath Kôl,[3] which to the dull unpurged ear was but an inarticulate thunder, spake in the voice of God to the ears of John -- "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

[1] εϊδε σχιζοµένους τούς ούρανούς (Mark i. 10). The whole context seems to show that Theodoret and Jerome were right in supposing that this was a πενυµατική θεωρία -- a sight seen, "non reseratione elementorum, sed spiritualibus oculis."[1a] [1a] Not by a rending asunder of the elements, but by spiritual vision. [2] "Spiritus Jesu, spiritus columbinus"[2a] (Bacon, Meditt. Sacr.). Some ancient Christian mystics explained the appearance by Gematria, because περιστερά= 801= ΑΩ. We need not necessarily suppose an actual dove, as is clear from John i. 32; the expression in the three Gospels is ώσεί περιστεράν, though St. Luke adds σωµατικώ εϊδει. Compare Targum, Cant. ii. 12, "Vox turturis vox spiritus sancti;"[2b] and 2 Esdras v. 26; 1 Macc. i. 2; and Milton's with mighty wings outspread, Dovelike, sat'st brooding on the vast abyss" (Par. Lost, i. 20). In the tract Chagigah, we find, "The Spirit of God moved on the face of the waters like a dove" (Gen. i. 2).

[2a] The spirit of Jesus is the spirit of the dove.

[2b] The voice of the turtle-dove is the voice of the holy spirit. [3] On the Bath Kôl, see Gfrörer, Jahrh. d. Heils, i. 253, seqq.; Otho, Lex. Rabb. s. v. The term was sometimes applied to voices from heaven, sometimes to sounds repeated by natural echo, sometimes to chance words overruled to providential significance (Etheridge, Hebr., Literat., p. 39). The Apocryphal Gospels add that a fire was kindled in Jordan (J. Mart. c. Tryph. 88; Hofmann, p. 299).
