THE TEMPTATION.

"Ideo tentatus est Christus, ne vincatur a Tentatore christianus."[1]

-- AUG in Ps. lx.

[1] Christ was so tempted in order that the Christian might not be overcome by the Tempter.

His human spirit filled with overpowering emotions, Jesus sought for retirement, to be alone with God, and once more to think over His mighty work. From the waters of Jordan He was led -- according to the more intense and picturesque expression of St. Mark, He was "driven" -- by the Spirit into the wilderness.[1]

[1] Cf. Rom. viii. 14; Ezek. iii. 14; Mark i. 12, τό ΙΙνεΰµα έκβάλλει άύτόν είς την έρηµον. St. John, perhaps, among other reasons which are unknown to us, from his general desire to narrate nothing of which he had not been an eyewitness, omits the narrative of the temptatin, which clearly followed immediately after the baptism. Unless a charge of dishonestly be deliberately maintained, and an adequate reason for such dishonesty assigned, it is clearly unfair to say that a fact is wilfully suppressed simply because it is not narrated. It seems probable that on the last day of the temptation came the deputation to John from the priests and Levites, and on the following day Christ returned from the desert, and was saluted by the Baptist as the Lamb of God.

A tradition, said to be no older than the time of the Crusades, fixes the scene of the temptation at a mountain to the south of Jericho, which from this circumstance has received the name of Quarantania. Naked and arid like a mountain of malediction, rising precipitously from a scorched and desert plain, and looking over the sluggish, bituminous waters of the Sodomitic sea -- thus offering a sharp contrast to the smiling softness of the Mountain of Beatitudes and the limpid crystal of the Lake of Gennesareth -- imagination has seen in it a fit place to be the haunt of evil influences[1] -- a place where, in the language of the prophets, the owls dwell and the satyrs dance.

[1] Bab. Erubhín, f. 19, 1 a; Isa. xiii. 21, 22; xxxiv. 14. The Rabbis said that there were three mouths of Gehenna -- in the Desert (Numb. xvi. 33), in the sea (Jonah ii. 3), and at Jerusalem (Isa. xxxi. 9). Cf. 4 Macc. xviii., ού διέφθειρέ µε λυµέών έρηµίας, φθορέύς έν πεδίω.[1a] Azazel (Lev. xvi. 10, Heb.) was a demon of "dry places" (cf. Matt. xii. 48). (Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr.; Keim, i. 638.) -- Milton's description (Par. Reg. iii. 242), probably derived from some authentic source, "would almost seem to have been penned on the spot." (Porter, Palestine, i. 185.)

[1a] No destroyer of the desert [or] ravisher of the plain injured me."

And here Jesus, according to that graphic and pathetic touch of the second Evangelist, "was with the wild beasts." They did not harm him. "Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet." So had the voice of olden promise spoken;[1] and in Christ, as in so many of His children, the promise was fulfilled. Those whose timid faith shrinks from all semblance of the miraculous, need find nothing to alarm them here. It is not a natural thing that the wild creatures should attack with ferocity, or fly in terror from, their master man. A poet has sung of a tropical isle that --

"Nor save for pity was it hard to take

The helpless life, so wild that it was tame."[2]

The terror or the fury of animals, though continued by hereditary instinct, was begun by cruel and wanton aggression; and historical instances are not wanting in which both have been overcome by the sweetness, the majesty, the gentleness of man. There seems to be no adequate reason for rejecting the unanimous belief of the early centuries that the wild beasts of the Thebaid moved freely and harmlessly among the saintly eremites, and that even the wildest living creatures were tame and gentle to St. Francis of Assisi. Who had not known people whose presence does not scare the birds, and who can approach, without danger, the most savage dog? We may well believe that the mere human spell of a living and sinless personality would go far to keep the Saviour from danger. In the catacombs and on other ancient monuments of early Christians, He is sometimes represented as Orpheus charming the animals with his song. All that was true and beautiful in the old legends found its fulfilment in Him, and was but a symbol of His life and work.

[1] Ps. xci. 13. "The beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee" (Job v. 23) [2] Tennyson's Enoch Arden.

And he was in the wilderness forty days. The number occurs again and again in Scripture, and always in connection with the facts of temptation or retribution. It is clearly a sacred and representative number, and independently of other associations, it was for forty days that Moses had stayed on Sinai, and Elijah in the wilderness. In moments of intense excitement and overwhelming thought the ordinary needs of the body seem to be modified, or even for a time superseded; and unless we are to understand St. Luke's words, "He did eat nothing," as being absolutely literal, we might suppose that Jesus found all that was necessary for His bare sustenance in such scant fruits as the desert might afford;[1] but however that may be -- and it is a question of little importance -- at the end of the time He hungered. And this was the tempter's moment. The whole period had been one of moral and spiritual tension.[2] During such high hours of excitement men will sustain, without succumbing, an almost incredible amount of labour, and soldiers will fight through a long day's battle unconscious or oblivious of their wounds. But when the enthusiasm is spent, when the exaltation dies away, when the fire burns low, when Nature, weary and overstrained, reasserts her rights -- in a word, when a mighty reaction has begun, which leaves the man suffering, spiritless, exhausted -- then is the hour of extreme danger, and that has been, in many a fatal instance, the moment in which a man has fallen a victim to insidious allurement or bold assault. It was at such a moment that the great battle of our Lord against the powers of evil was fought and won.

[1] The Jewish hermit Banus lived for years on the spontaneous growth of this very desert (Jos. Vit. 2). The νηστεύσας of St. Matthew does not necessarily imply an absolute fast. [2] Luke iv. 2, "Being forty days tempted of the devil."

The struggle was, as is evident, no mere allegory. Into the exact external nature of the temptation it seems at once superfluous and irreverent to enter -- superfluous, because it is a question in which any absolute decision is for us impossible; irreverent, because the Evangelists could only have heard it from the lips of Jesus, or of those to whom He communicated it, and our Lord could only have narrated it in the form which conveys at once the truest impression and the most instructive lessons. Almost every different expositor has had a different view as to the agency employed, and the objective or subjective reality of the entire event.[1] From Origen down to Schleiermacher some have regarded it as a vision or allegory -- the symbolic description of a purely inward struggle; and even so literal and orthodox a commentator as Calvin has embraced this view. On this point, which is a matter of mere exegesis, each must hold the view which seems to him most in accordance with the truth; but the one essential point is that the struggle was powerful, personal, intensely real -- that Christ, for our sakes, met and conquered the tempter's utmost strength.

[1] Very few writers in the present day will regard the story of the temptation as a narrative of objective facts. Even Lange gives the story a natural turn, and supposes that the tempter may have acted through the intervention of human agency. Not only Hase and Weisse, but even Olshausen, Neander, Ullmann, and many orthodox commentators, make the narrative entirely symbolical, and treat it as a profound and eternally significant parable. For a fuller discussion of the subject, see the Excursus "On Different Views of the Temptation" in Ullmann's beautiful treatise on The Sinlessness of Jesus (pp. 264-291, third edition, E. Tr.).

The question as to whether Christ was or was not capable of sin -- to express it in the language of that scholastic and theological region in which it originated, the question as to the pecceability or impeccability of His human nature -- is one which would never occur to a simple and reverent mind. We believe and know that our blessed Lord was sinless -- the Lamb of God, without blemish and without spot. What can be the possible edification or advantage in the discussion as to whether this sinlessness sprang from a posse non peccare or a non posse peccare? Some, in a zeal at once intemperate and ignorant, have claimed for him not only an actual sinlessness, but a nature to which sin was divinely and miraculously impossible. What then? If His great conflict were a mere deceptive phantasmagoria, how can the narrative of it profit us? If we have to fight the battle clad in that armour of human free-will which has been hacked and riven about the bosom of our fathers by so many a cruel blow, what comfort is it to us if our great Captain fought not only victoriously, but without real danger; not only uninjured, but without even a possibility of wound? Where is the warrior's courage, if he knows that for him there is but the semblance of a battle against the simulacrum of a foe? Are we not thus, under an appearance of devotion, robbed of One who, "though He were a son, yet learned obedience by the things which He suffered?"[1] Are we not thus, under the guise of orthodoxy, mocked in our belief that we have a High Priest who can be touched with a feeling of our infirmities, "being tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin?"[2] They who would thus honour Him rob us of our living Christ, who was very man no less than very God, and substitute for Him a perilous Apollinarian phantom enshrined "in the cold empyrean of theology," and alike incapable of kindling devotion or of inspiring love.

[1] Heb. v. 8.

[2] Heb. iv. 15.

Whether, then, it comes under the form of a pseudo-orthodoxy, false and pharisaical, and eager only to detect or condemn the supposed heresy of others; or whether it comes from the excess of a dishonouring reverence which has degenerated into the spirit of fear and bondage -- let us beware of contradicting the express teaching of the Scriptures, and, as regards this narrative, the express teaching of Christ Himself, by a supposition that He was not liable to real temptation. Nay, He was liable to temptation all the sorer, because it came like agony to a nature infinitely strong yet infinitely pure. In proportion as any one has striven all his life to be, like his great Ensample, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, in that proportion will he realise the intensity of the struggle, the anguish of the antipathy which pervades a nobler nature when, either by suggestions from within or from without, it has been dragged into even apparent proximity to the possibilities of evil. There are few passages in the Pilgrim's Progress more powerful, or more suggestive of profound acquaintance with the mysteries of the human heart, than that in which Christian in the Valley of the Shadow of Death finds his mind filled with revolting images and blaspheming words, which have indeed been but whispered into his ear, beyond his own powers of rejection, by an evil spirit, but which, in his dire bewilderment, he cannot distinguish or disentangle from thoughts which are his own, and to which his will consents.[1] In Christ, indeed, we suppose that such special complications would be wholly impossible, not because of any transcendental endowments connected with "immanent divinity" or the "communication of idioms," but because He had lived without yielding to wickedness, whereas in men these illusions arise in general from their own past sins. They are, in fact, nothing else but the flitting spectres of iniquities forgotten or unforgotten -- the mists that reek upward from the stagnant places in the deepest caverns of hearts not yet wholly cleansed. No, in Christ there could not be this terrible inability to discern that which comes from within us and that which is forced upon us from without -- between that which the weak will has entertained, or to which, in that ever-shifting border-land which separates thought from action, it has half assented, and that with which it does indeed find itself in immediate contact, but which, nevertheless, it repudiates with every muscle and fibre of its moral being. It must be a weak or a perverted intellect which imagines that "man becomes acquainted with temptation only in proportion as he is defiled by it," or that is unable to discriminate between the severity of a powerful temptation and the stain of a guilty thought. It may sound like a truism, but it is a truism much needed alike for our warning and our comfort, when the poet who, better than any other, has traversed every winding in the labyrinth of the human heart, has told us with such solemnity,

"Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,

Another thing to fall."[2]

[1] There is something of the same conception in Milton's description of the attempts made by the Evil Spirit to assoil the thoughts of Eve while yet she was innocent: --

"Him there they found

Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve,

Assaying by his devilish art to reach

The organs of her fancy, and with them forge

Illusions as he list, phantasms and dreams,

At least distempered, discontented thoughts,

Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires."

-- Par. Lost, iv. 800.

The passages in the Pilgrim's Progress is, "Christian made believe that he spake blasphemies, when it was Satan that suggested them into his mind." It is as follows: -- "One thing I would not let slip. I took notice that now poor Christian was so confounded that he did not know his own voice, and thus I perceived it. Just when he was come over against the mouth of the burning pit, one of the wicked ones got behind him, and stepped up softly to him, and whisperingly suggeted many grievous blasphemies to him, which he verily thought had proceeded from his own mind ... but he had not the discretion either to stop his ears, or to know from whence those blasphemies came." [2] Shakespeare, Measure for Measure, ii. 1. Similarly St. Augustine says, "It is the devil's part to suggest, it is ours not to consent;" and St. Gregory, "Sin is first by suggestion, then by delight, and lastly by consent." Luther, says Ullmann, "well distinguishes between sentire tentationem and consentire tentationi. Unless the tempting impression be felt, there is no real temptation; but unless it be acquiescend in or yielded to, there is no sin" (ubi supra, p. 129). "Where then is the point in temptation at which sin begins, or at which it becomes itself sin? It is there where the evil which is presented to us begins to make a determining impression upon the heart" (id.).

And Jesus was tempted. The "Captain of our salvation" was "made perfect through sufferings."[1] "In that He Himself hath suffered being tempted, He is able to succour them that are tempted."[2] The wilderness of Jericho and the Garden of Gethsemane -- these witnesses His two most grievous struggles, and in these He triumphed wholly over the worst and most awful assaults of the enemy of souls; but during no part of the days of His flesh was He free from temptation, since otherwise His life had been no true human life at all, nor would He in the same measure have left us an ensample that we should follow His steps. "Many other were the occasions," says St. Bonaventure,[3] "on which he endured temptations" "They," says St. Bernard, "who reckon only three temptations of our Lord, show their ignorance of Scripture."[4] He refers to John vii. 1, and Heb. iv. 15: he might have referred still more appositely to the express statement of St. Luke, that when the temptation in the wilderness was over, the foiled tempter left Him indeed, but left Him only "for a season,"[5] or, as the words may perhaps be rendered, "till a new opportunity occurred." Yet we may well believe that when He rose victorious out of the dark wiles in the wilderness, all subsequent temptations, until the last, floated as lightly over His sinless soul as the cloud-wreath of a summer day floats over the blue heaven which it cannot stain.

[1] Heb. ii. 10.

[2] Heb. ii. 18.

[3] Bonav. De Vit. Christi, xiv.

[4] Bern. (Serm. xiv. in Ps. "Qui habitat."). Vulg. "Militia est vita hominis super terram."[4a] See too Theophylact in Aur. Cat. in Luc.

[4a] The life of man on earth is a warfare.

[5] Luke iv. 13, άχρί καιροΰ. Much that I have here said is confirmed by a passage in Greg. M. Hom. i. 16 (Wordsw. on Matt. iv. 1), "Tentari Christus potuit, sed ejus mentem peccati delectatio nom momordit. Ideo omnis diabolica illa tentatio foris non intus fuit."[5a] And yet in spite of these and many more saintly and erudite justifications of such a view from the writings of theologians in all ages, the violent and prejudiced ignorance of modern άορασια still continues to visit all such methods of interpretation with angry anathema and indiscriminate abuse.

[5a] Christ could be tempted, but delight in sin did not take hold of his mind. Accordingly, that entire temptation by the devil was from without, not from within.

[1] Matt. xvii. 21, from which it might seem that Jesus Himself fasted, is omitted by Tischendorf

on the authority of א, B, the Cureton Syriac, the Sahidic version, &c. This interpolation arises, however, from Mark ix. 29, where the words of Jesus should also perhaps end at προσευχή,

and where καί νηστεία, though widely sanctioned by the MSS. and versions, are omitted by א, B, K, and rejected by Tischendorf. (When I refer to Tischendorf I mean the readings adopted by him in his Synopsis Evangelica, 3d edition, 1871.)

"If Thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made loaves." So spake the Tempter first. Jesus was hungry, and "these stones" were perhaps those siliceous accretions, sometimes known under the name of lapides judaici, which assume the exact shape of little loaves of bread,[1] and which were represented in legend as the petrified fruits of the Cities of the Plain. The pangs of hunger work all the more powerfully when they are stimulated by the added tortures of a quick imagination; and if the conjecture be correct, then the very shape and aspect and traditional origin of these stones would give to the temptation an added force.

[1] So Matt. iv. 3, άρτοι; Luke iv. 3, "that this stone become a loaf." Cf. Stanley's Sinai and Palestine, p. 154 (Elijah's melons).

There can be no stronger proof of the authenticity and divine origin of this narrative than the profound subtlety and typical universality of each temptation. Not only are they wholly unlike the far cruder and simpler stories of the temptation, in all ages, of those who have been eminent saints, but there is in them a delicacy of insight, an originality of conception, that far transcend the range of the most powerful invention.

It was a temptation to the senses -- an appeal to the appetites -- an impulse given to that lower nature which man shares with all the animal creation. But so far from coming in any coarse and undisguisedly sensuous form, it came shrouded in a thousand subtle veils. Israel, too, had been humbled, and suffered to hunger in the wilderness, and there, in his extreme need, God had fed him with manna, which was as angels' food and bread from heaven. Why did not the Son of God thus provide Himself with a table in the wilderness? He could do so if He liked, and why should He hesitate? If an angel had revealed to the fainting Hager the fountain of Beer-lahai-roi -- if an angel had touched the famishing Elijah, and shown him food -- why should He await even the ministry of angels to whom such ministry was needless, but whom, if He willed it, angels would have been so glad to serve?

How deep is the wisdom of the reply! Referring to the very lesson which the giving of the manna had been designed to teach, and quoting one of the noblest utterances of Old Testament inspiration, our Lord answered, "It standeth written,[1] Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God."[2] And what a lesson lies herein for us -- a lesson enforced by how great an example -- that we are not to be guided by the wants of our lower nature; that we may not misuse that lower nature for the purposes of our own sustenance and enjoyment; that we are not our own, and may not do what we will with that which we imagine to be our own; that even those things which may seem lawful, are yet not all expedient; that man has higher principles of life than material sustenance, as he is a higher existence than his material frame.[3] He who thinks that we live by bread alone, will make the securing of bread the chief object of his life -- will determine to have it at whatever cost -- will be at once miserable and rebellious if even for a time he be stinted or deprived of it, and, because he seeks no diviner food, will inevitably starve with hunger in the midst of it. But he who knows that man doth not live by bread alone, will not thus, for the sake of living, lose all that makes life dear -- will, when he had done his duty, trust God to preserve with all things needful the body He has made -- will seek with more earnest endeavour the bread from heaven, and that living water whereof he who drinketh shall thirst no more.

[1] Matt. iv. 4, γέγραπται -- the perfect indicates an abiding, eternal lesson. [2] Deut. viii. 3. Alford justly draws attention to the fact that Jesus meets and defeats the temptation in His humanity; "Man shall not," &c.

[3] "We live by admiration, hope, and love." (Wordsworth.)

And thus His first temptation was analogous in form to the last taunt addressed to Him on the cross -- "If Thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross." "If" -- since faith and trust are the mainstay of all human holiness, the tempter is ever strongest in the suggestion of such doubts; strong, too, in his appeal to the free-will and the self-will of man. "You may, you can -- why not do it?" On the cross our Saviour answers not; here He answers only to express a great eternal principle. He does not say, "I am the Son of God;" in the profundity of His humiliation, in the extreme of His self-sacrifice, He made not His equality with God a thing to be grasped at,[1] "but made Himself of no reputation." He foils the tempter, not as very God, but as very man.

[1] Phil. ii. 6, ούχ άρπαγµόν ίγήσατο τό είναι ίσα Θεώ.

[1] Milton in the Paradise Regained may have been influenced to prefer the order as given in St. Luke, partly from this reason, and partly from the supposition that angels rescued our Lord in safety from that dizzy height.

Jesus had conquered and rejected the first temptation by the expression of an absolute trust in God. Adapting itself, therefore, with infinite subtlety to the discovered mood of the Saviour's soul, the next temptation, challenging as it were directly, and appealing immediately to, this absolute trust, claims the illustration and expression of it, not to relieve an immediate necessity, but to avert an overwhelming peril. "Then he brought Him to the Holy City,[1] and setteth Him on the pinnacles of the Temple."[2] Some well-known pinnacle of that well-known mass must be intended; perhaps the roof of the Stoa Basilikè, or Royal Porch, on the southern side of the Temple, which looked down sheer into the valley of the Kidron below it, from a height so dizzy that, according to the description of Josephus, if any one ventured to look down, his head would swim at the immeasurable depth; perhaps Solomon's Porch, the Stoa Anatolikè, which Josephus also has described,[3] and from, which, according to tradition, St. James, the Lord's brother, was afterwards precipitated into the court below.[4]

[1] Still called by the Arabs El-Kûds esh-Shereef, "the Holy, the Noble." [2] Matt. iv. 5, έπί τό πτερύγτον τοΰ ιεροΰ. The article is used in both Evangelists, and both times omitted by the English version.

"So saying, he caught Him up, and without wing

Of hippogrif, bore through the air sublime,

Over the wilderness, and o'er the plain,

Till underneath them fair Jerusalem,

The Holy City, lifted high her towers,

And higher yet the glorious Temple reared

Her pile, far off appearing like a mount

Of alabaster, topt with golden spires.

There, on the highest pinnacle, he set

The Son of God."

(Milton, Par. Reg. iv. 462.)

These journeys through the air (though the sacred narrative says nothing of them, clearly thereby tending to turn our attention wholly from the mere secondary accidents and external form of the story to its inmost meaning) were thoroughly in accordance with ordinary Jewish beliefs (1 Kings xviii. 13; 2 Kings ii. 16; Acts viii. 39; Ezek. iii. 14). See, too, the apocryphal addition to Habakkuk, and the text interpolated in the Ebionite Gospel of St. Matthew, "My mother the Holy Ghost took me by a hair of the head and carried me to Mount Tabor." This is quoted by Origen, in Joann. t. ii., § 6; and Jer. in Mic. vii. 6. The expression "My mother" apparently arises from the fact that the Hebrew ruach is fem. Jerome (in Isa. xl. 11) tells us that in Ps. lxviii. 12, the Jews explain "maiden" of the soul, and "mistress" of the Holy Spirit. [3] Jos. Antt. xv 11, § 5, σκοτοδινιάν; xx. 9, § 7. See Caspari, p. 256. [4] Hegesippus ap. Euseb. H. E. ii. 23; Epiphan. Adv. Hœres. xxix. 4.

"If" -- again that doubt, as though to awake a spirit of pride, in the exercise of that miraculous display to which He is tempted -- "if thou be the Son of God, cast Thyself down." "Thou art in danger not self-sought; save Thyself from it, as Thou canst and mayest, and thereby prove Thy Divine power and nature. Is it not written that the angels shall bear Thee up?[1] Will not this be a splendid proof of Thy trust in God?" Thus deep and subtle was this temptation; and thus, since Jesus had appealed to Scripture, did the devil also "quote Scripture for his purpose." For there was nothing vulgar, nothing selfish, nothing sensuous in this temptation. It was an appeal, not to natural appetites, but to perverted spiritual instincts. Does not the history of sects, and parties, and churches, and men of high religious claims, show us that thousands who could not sink into the slough of sensuality, have yet thrust themselves arrogantly into needless perils, and been dashed into headlong ruin from the pinnacle of spiritual pride? And how calm, yet full of warning was that simple answer, "It is written again, 'Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.' " The word is the original (ékpeiráseis -- Matt. iv. 7; Dent. vi. 16) is strong and more expressive. It is, "Thou shalt not tempt of the extreme the Lord thy God;" thou shalt not claim His miraculous intervention to save thee from thine own presumption and folly; thou shalt not challenge His power to the proof. When thou art in the path of duty trust in him to the utmost with a perfect confidence; but listen not to the haughty seductive whisper, "Ye shall be as gods," and let there be no self-willed and capricious irreverence in they demand for aid. Then -- to add the words so cunningly omitted by the tempter -- "shalt thou be safe in all thy ways."[2] And Jesus does not even allude to His apparent danger. Danger not self-sought is safety. The tempter's own words had been a confession of his own impotence -- "Cast Thyself down." Even from the giddy height he had no power to hurl Him whom God kept safe. The Scripture which he had quoted was true, though he had perverted it. No amount of temptation can ever necessitate a sin. With every temptation God provides also "the way to escape:

"Also it is written,

'Tempt not the Lord thy God,' He said,

and stood:

But Satan, smitten by amazement, fell."[3]

[1] Ps. xci. 11, 12.

[2] Ps. xci. 11, 12. As the psalms is addressed to "Him that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High," the expression "all thy ways" can only mean ways of innocence and holiness -- the ways of God's providence. The only true meaning of the text therefore excludes the insolent gloss put on it by the tempter; and he omits verse 13, which is a prophecy of his own defeat. [3] Par. Reg. iv. 481.

[1] See John xii. 31; xvi. 2-30; Eph. ii. 2 (τόν άρχοντα τής έξουσίας τοΰ άέρος[1a]); 2 Cor. iv. 4; Sar ha-Olam, Sanhedr. f. 94. It was done έν στιγµή χρόνου[1b] (Luke iv. 5), for, as St. Ambrose says, "in momento praetereunt."[1c] We must bear in mind that the Power of Evil has been disarmed to a very great extent in the kingdom of Christ. Samael in the Talmud is

called "the prince of the air." The tract Zohar goes so far as to call him ר ֵח ָא ל ֵא el âcheer, "a second god." (See Gfrörer, Jahrh. d. Heils, i. 402-420.) [1a] "the prince of the powers of the air."

[1b] "in a moment of time."

[1c] they pass by in a moment.

"The kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them!" "There are some that will say," says Bishop Andrewes, "that we are never tempted with kingdoms. It may be well, for it needs not be, when less will serve. It was Christ only that was thus tempted; in Him lay an heroical mind that could not be tempted with small matters. But with us it is nothing so, for we esteem more basely of ourselves. We set our wares at a very easy price; he may buy us even dagger-cheap. He need never carry us so high as the mount. The pinnacle is high enough; yea, the lowest steeple in all the town would serve the turn. Or let him but carry us to the leads and gutters of our own houses; nay, let us but stand in our windows or our doors, if he will give us so much as we can there see, he will tempt us thoroughly; we will accept it, and thank him too ... A matter of half-a-crown, or ten groats, a pair of shoes, or some such trifle, will bring us on our knees to the devil."

But Christ taught, "What shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?"

There was one living who, scarcely in a figure, might be said to have the whole world. The Roman Emperor Tiberius was at that moment infinitely the most powerful of living men, the absolute, undisputed, deified ruler of all that was fairest and richest in the kingdoms of the earth. There was no control to his power, no limit to his wealth, no restraint upon his pleasures. And to yield himself still more unreservedly to the boundless self-gratification of a voluptuous luxury, not long after this time he chose for himself a home on one of the loveliest spots on the earth's surface, under the shadow of the slumbering volcano, upon an enchanting islet in one of the most softly delicious climates of the world. What came of it all? He was, as Pliny calls him, "tristissimus ut constat hominum,"[1] confessedly the most gloomy of mankind. And there, from this home of his hidded infamies, from this island where on a scale so splendid he had tried the experiment of what happiness can be achieved by pressing the world's most absolute authority, and the world's guiltiest indulgences, into the service of an exclusively selfish life, he wrote to his servile and corrupted Senate, "What to write to you, Conscript Fathers, or how to write, or what not to write, may all the gods and goddesses destroy me, worse than I feel that they are daily destroying me, if I know."[2] Rarely has there been vouchsafed to the world a more overwhelming proof that its richest gifts are but "fairy gold that turns to dust and dross," and its more colossal edifices of personal splendour and greatness no more durable barrier against the encroachment of bitter misery than are the babe's sandheaps to stay the mighty march of the Atlantic tide. [1] H. N. xxviii. 5. For Capreae, see Tac. Ann. iv. 61, 62, 67. [2] "Quid scribam vobis, Patres Conscripti, aut quomodo scribam, aut quid omnino non scribam hoc tempore, di me deaequi pejus perdant quam perire me coidie sentio si scio. Adeo facinora atque flagitia sua ipsi quoque in supplicium verterant. Quippe Tiberium non fortuna, non solitudines protegebant quin tormenta pectoris suasque ipse poenas fateretur."[2a] (Tac. Ann. vi. 6.)

[2a] "What to write to you, conscript fathers, or in what manner to write, or what altogether not to write at this juncture, if I can determine, may all the gods and goddesses doom me to worse destruction than that by which I feel myself consuming daily. With such just retribution did his crimes and atrocities recoil upon himself. For assuredly not his imperial fortune, not his inaccessible solitude, could prevent Tiberius from acknowledging the anguish of his breast, and the penalties he had brought upon himself."

In such perplexity, in such anguish, does the sinful possession of all riches and all rule end. Such is the invariable Nemesis of unbridled lusts. It does not need the snaky tresses or the shaken torch of the fabled Erinnyes. The guilty conscience is its own adequate avenger; and "if the world were one entire and perfect chrysolite," and that gem ours, it would not console us for one hour of that inward torment, or compensate in any way for those lacerating pangs.

But he who is an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven is lord over vaster and more real worlds, infinitely happy because infinitely pure. And over that kingdom Satan has no power. It is the kingdom of God; and since from Satan not even the smallest semblance of any of his ruinous gifts can be gained except by suffering the soul to do allegiance to him, the answer to all his temptations is the answer of Christ, "Get thee behind me Satan: for it is written, 'Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve.' "[1]

[1] Deut. vi. 13. This being one of St. Matthew's "cyclic" quotations agrees mainly with the LXX. [except προσκυνήσεις for φοβηθήστ and µόνωfor the LXX. variations are here, no doubt, altered in the Alex. MS. from the N. T.], and is not close to the Hebrew; but his "peculiar" quotations are usually from the Hebrew, and differ from the LXX. (See Westcott, Introd., p. 211.) It is remarkable that our Lord's three answers are all from Deut. vi. and viii.

Thus was Christ victorious, through that self-renunciation through which only can victory be won. And the moments of such honest struggle crowned with victory are the very sweetest and happiest that the life of man can give. They are full of an elevation and a delight which can only be described in language borrowed from the imagery of Heaven.

"Then the devil leaveth Him" -- St. Luke adds, "till a fitting opportunity" -- "and, behold, angels came and ministered unto Him."[1]

[1] The reader will be glad to see, in connection with this subject, some of the remarks of Ullmann, who has studied it more profoundly, and written on it more beautifully, than any other theologian. "The postive temptations of Jesus," he says, "were not confined to that particular point of time when they assailed Him with concentrated force ... But still more frequently in after life was He called to endure temptation of the other kind -- the temptation of suffering, and this culminated on two occasions, viz., in the conflict of Gethsemane, and in that moment of agony on the cross when He cried, 'My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?' " (Sinlessness of Jesus, E. Tr., p. 140.) He had already remarked (p. 128) that "man is exposed in two ways to the possiblility and seductive power of evil. On the one hand he may be drawn to actual sin by enticements; and, on the other hand, he may be turned aside from good by threatened as well as by inflicted suffering. The former may be termed positive, the latter negative temptation." "Jesus was tempted in all points -- that is, He was tempted in the only two possible ways specified above. On the one hand, allurements were presented which, if successful, would have led Him to actual sin; and, on the other hand, He was beset by sufferings which might have turned Him aside from the divine path of duty. These temptations, moreover, occurred both on great occasions and in minute particulars, under the most varied circumstances, from the beginning to the end of His earthly course. But in the midst of them all His spiritual energy and his love to God remained pure and unimpaired" (id. p. 30). Ewald, in his Die drei Ersten Evangelien, regarding the Temptation from the point of view of public work, makes the three temptations correspond severally to the tendencies to (i.) unscrupulousness, (ii.) rash confidence, (iii.) unhallowed personal ambitions.
