THE FIRST APOSTLES.

"Nisi habuisset et in vultu quiddam oculisque sidereum nunquam eum statim secuti fuissent

Apostoli, nec qui ad comprehendendum eum venerant corruissent.[1]

-- JER. Ep. lxv.

[1] Had he not had "something starry" in his countenance and eyes, the Apostles would never have forthwith followed him, nor would they who had come to apprehend him have fallen prostrate.

Victorious over the concentrated temptation, safe from the fiery ordeal, the Saviour left the wilderness and returned to the fords of Jordan.[1]

[1] It is well known that "Bethania" ( א, A, B, C, &c.), not "Bethabara," is the true reading of John i. 28; it was altered by Origen (who admits that it was the reading of nearly all the MSS.) on very insufficient grounds, viz., that no Bethany on the Jordan was known, and that there was said to be (δεικνυσθαι δε λ έ γ ο υ σ ι) a Bethabara, where John was said to have baptized.

Origen is, however, supported by Cureton's Syriac. The two names (ָהר ָבֲע חי ֵבּ, "house of

passage, and הָי ִנ ַא חי ֵבּ, "house of ship," or ferry-boats) have much the same meaning (see 2 Sam. xv. 23 Heb.). Mr. Grove thinks that Bethabara may be identical with Beth-barah, the fords secured by the Ephraimites (Judg. vii. 24), or with Beth-nimrah (Numb. xxxii. 36). This latter answers to the description, being close to the region round about Jordan, the Ciccar of the O. T., the oasis of Jericho. In some edd. of the LXX. this is actually written Βηθαβρά (Bibl. Dict. i. 204). Mr. Monro ingenuiously suggests that Origen (like his copyists) may have confused Bethabara with Betharaba (Josh. xviii. 22) which was in the Jordan valley. After careful attention, I see no grounds whatever for agreeing with Caspari (Chron. Geogr. Einl. 277), and others who place this Bethania at Tellanihje, on the upper Jordan, to the north-east of the Sea of Gennesareth. The reasons for the traditional scene of the baptism, near Jericho, and therefore within easy reach of Jerusalem, seem far more convincing [The Bethany on the

Mount of Olives has another derivation; it was usually derived from י ִני ֵה תי ֵבּ, "house of unripe dates;" but after the valuable letter of Dr. Deutsch, published by Mr. W. H. Dixon in his Holy Land (ii. 217), this conjecture of Lightfoot's must remain at least doubtful.]

The Synoptical Gospels, which dwell mainly on the ministry in Galilee, and date its active commencement from the imprisonment of John, omit all record of the intermediate events, and only mention our Lord's retirement to Nazareth.[1] It is to be the fourth Evangelist that we owe the beautiful narrative of the days which immediately ensued upon the temptation. The Judæan ministry is brought by him into the first prominence.[2] He seems to have made a point of relating nothing of which he had not been a personal witness, and there are some few indications that he was bound to Jerusalem by peculiar relations.[3] By station St. John was a fisherman, and it is not impossible that, as the fish of the Lake of Galilee were sent in large quantities to Jerusalem, he may have lived there at certain seasons in connection with the employment of his father and his brother, who, as the owners of their own boat and the masters of hired servants, evidently occupied a position of some importance. Be that as it may, it is St. John alone who narrates to us the first call of the earliest Apostles, and he relates it with all the minute particulars and graphic touches of one on whose heart and memory each incident had been indelibly impressed.

[1] Matt. iv. 12 (άνεχώρησεν, "withdrew"); Mark i. 14; Luke iv. 14. [2] Throughout this book it will be seen that I accept unhesitatingly the genuineness of St. John's Gospel. It would be of course impossible, and is no part of my purpose, to enter fully into the controversy about it; and it is the more needless, because in many books of easy access (I may mention, among others, Professor Westcott's Introd. to the Study of the Gospels, and Hist. of the Canon of the New Testament, and Mr. Sanday's Authorship of the Fourth Gospel) the main arguments which seem decisive in favor of its genuineness may be studied by any one. The other side is powerfully argued by Mr. Tayler in his Fourth Gospel. All that I need here say (referring especially to what Professor Westcott has written on the subject), is, that there is external evidence for its authenticity in the allusions to or traces of the influence of this Gospel in Ignatius and Polycarp; and later in the second century, of Justin Martyr, Tatian, Theophilus, &c. Papias does not indeed mention it, which is a circumstance difficult to account for; but according to Eusebius (Hist. Ecc. iii. 39), he "made use of testimonies" out of the First Epistles, and few will separate the question of the genuineness of the Epistles from that of the genuineness of the Gospel. The very slightness of the Second and Third Epistles is almost a convincing proof of their authenticity, since no one could have dreamed of forging them. The early admission of the Fourth Gospel into the canon both of the East and West, and the acknowledgment of it even by heretics, are additional arguments in its favor. Dr. Lightfoot also notices the further fact that "soon after the middle of the second century divergent readings of a striking kind occur in St. John's Gospel, as for instance, µονογενής θεός[2a] and ό µονογενής υιός"[2b] (i. 18), and this leads us to the conclusion "that the text has already a history, and that the Gospel therefore cannot have been very recent" (On Revision, p. 20). But if the external evidence, though less decisive than we could have desired, is not inadequate, the internal evidence, derived not only from its entire scope, but also from numberless minute and incidental particulars, is simply overwhelming; and the improbabilities involved in the hypothesis of forgery are so immense, that it is hardly too much to say that we shold have recognized in the Gospel the authorship of St. John, even if it had come down to us anonymously, or under some other name. The Hebraic coloring of the style; the traces of distinctly Judiac training and conceptions (i. 45; iv. 22); the naϊve faithfulness in admitting facts which might seem to tell most powerfully against the writer's belief (vii. 5); the minute topographical and personal allusions and reminiscences (vi. 10, 19, 23; x. 22, 23; xi. 1, 44, 54; xxi. 2); the faint traces that the writer had been a disciple of John the Baptist, whose title he alone omits (i. 15; iii. 23, 25); the vivid freshness of the style throughout, as, for instance, in the account of the blind man, and of the Last Supper -- so wholly unlike a philosopheme, and so clearly written ad narrandum, not ad probandum (ch. ix., xiii.); the preservation of the remarkable fact that Jesus was first tried before Annas (xviii. 13, 19-24), and the correction of the current tradition as to the time of the Last Supper (xiii. 1; xviii. 28); -- these are but a few of numberless internal evidences which bring additional confirmation to the conviction inspired by the character and contents of this great Gospel. They have left no doubt on the minds of many profound and competent scholars, and no one can easily make light of evidence which has satisfied such a philologian as Ewald, and, for twelve editions of his book, satisfied even such a critic as Renan. It is my sincere belief that the difficulties of accepting the Gospel are mainly superficial, and that they are infinitely less formidable than those involved in its rejection. Mr. Sanday has treated the question with great impartiality; and in his volume many of the points touched upon in this note are developed with much force and skill. [2a] "only begotten God."

[2b] "the only begotten Son."

[3] John xix. 27; xviii. 16. Perhaps this explains the fact that James was not with his brother John as a disciple of the Baptist. Andrew, on finding Christ, immediately sought out his brother Simon. John could not do so, for his brother was in Galilee, and was not called till some time subsequently.

The deputation of the Sanhedrin[1] (to which we have already alluded) seems to have taken place the day previous to our Lord's return from the wilderness; and when, on the following morning,[2] the Baptist saw Jesus approaching, he delivered a public and emphatic testimony that this was indeed the Messiah who had been marked out to him by the appointed sign, and that He was "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world." Whether the prominent conception in the Baptist's mind was the Paschal Lamb, or the Lamb of the morning and evening sacrifice; whether "the world" (kósmos) was the actual expression which he used, or is merely a Greek rendering of the word "people"; whether he understood the profound and awful import of his own utterance, or was carried by prophetic inspiration beyond himself -- we cannot tell. But this much is clear, that since his whole imagery, and indeed the very description of his own function and position, is, as we have already seen, borrowed from the Evangelical prophet, he must have used the expression with distinct reference to the picture of Divine patience and mediatorial suffering in Isa. liii. 7 (cf. Jer. xi. 19). His words could hardly have involved less meaning that this -- that the gentle and sinless man to whom he pointed should be a man of sorrows, and that these sorrows should be for the salvation of His race.[3] Whatever else the words may have connoted to the minds of his hearers, yet they could hardly have thought them over without connecting Jesus with the conceptions of sinlessness, of suffering, and of a redeeming work.

[1] John i. 19-34.

[2] John i. 35-43. The ούκ ήδειν αύτόν[2a] means that the Baptist did not recognize Jesus as the Messiah, till he had seen (τεοθέαµαι, ver. 32; έώρακα, ver. 34) the heavenly sign. [2a] "I knew him not."

[3] "He felt in the delicacy of Christ's personality all its capability of suffering, and its suffering destiny." (Lange, ii. 283. Comp. Exod. xii. 5; 1 Cor. v. 7; 1 Pet. i. 19.) In the Apocalypse (v. 6; vii. 9, &c.) άρνιον,[3a] not άµνός,[3b] is always used. The attempt of Danz to account for the

expression as a mistaken rendering of ל ֵאוּנּ ָמֲע in the sense of "strong hero" (see Hase, Leben Jesu, p. 101) is only worth noticing as an instance of that fondness for ingenious novelties which is the bane of German theologians. On the word αίρων, "bearing, and carrying away," "expiating," cf. Exod. xxviii. 30; xxxiv. 7; Lev. v. 1, &c. [3a] a Lamb (a diminutive).

[3b] a Lamb.

Memorable as this testimony was, it seems on the first day to have produced no immediate result. But on the second day, when the Baptist was standing accompanied by two of his disciples, Jesus again walked by, and John, fixing upon Him his intense and earnest gaze,[1] exclaimed again, as though with involuntary awe and admiration. "Behold the Lamb of God!"

[1] έµβλέψας. For other instances of the word, see Matt. xix. 26; Luke xx. 17; Mark x. 21.

The words were too remarkable to be again neglected, and the two Galilæan youths who heard them followed the retreating figure of Jesus. He caught the sound of their timid footsteps, and turning round to look at them as they come near, He gently asked, "What seek ye?"

It was but the very beginning of His ministry: as yet they could not know Him for all that He was;[1] as yet they had not heard the gracious words that proceeded out of His lips; in coming to seek Him thus they might be actuated by inadequate motives, or even by mere passing curiosity; it was fit that they should come to Him by spontaneous impulse, and declare their object of their own free will.

[1] Even if, as some suppose, St. John the Evangelist was His first cousin. The argument for supposing that Salome, the wife of Zebedee, was a sister of the Virgin Mary, rises from the comparison of Mark xv. 40 with John xix. 25, where four women are mentioned; but John, with his usual delicate reserve, does not mention his own mother by name. See sup., p. 99, n. 3.

But how deep and full of meaning is that question, and how sternly it behoves all who come to their Lord to answer it! One of the holiest of the church's saints, St. Bernard, was in the habit of constantly warning himself by the solemn query, "Bernarde, ad quid venisti?" -- "Bernard, for what purpose art thou here?" Self-examination could assume no more searching form; but all the meaning which it involved was concentrated in that quiet and single question, "What seek ye?"

It was more than the two young Galilæans could answer Him at once; it meant more perhaps than they knew or understood, yet the answer showed that they were in earnest. "Rabbi," they said (and the title of profound honour and reverence[1] showed how deeply His presence had impressed them), "where art thou staying?"

[1] Among the Jews this title was a sort of degree. One of the myriads of idle conjectures which have defaced the simple narrative of the Gospels is that Jesus had taken this degree among the Essenes. It is clear, on the one hand, that He never sought it; and on the other, that it was bestowed upon Him even by the most eminent Pharisees (John iii. 2) out of spontaneous and genuine awe.

Where it was we do not know. Perhaps in one of the temporary succôth, or booths, covered at the top with the striped abba, which is in the East an article of ordinary wear, and with their wattled sides interwoven with green brances of terebinth or palm, which must have given the only shelter possible to the hundreds who had flocked to John's baptism. "He saith to them, Come and see." Again, the words were very simple, though they occur in passages of much significance.[1] Never, however, did they produce a result more remarkable than now. They came and saw where Jesus dwelt, and as it was then four in the afternoon,[2] stayed there that day, and probably slept there that night; and before they lay down to sleep they knew and felt in their inmost hearts that the kingdom of heaven had come, that the hopes of long centuries were now fulfilled, that they had been in the presence of Him who was the desire of all nations, the Priest great than Aaron, the Prophet greater then Moses, the King great than David the true Star of Jacob and Sceptre of Israel.

[1] John xi. 34; Cant. iii. 11; Rev. vi. 1, 3, 5, 7; Ps. lxvi. 5, &c. (See Stier, i. 51). [2] The tenth hour counting from six in the morning; there is no ground for supposing, with Wieseler, that John counts from midnight, instead of adopting the ordinary Jewish computation (John iv. 6, 52; xi. 9; xix. 14). Wieseler seems even to be mistaken in the belief that the Romans ever counted the hours of their civil day from midnight -- Mr. Monro refers me to a passage in the Digests in which hora vi. diei and hora vi. noctis are refered to in the very sentence in which a lawyer is expounding civil computation in opposition to natural. (Dig. xli., tit. 3, fr. 6, 7.)

One of these two youths who thus came earliest to Christ was Andrew.[1] The other suppressed his own name because he was the narrator, the beloved disciple, the Evangelist St. John.[2] No wonder that the smallest details, down even to the very hour of the day, were treasured in his memory, never to be forgotten, even in extreme old age.

[1] Hence the Fathers call him ό πρωτόκλητος.[1a]

[1a] The first-called.

[2] This exquisite and consistent reticence is one of the many strong arguments in favor of the genuineness of the Gospel. If our view be right, he did care about the facts of which he is writing, but did not care that his mere name should be remembered among men. M. Renan seems at one time to have held that it was partly written out of jealousy at the primacy popularly ascribed to St. Peter!

It was the first care of Andrew to find his brother Simon, and tell him of this great Eureka.[1] He brought him to Jesus, and Jesus looking earnestly on him with that royal gaze which read intuitively the inmost thoughts -- seeing at a glance in that simple fisherman all the weakness but also all the splendid greatness of the man -- said, giving him a new name, which was long afterwards yet more solemnly confirmed. "Thou art Simon, the son of Jona; thou shalt be called Kephas;" that is, "Thou art Simon, the son of the dove; hereafter thou shalt be as the rock in which the dove hides."[2] It was, indeed, a play upon the word, but one which was memorably symbolic and profound. None but the shallow and the ignorant will see, in such a play upon the name, anything derogatory to the Saviour's dignity. The essential meaning and augury of names had been in all ages a belief among the Jews, whose very language was regarded by themselves as being no less sacred than the oracular gems on Aaron's breast. Their belief in the mystic potency of sounds, of the tongue guided by unalterable destiny in the realms of seeming chance, may seem idle and superstitious to an artificial cultivation, but has been shared by many of the deepest thinkers in every age.[3]

[1] Εύρήκαµεν τόν Μεσσιαν[1a] (John i. 41). (Pressensé, Jesus Christ, p. 294.) This was indeed a true act of brotherly affection. (See Keble's Hymn on St. Andrew's Day.) [1a] We have found the Messiah.

[2] Lange, ii. 284. Or possibly, "Thou art a Son of Weakness, but shalt become a Rock."

Unfortunately, however, there is no sufficient authority for giving this meaning to the word ה&נ'. (Lücke, i. 450.)

[3] Cf. Æsch. Agam. 665, προνοίαισι τοΰ πεπρωµένου γλώσσαν έν τύχα νέµων.[3a] (See Origin of Lang., ch. iii.; Chapters on Lang., p. 269-277.) I am not now referring to such recondite fancies as those involved in the Cabbalistic modes of interpretation by Gematria, notarikon. atbash, &c., but to something far more antique and spontaneous, of which, for instance, we find specimens not only in the tragedians, but even in the stories of Herodotus ix. 91, &c.).

[3a] "successfully guiding his tongue in foreknowledge of destiny."

How was it that these youths of Galilee, how was it that a John so fervid yet contemplative, a Peter so impetuous in his affections, yet so timid in his resolves, were thus brought at once -- brought, as it were, by a single look, by a single word -- to the Saviour's feet? How came they thus, by one flash of insight or of inspiration, to recognise, in the carpenter of Nazareth, the Messiah of prophecy, the Son of God, the Saviour of the world?

Doubtless in part by what He said, and by what John the Baptist had testified concerning him, but doubtless also in part by His very look. On this subject, indeed, tradition has varied in a most remarkable manner; but on a point of so much interest we may briefly pause.

Any one who has studied the representations of Christ in mediæval art will have observed that some of them, particularly in missals, are degradingly and repulsively hideous, while others are conceived in the softest and loveliest ideal of human beauty.[1] Whence came this singular divergence?

[1] See Lecky, Hist. of Rationalism, i. 257.

It came from the prophetic passages which were supposed to indicate the appearance of the Messiah, as well as His life.

The early Church, accustomed to the exquisite perfection of form in which the genius of heathen sculpture had clothed its conceptions of the younger gods of Olympus -- aware, too, of the fatal corruptions of a sensual imagination -- seemed to find a pleasure in breaking loose from this adoration of personal endowments, and in taking as their ideal of the bodily aspect of our Lord, Isaiah's picture of a patient and afflicted sufferer, or David's pathetic description of a smitten and wasted outcast.[1] His beauty, says Clemens of Alexandria, was in His soul and in His actions, but in appearance He was base. Justin Martyr describes Him as being without beauty, without glory, without honour. His body, says Origen, was small, and ill-shapen, and ignoble. "His body," says Tertullian, had no human handsomeness, much less any celestial splendour." The heathen Celsus, as we learn from Origen, even argued from His traditional meanness and ugliness of aspect as a ground for rejecting His divine origin.[2] Nay, this kind of distorted inference went to even great extremities. The Vulgate rendering of Isa. liii. 4 is, "Nos putavimus cum quasi leprosum, percussum a Deo et humiliatum;[3]" and this gave rise to a wide-spread fancy of which there are many traces, that He who healed so many leprosies was Himself a leper![4]

[1] Isa. lii. 14; liii. 4, "We did esteem him stricken (ֵעוּנָנ; cf. עַנָנ ַה, Lev. xiii. 13), smitten of God, and afflicted." Ps. xxii. 6, 7, "I am a worm, and no man ... All they that see me laugh me to scorn;" 15-17, "My strength is dried up like a potsherd ... I may tell all my bones they stand staring and looking upon me."

[2] See Keim, i. 460, who quotes Just. Mart. c. Tryph. xiv. 36, &c., άειδής, άδοξος, άτιµος;[2a] Clem. Strom. ii. 440, Paed. iii. 1, 3, τήν όψιν αίσχρός;[2b] Tert. De Car. Christ. 9, "Nec humanae honestatis corpus fuit, nedum caelestis claritatis;"[2c] Orig. c. Cels. vi. 75, τό σώµα µικρόν καί δυσειδές καί άγενές ήν.[2d]

[2a] "without beauty, without glory, without honor."

[2b] "in appearance he was base."

[2c] "His body had no human handsomeness, much less any celestial splendor." [2d] "His body was small, and ill-shapen, and ignoble." [3] We accounted him as if leprous, smitten of God and abased. [4] In the Talmud Cod. Sanhedrin, to the question, "What is the name of the Messias?" it is answered "The Leper." (Pearson On the Creed, Art. iv.) See the story of St. Francis in Sir J. Stephen's Essays on Eccles. Biog. i. 99; Montalembert, St. Eliz. de Hongrie, ii. 93-99 (in both of which stories Christ appears as a leper). Hence the extraordinary devotion bestowed on this afflicted class by St. Edmund of Canterbury, St. Louis, St. James de Chantal, &c. In fact, leprosy came to be regarded as a gift of God. In 1541 Henry, organist of Coblenz, begged the council of the city to give a place in the hospital to his son. "Somit dem Us-satz von Gott dem almechtigen begabt."[4a] In 1189 Clement III, addressed a bull "dilectis filiis leprosis."[4b] [4a] Inasmuch as he was endowed with leprosy by God the Almighty. [4b] To our beloved sons the lepers.

Shocked, on the other hand, by these revolting fancies, there were many who held that Jesus, in his earthly features, reflected the charm and beauty of David, His great ancestor; and St. Jerome and St. Augustine preferred to apply to Him the words of Psalms xlv. 2, 3, "Thou art fairer than the children of men."[1] It was natural that, in the absence of positive indications, this view should command a deeper sympathy, and it gave rise both to the current descriptions of Christ, and also to those ideals, so full of mingled majesty and tenderness in --

"That face

How beautiful, if sorrow had not made

Sorrow more beautiful than beauty's self."

which we seen in the pictures of Fra Angelico, of Michael Angleo, of Leonardo da Vinci, of Raphael, and of Titian.[2]

[1] Aug. in Ep. Joh., tract. ix. 9.

[2] See Excursus IV., "Traditional Descriptions of the Appearance of Our Lord."

Independently of all tradition, we may believe with reverent conviction that there could have been nothing mean or repugnant -- that there must, as St. Jerome says, have been "something starry" -- in the form which enshrined an Eternal Divinity and an Infinite Holiness. All true beauty is but "the sacrament of goodness," and a conscience so stainless, a spirit so full of harmony, a life so purely noble, could not but express itself in the bearing, could not but be reflected in the face, of the Son of Man. We do not indeed find any allusion to this charm of aspect, as we do in the description of the young High-priest Aristobulus whom Herod murdered; but neither, on the other hand, do we find in the language of His enemies a single word or allusion which might have been founded on an unworthy appearance. He of whom John bore witness as the Christ -- He whom the multitude would gladly have seized that He might be their king -- He whom the city saluted with triumphant shouts as the Son of David -- He to whom women ministered with such deep devotion, and whose aspect, even in the troubled images of a dream, had inspired a Roman lady with interest and awe -- He whose mere word caused Philip and Matthew and many others to leave all and follow Him -- He whose one glance broke into an agony of repentance the heart of Peter -- He before whose presence those possessed with devils were alternately agitated into frenzy and calmed into repose, and at whose question, in the very crisis of His weakness and betrayal, His most savage enemies shrank and fell prostrate in the moment of their most infuriated wrath[1] -- such an One as this could not have been without the personal majesty of Prophet and a Priest. All the facts of His life speak convincingly of that strength, and endurance, and dignity, and electric influence which none could have exercised without a large share of human, no less than of spiritual, gifts. "Certainly," says St. Jerome, "a flame of fire and starry brightness flashed from His eye, and the majesty of the Godhead shone in His face."

[1] John xviii. 6. Cf. Luke iv. 30.

The third day after the return from the wilderness seems to have been spent by Jesus in intercourse with His new disciples. On the fourth day He wished to start[1] for His return to Galilee, and on the journey fell in with another young fisherman, Philip of Bethsaida. Alone of the apostles Philip had a Greek name, derived, perhaps, from the tetrarch Philip, since the custom of naming children after reigning princes has always been a common one.[2] If so, he must at this time have been under thirty. Possibly his Greek name indicates his familiarity with some of the Greek-speaking population who lived mingled with the Galilæans on the shores of Gennesareth; and this may account for the fact that he, rather than any of the other Apostles, was appealed to by the Greeks who, in the last week of His life, wished to see our Lord. One word -- the one pregnant invitation, "Follow me!" -- was sufficient to attach to Jesus for ever the gentle and simpleminded Apostle, whom in all probability he had previously known.

[1] In using the phrase ήθέλησεν έξελθείν,[1b] it is evident that St. John had in his mind some slight circumstance unknown to us.

[1a] "was minded to go forth." (Alford's tr.)

[2] The name Andrew is of Greek origin, but Lightfoot (Harmony, Luke v. 10) shows that it was in use among the Jews. Thomas was also called by the Greek name Didymus, or "Twin;" but we know no name of Philip except this Greek one. The άπό Βηθσαίδας probably means "a native of;" for Greswell's attempt to distinguish άπό from έκ in this sense is untenable.

The next day a fifth neophyte was added to that sacred and happy band. Eager to communicate the rich discovery which he had made, Philip sought out his friend Nathanael, exercising thereby the divinest prerogative of friendship, which consists in the communication to others of all that we have ourselves experienced to be most divine. Nathanael, in the list of Apostles, is generally, and almost indubitably, identified with Bartholomew; for Bartholomew is less a name than a designation -- "Bar-Tolmai, the son of Tolmai;" and while Nathanael is only in one other place mentioned under this name (John xxi. 2), Bartholomew (of whom, on any other supposition, we should know nothing whatever) is, in the list of Apostles, almost invariably associated with Philip.[1] As his home was at Cana of Galilee, the son of Tolmai might easily have become acquainted with the young fishermen of Gennesareth. And yet so deep was the retirement in which up to this time Jesus had lived His life, that though Nathanael knew Philip, he knew nothing of Christ. The simple mind of Philip seemed to find a pleasure in contrasting the grandeur of His office with the meanness of His birth: "We have found Him of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets, did write;" whom think you? -- a young Herodian Prince? -- a young Asmonæan priest? -- some burning light from the schools of Shammai or Hillel? -- some passionate young Emîr from, the followers of Judas of Gamala? -- no, but "Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph."

[1] Some make Tolmai a mere abbreviation of Ptolomæus. On the identity of Nathanael with Bartholomew, see Ewald, Gesch. Christus, 327. Donaldson (Jashar, p. 9) thinks that Nathanael was Philip's brother.

Nathanael seems to have felt the contrast. He caught at the local designation. It may be, as legend says, that he was a man of higher position than the rest of the Apostles.[1] It has been usually considered that his answer was proverbial; but perhaps it was a passing allusion to the word nazora, "despicable;: or it may merely have implied "Nazareth, that obscure and ill-reputed town in its little untrodden valley -- can anything good come from thence?" The answer is in the same words which our Lord had addressed to John and Andrew. Philip was an apt scholar, and he too said, "Come and see."

[1] Non Petro vili piscatori Bartholomaeus nobilis anteponitur"[1a] (Jerome, Ep. ad Eustoch.). Hence he is usually represented in mediæval art clothed in a purple mantle, adorned with precious stones; but John xxi. 2 is alone sufficient to invalidate the tradition. [1a] Not to Peter, a common fisherman, is the noble Bartholomew preferred.

To-day, too, that question -- "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" -- is often repeated, and the one sufficient answer -- almost the only possible answer -- is now, as it then was, "Come and see." Then it meant, come and see One who speaks as never man spake; come and see One who, though he be but the Carpenter of Nazareth, yet overawes the souls of all who approach him -- seeming by His mere presence to reveal the secrets of all hearts, yet drawing to him even the most sinful with a sense of yearning love; come and see One from whom there seems to breathe forth the irresistible charm of a sinless purity, the unapproachable beauty of a Divine life. "Come and see," said Philip, convinced in his simple faithful heart that to see Jesus was to know Him, and to know was to love, and to love was to adore. In this sense, indeed, we can say "come and see" no longer; for since the blue heaven closed on the visions which were vouchsafed to St. Stephen and St. Paul, His earthly form has been visible no more. But there is another sense, no less powerful for conviction, in which it still suffices to say, in answer to all doubts, "Come and see." Come and see a dying world revivified, a decrepit world regenerated, an aged world rejuvenescent; come and see the darkness illuminated, the despair dispelled; come and see tenderness brought into the cell of the imprisoned felon, and liberty to the fettered slave; come and see the poor, and the ignorant, and the many, emancipated for ever from the intolerable thraldom of the rich, the learned, and the few; come and see hospitals and orphanages rising in their permanent mercy beside the crumbling ruins of colossal amphitheatres which once reeked with human blood; come and see the obscene symbols of an universal degradation obliterated indignantly from the purified abodes; come and see the dens of lust and tyranny transformed into sweet and happy homes, defiant atheists into believing Christians, rebels into children, and pagans into saints. Ay, come and see the majestic acts of one great drama continued through nineteen Christian centuries; and as you see them all tending to one great development, long predetermined in the Council of the Divine Will -- as you learn in reverent humility that even apparent Chance is in reality the daughter of Forethought, as well as, for those who thus recognise her nature, the sister of Order and Persuasion[1] -- as you hear the voice of your Saviour searching, with the loving accents of a compassion which will neither strive nor cry, your very reins and heart -- it may be that you too will unlearn the misery of doubt, and exclaim in calm and happy confidence, with the pure and candid Nathanael, "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel!"

[1] [Τύχα] Εύνοµίας τε καί ΙΙειθοΰς άδελφά καί ΙΙροµαθείας θυγάτηρ[1a] (Alcman, f. 55, ed. Bergk.) "The threefold offspring of Forethought which is described in this noble fragment, appears to represent three of the cardinal relations in which we may regard the working of Providence. It first appears as Chance in regard to its occurrence; it next works Persuasion as men bow to its decrees; and at least it issues in Order" (Westcott, Charact. of the Gosp. Miracles, p. 35). [1a] [Chance] sister both of Order and Persuasion and daughter of Forethought.

The fastidious reluctance of Nathanael was very soon dispelled. Jesus, as He saw him coming, recognised that the seal of God was upon his forehead, and said of him, "Behold a true Israelite, in whom guile is not." "Whence dost thou recognise me?" asked Nathanael and then came that heart-searching answer, "Before that Philip called thee, whilst thou wert under the fig-tree, I saw thee."

It was the custom of pious Jews -- a custom approved by the Talmud -- to study their crishma, or office of daily prayer, under a fig-tree;[1] and some have imagined that there is something significant in the fact of the Apostle having been summoned from the shade of a tree which symbolised Jewish ordinances and Jewish traditions, but which was beginning already to cumber the ground.[2] But though something interesting and instructive may often be derived from the poetic insight of a chastened imagination, which can thus observe allegories which lie involved in the simplest facts, yet no such flash of sudden perception could alone have accounted for the agitated intensity of Nathanael's reply. Every one must have been struck at first sight, with the apparent disproportionateness between the cause and the effect. How apparently inadequate was that quiet allusion to the lonely session of silent thought under the fig-tree, to produce the instantaneous adhesion, the henceforth inalienable loyalty, of this "fusile Apostle" to the Son of God, the King of Israel! But for the true explanation of this instantaneity of conviction, we must look deeper; and then, if I mistake not, we shall in this incident another of those indescribable touches of reality which have been to so many powerful minds the most irresistible internal evidence to establish the historic truthfulness of the Fourth Gospel.

[1] Beresh. Rabba, f. 62, quoted by Sepp. The accusative, ύπό τήν συκήν,[1a] where we should have expected the dative, seems to imply that he had purposely gone there for prayer and meditation. Perhaps some inference as to the time of year may be drawn from this circumstance.

[1a] under the fig-tree.

[2] See 1 Kings iv. 25; Mic. iv. 4; Zech. iii. 10; Matt. xxi. 20; Luke xiii. 7.

There are moments when the grace of God stirs sensibly in the human heart; when the soul seems to rise upon the eagle-wings of hope and prayer into the heaven of heavens; when caught up, as it were, into God's very presence, we see and hear things unspeakable. At such moments we live a lifetime; for emotions such as these annihilate all time; they --

"Crowd Eternity into an hour,

Or stretch an hour into Eternity."

At such moments we are nearer to God; we seem to know Him and be known of him; and if it were possible for any man at such a moment to see into our souls, he would know all that is greatest and most immortal in our beings. But to see us then is impossible to man; it is possible only to Him whose hand should lead, whose right hand should guide us, even if we could take the wings of the morning and fly into the uttermost parts of the sea. And such a crisis of emotion must the guileless Israelite have known as he sat and prayed and mused in silence under his fig-tree. To the consciousness of such a crisis -- a crisis which could only be known to One to whom it was given the read the very secrets of the heart -- our Lord appealed. Let him who has had a similar experience say how he would regard a living man who could reveal to him that he had at such a moment looked into and fathomed the emotions of his heart. That such solitary musings -- such penetrating, even in this life, "behind the vail" -- such raptures into the third heaven during which the soul strives to transcend the limitations of space and time while it communes, face to face, with the Eternal and Unseen -- such sudden kindlings of celestial lighting which seem to have fused all that is meanest and basest within us in an instant and for ever -- that these supreme crises are among the recorded experiences of the Christian life, rests upon indisputable evidence of testimony and of fact. And if any one of my readers has ever known this spasm of divine change which annihilates the old and in the same moment creates or re-creates a new-born soul, such a one, at least, will understand the thrill of electric sympathy, the arrow-point of intense conviction, that shot that very instant through the heart of Nathanael, and brought him, as it were, at once upon his knees with the exclamation, "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel!"

We scarcely hear of Nathanael again. His seems to have been one of those calm, retiring, contemplative souls, whose whole sphere of existence lies not here, but --

"Where, beyond these voices, there is peace."

It was a life of which the world sees nothing, because it was "hid with Christ in God;" but of this we may be sure, that never till the day of his martyrdom, or even during his martyr agonies, did he forget those quiet words which showed that his "Lord had searched him out and known him, and comprehended his thoughts long before." Not once, doubtless, but on many and many a future day,[1] was the promise fulfilled for him and for his companions, that, with the eye of faith, they should "see the heavens opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man."[2]

[1] όψεσθε ( א, B, L, &c). The promise is obviously spiritual, as the ablest Fathers saw. A striking passage of Luther's to this effect is quoted in Alford. The word "hereafter shall ye see," &c. (John i. 51), meant "from this time forth," and therefore was a correct translation of άπ' άρτι at the time when our Version was made. Compare Matt. xxvi. 64 and the petition "that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life" -- i.e., not at some future time, but "from this day forward." The reading, however, is very dubious, and B, L, as well as several versions, and Origen, &c., omit it. The ΄Αµήν is found twenty-five times in St. John, and always

doubled. Cf. Isa. lxv. 16 (where God is called the "God of ן ֵמ ָא(); 2 Cor. i. 20; Rev. iii. 14. For the Messianic title Son of Man -- a title describing the Messiah as the essential representative of every child in the great human family of God -- see Dan. vii. 13, 14; Rev. i. 13, &c. [2] "Son of Man," Ben-adam, may, in its general sense, be applied to any man (Job xxv. 6; Ps. cxliv. 3, &c.), but it is applied in a special sense to Ezekiel in the Old Testament, and to Christ in the New. One very observable fact is, that though used of Ezekiel nearly ninety times, he does not once apply the title to himself; and though used about eighty times of Christ, it is never used by any but Himself, except in passages which describe His heavenly exaltation (Acts vii. 56; Rev. i. 13-20; xiv. 14). It seems further clear that though Ezekiel is called Ben-Adam (perhaps, in the midst of his revelations, to remind him of his own nothingness, µέµνησο άνθρωποςών), the title in the New Testament, being clearly drawn from Daniel (vii. 13), is the Chaldee Bar-enôsh, which represents humanity in its greatest frailty and humility, and is a significant declaration that the exaltation of Christ in His kingly and judicial office is due to His previous self-humiliation in His human nature (Phil. ii. 5-11). (Bishop Wordsworth s. v. in Smith's Dict. of Bible, iii. 1359, who quotes Cypr. De Idol. Vanit., p. 538, "hominem induit, quem perducat ad Patrem,"[2a] and Aug., Serm. 121, "Filius Dei factus est filius hominis, ut vos, qui eratis filii hominis, efficeremini filii Dei.[2b] The term benî îsh, found in Ps. iv. 3, &c., means "filii viri,"[2c] not "filii hominis,"[2d] Bengel, on this verse (John i. 51), referring to 1 Cor. xv. 47, says, "Unus hic nempe homo est, quem Adamus, post lapsum, expectavit."[2e] [2a] He assumed humanity that he might lead man to the Father. [2b] The Son of God became the Son of man, that you who were sons of man might be made sons of God.

[2c] Sons of man (of one who deserves the name of man). [2d] Sons of man (a human being).

[2e] He truly was the only man whom Adam expected after the fall.
