THE WOMAN OF SAMARIA.

"In templo vis orare? in te ora, sed prius esto templum Dei."[1]

-- AUG.

[1] Dost thou wish to pray in the temple? Pray in thyself, but first be thou a temple of God.

The Jew whose discussions had thus deeply moved the followers of John may well have been one of the prominent Pharisees; and our Lord soon became aware that they were watching his proceedings with an unfriendly eye. Their hostility to John was a still deeper hostility against Him, for the very reason that His teaching was already more successful. Perhaps in consequence of this determined rejection of the earliest steps of His teaching -- perhaps also out of regard for the wounded feelings of John's followers -- but most of all because at this very time the news reached Him that John had been seized by Herod Antipas and thrown into prison -- Jesus left Judæa and again departed into Galilee.[1] Being already in the north of Judæa, He chose the route which led through Samaria. The fanaticism of Jewish hatred, the fastidiousness of Jewish Pharisaism, which led His countrymen when travelling alone to avoid that route, could have no existence for Him, and were things rather to be discouraged than approved.

[1] The first reasons are emphasized by John (iv. 2, 3), the latter by Matt. iv. 12; Mark i. 14. For the imprisonment of John, vid. infra, Chapt. XX. (see pp. 289, seqq.). The Synoptists markedly make the imprisonment of John the beginning of the Galilæan ministry, but the Fourth Gospel supplies the hiatus which they leave.

Starting early in the morning, to enjoy as many as possible of the cool hours for travelling, he stopped at length for rest and refreshment in the neighbourhood of Sychar,[1] a city not far from the well in the fertile district which the partiality of the patriarch Jacob had bequeathed to his favourite son. The well, like all frequented wells in the East, was doubtless sheltered by a little alcove, in which were seats of stone.

[1] The town of Shechem (cf. iv. 5 with Gen. xxxiii. 19; xlviii. 22, "one portion," LXX. Σίκιµα έξαίρετον) -- the modern Nablûs (Neapolis) -- corresponds to the description here given of Sychar; and if we imagine that the city extended a little farther eastward than at present, it is not so far from the well as to render it unlikely that the women of the city would sometimes resort to it for the cool and sacred water. From what the name of Sychar is derived is uncertain. The word λεγόµενος in St. John seems to imply a sobriquet (xi. 16; xx. 24; xix. 13).

It may be ר ֶק ֶש (sheker), "a lie," alluding to the false worship of the Temple on Gerizim; or רבּ ִש

(shikkôr), "drunken," alluding to Isa. xxviii. 1; or ר ַבּןס (sûkar), "a sepulchre," alluding to Joseph's tomb, which is close by (Josh. xxiv. 32). If the designation were common, St. John might use it without any shadow of scorn; or, agains, Sychar may possibly have been a village [πόλις is very loosely used; thus Capernaum in the Gospels is called πόλις, though Josephus only calls it a village, κώµη] nearer the well than Sichem, on the site of the village now called El Askar, a name which Mr. Thomson says (The Land and the Book, ii. 220) may very easily have been corrupted from Sychar. (See, too, Keim, iii. 15, 16.)

It was the hour of noon,[1] and weary as He was with the long journey, possibly also with the extreme heat, our Lord sat "thus" on the well. The expression in the original is most pathetically picturesque. It implies that the Wayfarer was quite tired out, and in His exhaustion flung His limbs wearily on the seat, anxious if possible for complete repose. His disciples -- probably the two pairs of brothers whom he had called among the earliest, and with them the friends Philip and Bartholomew -- had left him, to buy in the neighbouring city what was necessary for their wants; and hungry and thirsty, He who bore all our infirmities sat wearily awaiting them, when His solitude was broken by the approach of a woman. In a May noon in Palestine the heat may be indeed intense,[2] but it is not too intense to admit of moving about; and this woman, either from accident, or, possibly, because she was in no good repute, and therefore would avoid the hour when the well would be thronged by all the women of the city,[3] was coming to draw water. He national enthusiasm and reverence for the great ancestor of her race, or perhaps the superior coolness and freshness of the water, may have been sufficient motive to induce her to seek this well, rather than any nearer fountain.[4] Water in the East is not only a necessity, but a delicious luxury, and the natives of Palestine are connoisseurs as to its quality.

[1] I must here repeat that I see no sufficient reason for supposing that St. John adopts a different computation of hours from that of the other Evangelists. If it had been evening, there would have been many women at the well instead of one; and, as Alford observes, St. John, if he had meant six in the evening, would have naturally specified whether he meant 6 a.m. or 6 p.m. It is a pity that such a notion has ever been started. Rettig, followed by Olshausen, Meyer, Tholuck, &c., assumed that the Romans had a civil day, the same as the modern. Hug attempted, but quite failed, to prove it. Wieseler, acknowledging that there is no evidence of any such civil reckoning, appeals to the fact that for scientific purposes the hora aequinoctialis (i.e., the twenty-fourth part of a νυχθήµερον) was recognized (e.g. by Pliny, Hist. Nat. ii. 79), and concludes, from internal evidence -- but, as it seems to me, quite unnecessarily -- that St. John must have done so (Synops., pp. 377 ff., E. Tr.). Ewald also adopts this view in a more summary way (Gesch. Christ., pp. 323, 573; Alterthümer, p. 452), though he admits that Josephus (Vit. 54) and Philo (Opp. i., p. 692) have no such reckoning. Townson conjectured, without sufficient proof, that St. John had found this mode of reckoning in use at Ephesus. St. John reckoned his hours from sunrise, as did the rest of mankind till the fifth century, so far as we know.

[2] It is not possible to determine at what time of the year this incident took place. Those who take John iv. 35 literally, suppose that it was in December; those who take verse 36 literally, place it in May. Now one of the two must be metaphorical, and how shall we decide which? Each supposition is surrounded with difficulties; but as the baptizing period seems to have been extremely short, and as the Passover in this year was in April, there is possibly a shade more likelihood that it took place in May. If so, "Say ye not, There are yet four months and then cometh harvest," must be understood as being merely a proverbial expression of the average interval between seed-time and harvest in some parts of Palestine; for which proverb there are parallels both in Hebrew and classical literature. [3] Gen. xxiv. 11.

[4] πηγή (John iv. 6). φρέαρ (ver. 12).

Jesus would have hailed her approach. The scene, indeed, in that rich green valley, with the great cornfields spreading far and wide, and the grateful shadow of trees, and the rounded masses of Ebal and Gerizim rising on either hand, might well have invited to lonely musing; and all the associations of that sacred spot -- the story of Jacob, the neighbouring tomb of the princely Joseph, the memories of Joshua, and of Gideon, and the long line of Israelitish kings -- would supply many a theme for such meditations. But the Lord was thirsty and fatigued, and having no means of reaching the cool water which glimmered deep below the well's mouth, He said to the woman, "Give me to drink."

Every one who has travelled in the East knows how glad and ready is the response to this request. The miserable Fellah, even the rough Bedawy, seems to feel a positive pleasure in having it in his power to obey the command of his great prophet, and share with a thirsty traveller the priceless element. But so deadly was the hatred and rivalry between Jews and Samaritans, so entire the absence of all familiar intercourse between them, that the request only elicited from the woman of Samaria an expression of surprise that it should have been made.[1]

[1] ού γάρσυγχρώνται (i.e., hold no familiarity with) Ίουδαϊοι Σαµαρείταις (John iv. 9); see Ezra iv. 1. Even our Lord speaks of a Samaritan as άλλογενής (Luke xvii. 18). The Jews called them Cuthites; coupled the name of "Samaritan" with "devil;" accused them of worshipping the earrings and idolatrous amulets buried by Jacob under the Allonmeonenim or "Enchanter's Oak" (Gen. xxxv. 4); cursed them in their synagogues; did not suffer them to become proselytes; said that to eat their bread was like eating swine's flesh; and denied them all share in the resurrection. The Samaritans, on their part, were accused of waylaying Jews; of misleading them by false fire-signals; and of having scattered bones in the Temple (Jos. Antt. xx. 6, § 1; xviii. 2, § 2). "Are you a Jew?" asked Salameh Cohen, the Samaritan high priest of Dr. Frankl; "and do you come to us, the Samaritans who are despised by the Jews?" (Jews in the East, ii. 329.) He added that they would willingly live in friendship with the Jews, but that the Jews avoided all intercourse with them. Soon after visiting the Sepharedish Jews of Nablous, Dr. Frankl asked one of the sect, "if he had any intercourse with the Samaritans. The women retreated with a cry of horror, and one of them said, 'Have you been among the worshippers of the pigeon?' I said that I had. The women again fell back with the same expression of repugnance, and one of them said, 'Take a purifying bath!' " (id., p. 334). I had the pleasure of spending a day among the Samaritans encamped on Mount Gerizin for their annual Passover, and neither in their habits nor apparent character could I see any cause for all this horror and hatred.

Gently, and without a word of rebuke, our Lord tells her that had she known Him, and asked of Him, He would have given her living water.[1] She pointed to the well, a hundred feet deep. He had nothing to draw with: whence could He obtain this living water? And then, perhaps with a smile of incredulity and national pride, she asked if He were greater than their father Jacob, who had digged and drunk of that very well.[2] And yet there must have been something which struck and overawed her in His words, for now she addresses Him by the title of respect which had been wanting in her first address.

[1] Not far from Jacob's well -- which is one of the very few precise spots in Palestine actually and closely identified by probability, as well as by unanimous tradition, with our Saviour's presence -- there gushes a sweet and abundant stream. The fact that even the close vicinity of the fountain should not have been enough to render needless the toil of Jacob in digging the well -- which is of immense depth -- forcibly illustrates the jealousy and suspicion that marked his relations to the neighboring Canaanites. I sat by Jacob's well at noon one April day in 1870, hot and thirsty and tired. The well is now dry, and in fact all that can be seen of it is a pit some twenty feet deep; the true well, or at any rate the mouth of it, having been filled up with masses of rubble and masonry from the basilica once built over it. Captian Anderson descended it to a depth of seventy-five feet, and it may have been twice that depth originally (Work in Palestine, p. 201). Riding on to the stream, I asked for some water, and, to my extreme surprise, for it never happened on any other occasion, was refused. I can only suppose that the cup which the Arab had in his hand was in some way sacred, and he did not wish it to be touched by a Nusrâny.

[2] Josephus (Antt. ix. 14, § 3; xi. 8, § 6; xii. 5, § 5) says that the Samaritans were fond of appealing to their descent from Jacob when the Jews were in prosperity, but denied all relationship when the Jews were in adversity. The son of Sirach calls them "the foolish people (ό λαός ό µωρός) that dwelleth in Shechem." Wetstein thinks that this was a play on the ancient name Moreh. "There be two manner of nations which my heart abhorreth, and the third is no nation: they that sit upon the mountains of Samaria, and they that dwell among the Philistines, and that foolish people that dwell in Sichem" (Ecclus. 1. 25, 26).

Our Lord is not deterred by the hard literalism of her reply; He treats it as He had treated similar unimaginative dulness in the learned Nicodemus, by still drawing her thoughts upward, if possible, to a higher region. She was thinking of common water, of which he who drinketh would thirst again; but the water He spake of was a fountain within the heart, which quenched all thirst for ever, and sprang up into eternal life.[1]

[1] Cf. Isa. xii. 3. The water is always there; what is wanting is the sacred thirst. "Ubi sitis recurrit, hominis, non aquae defectus est."[1a] (Bengel.) [1a] "When thirst returns, the defect is on the part of the man, not of the water."

She becomes the suppliant now. He had asked her a little favour, which she had delayed, or half declined; he now offers her an eternal gift. She sees that she is in some great Presence, and begs for this living water, but again with the same unspiritual narrowness -- she only begs for it that she might thirst no more, nor come there to draw.

But enough was done for the present to awake and to instruct this poor stranger, and abruptly breaking off this part of the conversation, Jesus bids her call her husband and return. All that was in His mind when He uttered this command we cannot tell; it may have been because the immemorial decorum of the East regarded it as unbecoming, if not as positively wrong, for any man, and above all for a Rabbi, to hold conversation with a strange woman; it may have been also to break a stony heart, to awake a sleeping conscience. For she was forced to answer that she had no husband, and our Lord, in grave confirmation of her sad confession, unbared to her the secret of a loose and wanton life. She had had five husbands, and he whom she now had was not her husband.[1]

[1] Keim, and many others, think it indisputable that this is an allegorical reference to the five religions brought by the Asiatic settlers into Samaria, and the hybrid Jehovism into which they were merged! Strange that an illusion so superfluously dim should have been made at all! If the Gospels were only intelligible to those who could guess the solution of such enigmas, the study of them might well be discredited altogether.

She saw that a Prophet was before her, but from the facts of her own history -- on which she is naturally anxious to linger as little as possible -- her eager mind flies to the one great question which was daily agitated with such fierce passion between her race and that of Him to whom she spake, and which lay at the root of the savage animosity with which they treated each other. Chance had thrown her into the society of a great Teacher: was it not a good opportunity to settle for ever the immense discussion between Jews and Samaritans as to whether Jerusalem or Gerizim was the holy place of Palestine -- Jerusalem, where Solomon had built his temple; or Gerizim, the immemorial sanctuary, where Joshua had uttered the blessings, and where Abraham had been ready to offer up his son?[1] Pointing to the summit of the mountain towering eight hundred feet above them, and crowned by the ruins of the ancient temple of Manasseh, which Hyrcanus had destroyed, she put her dubious question, "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship?"[2]

[1] Deut. xxvii. 4 (where they read Gerizim). Cf. Gen. xii. 7; xxxiii. 18; Deut. xii. 5; xi. 29. See Stanley, Sinai and Palestine, pp. 236, 250, &c., ed. 1866; and the remarkable story in Jos. Antt. xviii. 4, § 1.

[2] Gen. xii. 6; xxxiii. 18, 20; Jos. Antt. xi. 8, § 4. Some have seen in the woman's question a mere desire to "turn the conversation," and to avoid the personal and searching topics to which it seemed likely to lead. Although there is no sign that her conscience was sufficiently moved to make this likely, we may doubtless see in what she says the common phenomenon of an intense interest in speculative and party questions combined with an utter apathy respecting moral obedience.

Briefly, and merely by the way of parenthesis, He resolved her immediate problem. As against the Samaritans, the Jews were unquestionably right. Jerusalem was the place where God had chosen; compared to the hybrid and defective worship of Samaria, Judaism was pure and true;[1] but before and after touching on the earthly and temporal controversy, He uttered to her the mighty and memorable prophecy, that the hour was coming, yea now was, when "neither in this mountain nor yet in Jerusalem" should true worshippers worship the Father, but in every place should worship Him in spirit and in truth.

[1] John iv. 22, "We worship what we know; for salvation is of the Jews" (Isa. ii. 3; compare the phrase of Tacitus, preserved in Sulp. Severus, "Christianos ex Judaeis exstitisse"[1a]). It has been pointed out that such a sentence could not conceivably have been written by the Asiatic Gnostic to whom the school of Baur attribute the Fourth Gospel. "The ήυεϊς is remarkable as being the only instance of our Lord thus speaking ... The nearest approach to it is Matt. xv. 24, 26" (Alford). Josephus preserves the striking fact that, down to the time of Alexander, the Temple on Gerizim had no name (άνώνυµον ίερόν, Antt. xii. 5, § 5). The Samaritans actually proposed to Antiochus Epiphanes that it should be dedicated to Jupiter Hellenius. [1a] Christians sprang from Jews.

She was deeply moved and touched; but how could she, at the mere chance word of an unknown stranger, give up the strong faith in which she and her fathers had been born and bred? With a sigh she referred the final settlement of this and of every question to the advent of the Messiah;[1] and then He spake the simple, awful words -- "I that speak unto thee am He."

[1] The Messianic hopes of the Samaritans were founded, not on the Prophets (whom they rejected), but on such passages as Gen. xlix. 10; Numb. xxiv. 17; Deut. xviii. 15. That they had hopes of a character more or less Messianic is independently proved by Jos. Antt. xviii. 4, § 1; and both Simon Magus and Dositheus may fairly be regarded as false Messiahs. Yet Sir R. Hanson (Jesus of History, pp. 82-85) relies on the supposed absence of Messianic expectations in Samaria as one argument against the genuineness of the Fourth Gospel (see Sanday, p. 88). It is true that the Tirithaba impostor is not said by Josephus (l. c.) to have called himself a Christ; but this silence would prove little. Ewald (Gesch. Christ. 174, 348) seems to feel a needless difficulty here. If Hausrath (Neutest. Zeitgesch.) were right in dating the disturbance about this time, the woman's remark would be still more natural; but probably this event was six or seven years after this date.

His birth had been first revealed by night to a few unknown and ignorant shepherds; the first full, clear announcement by Himself of His own Messiahship was made by a well-side in the weary noon to a single obscure Samaritan woman. And to this poor, sinful, ignorant stranger had been uttered words of immortal significance, to which all future ages would listen, as it were, with hushed breath and on their knees.

Who would have invented, who would have merely imagined, things so unlike the thoughts of man as these?[1]

[1] A somewhat similar story occurs in the life of Ananda, the favorite disciple of Buddha; but I feel a strong conviction that some of these Buddhist stories are simply distorted echoes of the Gospel interpolated into the Lalita Vistara (see Beal's Travels of Fah Hian and Sung Yun, pp. lxxii., lxxiii.), and that others are merely accidental resemblances.

And here the conversation was interrupted, for the disciples -- and among them he who writes the record -- returned to their Master. Jacob's well is dug on elevated ground, on a spur of Gerizim, and in a part of the plain unobstructed and unshaded by trees or buildings. From a distance in that clear air they had seen and had heard their Master in long and earnest conversation with a solitary figure. He a Jew, He a Rabbi, talking to "a woman," and that woman a Samaritan, and that Samaritan a sinner![1] Yet they dared not suggest anything to Him; they dared not question Him. The sense of His majesty, the love and the faith His very presence breathed, overshadowed all minor doubts or wondering curiosities.

[1] John iv. 27, ότι µετά γυναικός έλάλει, "that he was talking with a (not the) woman." To talk with a woman in public was one of the six things which a Rabbi might not do (Berachôth, fol. 43 b; Schwab, p. 404); even, adds R. Hisda, with his own wife. Here we have a curious accidental analogy between Pharisaism and Buddhism. In the Vinaya a Bhikshu is not only forbidden to look at or speak to a woman, but he may not hold out his hand to his own mother if she be drowning! (Wilson, Essays on the Rel. of the Hindus, i. 360.)

Meanwhile the woman, forgetting ever her water-pot in her impetuous amazement, had hurried to the city with her wondrous story. Here was One who had revealed to her the very secrets of her life. Was not this the Messiah?

The Samaritans -- in all the Gospel notices of whom we detect something simpler and more open to conviction than in the Jews -- instantly flocked out of the city at her words, and while they were seen approaching,[1] the disciples urged our Lord to eat, for the hour of noon was now past, and He had had a weary walk. But all hunger had been satisfied in the exaltation of His ministry. "I have food to eat," He said, "which ye know not." Might they not have understood that, from childhood upwards, He had not lived by bread alone? But again we find the same dull, hard, stolid literalism. Their Scriptures, the very idiom in which they spoke, were full of vivid metaphors, yet they could hit on no deeper explanation of His meaning than that perhaps some one had brought Him something to eat.[2] How hard must it have been for Him thus, at every turn, to find even in His chosen ones such a strange incapacity to see that material images were but the vehicles for deep spiritual thoughts. But there was no impatience in Him who was meek and lowly of heart. "My meat," He said "is to do the will of Him that sent me, and to finish His work." And then pointing to the inhabitants of Sichem, as they streamed to Him over the plain, he continued, "You talk of there yet being four months to harvest. Look at these fields, white already for the spiritual harvest. Ye shall be the joyful reapers of the harvest which I thus have sown in toll and pain; but I, the sower, rejoice in the thought of that joy to come."[3]

[1] John iv. 30, έξήλθον -- ήρχοντο.

[2] For similar literal misconstructions see John ii. 20; iii. 4; iv. 11; vi. 42-52; Matt. xvi. 6; Mark viii. 15. We shall meet with the metaphor again, and even the Rabbis said, "The just eat of the glory of the Shechînah," and that Moses in Horeb was fed by the music of the spheres (Philo, De Somn., i. 6).

[3] Josh. xxiv. 13. We have already seen that no certain note of time can be drawn from this allusion; He "in whom is no before or after" might also have seen by imagination the whitening harvest in the springing corn.

The personal intercourse with Christ convinced many of these Samaritans far more deeply than the narrative of the woman to whom He had first revealed Himself; and graciously acceding to their request that He would stay with them, He and His disciples abode there two days. Doubtless it was the teaching of those two days that had a vast share in the rich conversions of a few subsequent years.[1]

[1] Acts viii. 5.
