THE TWELVE, AND THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT.

"Ante Christi adventum Lex jubebat non juvabat; post et jubet, et juvat."[1]

-- AUGUSTINE.

[1] Before the advent of Christ, the Law commanded but did not aid; since his advent, it both commands and aids.

After one of His days of loving and ceaseless toil, Jesus, as was His wont, found rest and peace in prayer. "He went out into a mountain" -- or, as it should rather be rendered, into the mountain[1] -- "to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God." There is something affecting beyond measure in the thought of these lonely hours; the absolute silence and stillness, broken by no sounds of human life, but only by the hooting of the night-jar or the howl of the jackal; the stars of an Eastern heaven raining their large lustre out of the unfathomable depth; the figure of the Man of Sorrows kneeling upon the dewy grass, and gaining strength for His labours from the purer air, the more open heaven, of that intense and silent communing with His Father and His God.[2]

[1] In Luke vi. 12, τό όρος is clearly specific, though elsewhere it only means the hill districts. [2] "In solitudine aer purior, caelum apertius, familiarior Deus"[2a] (Orig.). (Jer. Taylor, Life of Christ, I. § viii. 5.) -- It is a mistake of Mede, Hammond, &c., to suppose that έν τή προσευχή τοΰ Θεοΰ[2b] can mean "in a proseucha," or oratory (cf. Acts xvi. 13; Juv. iii. 296, "In quâ te quæro proseuchâ;"[2c] Jos. Vit. 54). These were always near water (cf. Jos. Antt. xiv. 10, § 23, "and may make their proseuchae at the sea-side, according to the custom of their forefathers"), and we know of no instance of their being on hill-tops. [2a] "In his solitude he did not breathe more pure inspiration, heaven was more open, God was more familiar"

[2b] in prayer to God.

[2c] "in what temple-porch must I seek you?" (Stirling's tr.) .

The scene of this lonely vigil, and of the Sermon on the Mount, was in all probability the singular elevation known at this day as the Kurn Hattîn, or "Horns of Hattî."[1] It is a hill with a summit which closely resembles an Oriental saddle with its two high peaks. On the west it rises very little above the level of a broad and undulating plain; on the east it sinks precipitately towards a plateau, on which lies, immediately beneath the cliffs, the village of Hattîn; and from this plateau the travelller descends through a wild and tropic gorge to the shining levels of the Lake of Galilee. It is the only conspicuous hill on the western side of the lake, and it is singularly adapted by its conformation, both to form a place for short retirement and a rendezvous for gathering multitudes. Hitherward, in all probability, our Lord wandered in the evening between the rugged and brigand-haunted crags which form the sides of the Vale of Doves, stopping, perhaps, at times to drink the clear water of the little stream, to gather the pleasant apples of the nubk, and to watch the eagles swooping down on some near point of rock. And hither, in the morning, less heedful than their Divine Master of the manifold beauties of the scene, the crown followed Him -- loathe even for a time to lose His inspiring presence, eager to listen to the gracious words that proceeded out of His mouth. [1] Robinson writes it Kurûn, which as a plural is good dictionary Arabic. I generally follow Mr. Porter's spelling of modern names in Palestine, as it certainly well represents the actual pronunciation.

It was at dawn of day, and before the crown had assembled, that our Lord summoned into His presence the disciples who had gradually gathered around Him. Hitherto the relation which bound them to His person seems to have been loose and partial; and it is doubtful whether they at all realised its full significance. But now the hour was come, and out of the wider band of general followers He made the final and special choice of His twelve Apostles. Their number was insignificant compared to the pompous retinue of hundreds who called themselves followers of a Hillel or a Gamaliel, and their position in life was humble and obscure. Simon and Andrew the sons of Jonas, James and John the sons of Zabdîa, and Philip, were of the little village of Bethsaida. If Matthew be the same as Levi, he was a son of Alphæus, and therefore a brother of James the Less and of Jude,, the brother of James, who is generally regarded as identical with Lebbæus and Thaddæus. They belonged in all probability to Cana or Capernaum, and if there were any ground for believing the tradition[1] which says that Mary, the wife of Alphæus or Klopas,[2] was a younger sister of the Virgin, then we should have to consider these two brothers as first-cousins of our Lord. Nathanael or Bartholomew was of Cana in Galilee.[3] Thomas was the son of a Simon Iscariot, but whether this Simon is identical with the Zealot cannot be determined.

[1] The punctuation of John xix. 25 is too uncertain to regard this as undeniable; nor, since James, Judas, Simon are among the very commonest of Jewish names, does this in any way affect the question of the "Brethren of Jesus."

[2] That Alphæus and Klopas may represent יַפ ְל ַח seems clear; and Kleopas (Luke xxiv. 18) may be only another variation. On the other hand, Kleopas may be a shortened form of Kleopater, as Antipas is of Antipater.

[3] This goes against Dr. Donaldson's conjecture that both Philip and Nathanael were sons of Tolmai, and brothers. Dr. Donaldson also argues that Thomas was a twin brother of Matthew, and was originally called Jude; and that Jude was the son of James the Less, and therefore grandson of Alphæus (see his arguments in Jashar, p. 100). Euseb. H. E. i. 13.) -- Some legends make Thomas a twin-brother of James.

Of these, "the glorious company of the Apostles," three, James the Less,[1] Jude [the brother[2] of James, and Simon Zelotes, are almost totally unknown. The very personality of James and Jude is involved in numerous and difficult problems, caused by the extreme frequency of those names among the Jews. Whether they are the authors of the two Catholic Epistles, is a question which, perhaps, will never be determined. Nor is anything of individual interest recorded about them in the Gospels, if we except the single question of "Judas, not Iscariot," which is mentioned by St. John.[3] Simon is only known by his surnames of Zelotes, "the Zelalot," or "the Canaanite" -- names which are identical in meaning, and which mark him out as having once belonged to the wild and furious followers of Judas of Giscala.[4] The Greek names of Philip and Andrew, together with the fact that it was to Philip that the Greeks applied who wished for an interview with our Lord, and his reference of the request to Andrew, may possibly point[5] to some connection on their part with the Hellenists; but, besides their first call, almost nothing is recorded about them; and the same remark applies to Nathanael and to Matthew. Of Thomas, called also Didymus, or "the Twin," which is only a Greek version of his Hebrew name, we catch several interesting glimpses, which show a well-marked character, naïve and simple, but at the same time ardent and generous; ready to die, yet slow to believe. Of Judas, the man of Kerioth,[6] perhaps the only Jew in the Apostolic band, we shall have sad occasion to speak hereafter; and throughout the Gospels he is often branded by the fatal epitaph, so terrible in its very simplicity, "Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him."[7]

[1] James shall rather be called "the Little" than "the Less." The Greek is ό µικρός, which in classical Greek means "the short of stature" (Xen. Mem. i. 4, 2; Lightfoot, Galatians, p. 250); moreover, James the son of Zebedee is never called the Great. [2] "Judas of James" may mean "son of James;" but it is supposed that both Judas and the better-known James were sons of Alphæus, as well as Matthew. Judas is almost universally believed (except by Ewald, Gesch. Christ., p. 399) to be the same as Lebbæus and Thaddæus

-- "the three-named disciple." כֵל (lebh) means "heart;" and Jerome renders the name Corculum. (There is absolutely no ground for the notion that he received other names because the name Jehuda has three letters of the Tetragrammaton, and so the Jews avoided it; on the contrary, it was one of the very commonest of Jewish names.) The identification rests partly on the fact that in Matt. x. [3] the reading Λεββαϊος is in א, B, Θαδδαϊος; and in some MSS. Λεββ. ό έπικληθείς Θαδδαϊος. In Mark iii. 18, the reading also varies, but the true reading is probably Θαδδαϊος, who, then, in both lists occupies the tenth place. In St. Luke's list, the corresponding name, though it occupies the eleventh place, is "Judas of James." The

attempt to make Thaddæus mean the same as Lebbæus is a mistake, for the Aram. ר ַּח(Hebr.

ר ַש) means mamma, not pectus or cor (Lam. iv. 3, &c.). Ewald identifies Lebbæus with Levi (Mark ii. 14), where Origen (c. Cels. ii. 62) seems to have read Λεβής and conjectures that Thaddæis died early, and Judas of James was appointed in his place (Gesch. Christ. 399). Clemens of Alexandria certainly distinguishes between Ματθαίος and Λενϊς (Strom. iv. 9, § 73). But the whole subject is involved in almost incredible obscurity. The lists of the Apostles as given by the three Evangelists and in the Acts are as follows:

MATT. x. 2-4 MARK iii. 16-19 LUKE vi. 14-16 ACTS i. 13 1. Simon Simon Simon Simon

Καναναϊος Καναναϊος

[3] John xiv. 22.

[4] ה ָא ְנ ִק means "zeal." The true reading of Matt. x. 4; Mark iii. 18 is Καναναϊος, and the form of the word indicates the member of a sect (Lightfoot, Revision, p. 138). Ζηλωταί παρά Ίουδαιοις οί τοΰ νόµου φύλακες [2j] (Suid. s. v.). Nicephorus (Hist. Eccl. ii 40) says that he derived the name διά τόν πρός τόν διδασκαλον διάπυρον ζήλον[2k]. For a description of this faction, and their doings, see Jos. Bell. Jud. iv. passim. "Zealots," he says (iv. 3, § 9), "for that was the name they went by, as if they were zealous in good deeds, and not rather zealous in the worst." They took PHinehas as their type (Numb. xxv. 11-13). Canaanite can hardly mean "of Cana," for that would be Καναθαϊος (Ewald, Gesch. Christ., p. 399). Bruce happily remarks that the choice of an ex-Zealot as an apostle, giving grounds for political suspicion, is another sign of Christ's disregard of mere prudential wisdom. Christ wished the apostles to be the type and germ of the Church; and therefore we find in it a union of opposites -- the tax-gatherer Matthew, and the tax-hater Simon -- the unpatriotic Jew who served the alien, and the patriot who strove for emancipation (Training of the Twelve, p. 36). [5] But see supra, Chap. X., p. 135.

[6] In John vi. 71, some MSS. read, άπό Καρυώτου ( א, al.). In D this is the reading also of xii. 4; xiii. 2; &c., and Tischendorf thinks that St. John may have always used this form. Kerioth is the name of a town on the southern border of Judah (Josh. xv. 25). Ίσκαριώτης then means

"man (שי ִ,,א, ish) of Kerioth," just as Ίστωβος, "a man of Tob" (Jos. Antt. viii. 6, § 1). Ewald, however (Gesch. Christ., p. 398), identifies it with Kartah in Zebulun (Josh. xxi. 34). Other derivations of the name (e.g., scortea, "a leather apron;" askara, "suffocation," &c.; see Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr., in Matt. x. 4) are hardly worth noticing; but it must be admitted that the reading in Josh. xv. 25 is dubious, being probably Kerioth-Hezron, i.e., "cities of Herzon, which is Hazor." Robinson identifies the place with Kuryetein, "the two cities" -- a ruined site, ten miles south of Hebron.

[7] Matt. x. 4. The ός έγένετο προδότης, "who became a traitor," of Luke vi. 16, is a lettle less

severe. If Simon the Zealot bore also the name Iscariot, as would appear from א, B, C, G, L, &c., in John vi. 71; xiii. 26, then he was a father of the traitor. If he were, as some traditions say, a son of "Clopas, or Alphæus," it might appear that nearly all the Apostles were related to each other and to our Lord. If we accept the suggestions of different writers on the subject, James and John, James the Less, Jude, Matthew, and Simon were all His first-cousins, and Judas Iscariot His second-cousin. The notion that Thomas was a twin-brother, according to some of Matthew, accroding to others of Thaddæus, according to others Jesus Himself, merely arises from his name. But all these suppositions depend on dubious conjecture or wavering tradition, and it is hardly needful to recount all the various guesses and attempted combinations of modern writers. It is, however, an interesting fact that so many of the Apostles wre brothers -- two sons of Zabdia, two of Jonas, three (at least), if not four, of Alphæus; besides (possibly) two sons of Tolmai, and a father and son.

James, John, and Peter belonged to the innermost circle -- the éklektôn éklektóteroi[1] -- of our Lord's associates and friends.[2] They alone were admitted into His presence when He raised the daughter of Jairus, and at His transfiguration, and during His agony in the garden. Of James we know nothing farther except that to him was granted the high honour of being the first martyr in the Apostolic band. He and his brother John seem, although they were fishermen, to have been in easier circumstances than their associates. Zebedee, their father, not only had his own boat, but also his own hired servants; and John mentions incidentally in his Gospel that he "was known to the high priest."[3] We have already noticed the not improbable conjecture that he resided much at Jerusalem, and there managed the importing of the fish which were sent thither from the Sea of Galilee. We should thus be able to account for his more intimate knowledge of those many incidents of our Lord's ministry in Judæa which have been entirely omitted by the other Evangelists.

[1] the more elect of the elect. [2] I have already mentioned the conjecture derived from John xix. 25, that Salome was a sister of the Virgin (v. supr., p. 130, n. 3). But if the sons of Zebedee were the first-cousins of Jesus, it would be strange that no hint or tradition of the fact should have been preserved. Zebedee probably died shortly after their final call to the Apostolate, as we hear no more of him.

[3] The story of his wearing a πέταλον (Exod. xxviii. 36; xxix. 6) at Ephesus, as though he had himself been of priestly race (ός έγενήθη ιερεύς τό πέταλον πεφρεκώς,[3a] Euseb. H. E. iii. 31), sounds very apocryphal. Yet it is strange that such a story should have been invented, especially as we find the same thing asserted of James the Just, "the Lord's brother" (Epiphan, Haer. xxix. 4; Ewald, Gesch. Christus, p. 246, 3rd ed.). Perhaps in this instance, as in others, a symbolic allusion has been too literally interpreted as a fact. [3a] "who was a priest that bore the sacerdotal plate"

St. John and St. Peter -- the one the symbol of the contemplative, the other of the practical life -- are undoubtedly the grandest and most attractive figures in that Apostolic band. The character of St. John has been often mistaken. Filled as he was with a most divine tenderness -- realising as he did to a greater extant than any of the Apostles the full depth and significance of our Lord's new commandment -- rich as his Epistles and his Gospel are with a meditative and absorbing reverence -- dear as he has ever been in consequence to the heart of the mystic and the saint -- yet he was something indefinitely far removed from that effeminate pietist which has furnished the usual type under which he has been represented. The name Boanerges "Sons of Thunder," which he shared with his brother James,[1] their joint petition for precedence in the kingdom of God, their passionate request to call down fire from heaven on the offending village of the Samaritans,[2] the burning energy of the patois in which the Apocalypse is written, the impetuous horror with which, according to tradition, St. John recoiled from the presence of the heretic Cerinthus,[3] all show that in him was the spirit of the eagle, which, rather than the dove, has been his immemorial symbol.[4] And since zeal and enthusiasm, dead as they are, and scorned in these days by an effete and comfortable religionism, yet have ever been indispensable instruments in spreading the Kingdom of Heaven, doubtless it was the existence of these elements in his character, side by side with tenderness and devotion, which endeared him so greatly to his Master, and made him the "disciple whom Jesus loved." The wonderful depth and power of his imagination, the rare combination of contemplativeness and passion, of strength and sweetness, in the same soul -- the perfect faith which inspired his devotion, and the perfect love which precluded fear -- these were the gifts and graces which rendered him worthy of leaning his young head on the bosom of his Lord.

[1] Bene R'aasch (Grätz, Gesch. d. Jud. iii. 231)

[2] Luke ix. 54.

[3] Euseb. H. E. iv. 14. The heretic is also said to have been Ebion (Epiph. Haer. xxx. 24). [4] The same spirit appears in Luke ix. 49; Rev. xxii. 18; 2 John 9, 10.

Nor is his friend St. Peter a less interesting study. We shall have many opportunities of observing the generous, impetuous, wavering, noble, timid, impulses of his thoroughly human but most lovable disposition. Let the brief but vivid summary of another now suffice. "It would be hard to tell," says Dr. Hamilton, "whether most of his fervour flowed through the outlet of adoration or activity. His full heart put force and promptitude into every movement. Is his Master encompassed by fierce ruffians? -- Peter's ardour flashes in his ready sword, and converts the Galilæan boatman into the soldier instantaneously. It there a rumour of a resurrection from Joseph's tomb? -- John's nimbler foot distances his older friend; but Peter's eagerness outruns the serene love of John, and past the gazing disciple he rushes breathless into the vacant sepulchre. Is the risen Saviour on the strand? -- his comrades secure the net, and turn the vessel's head for shore but Peter plunges over the vessel's side, and struggling through the waves, in his dripping coat falls down at his Master's feet. Does Jesus say, 'Bring of the fish ye have caught?' -- ere any one could anticipate the word, Peter's brawny arm is lugging the weltering net with its glittering spoil ashore, and every eager movement unwittingly is answering beforehand the question of his Lord, 'Simon, lovest thou me?' And that fervour is the best, which, like Peter's, and as occasion requires, can ascend in ecstatic ascriptions of adoration and praise, or follow Christ to prison and to death; which can concentrate itself on feats of heroic devotion, or distribute itself in the affectionate assiduities of a miscellaneous industry."[1]

[1] Dr. Hamilton, Life in Earnest, p. 80.

Such were the chief of the Apostles whom the Lord united into one band as He sat on the green summit of Kurn Hattîn. We may suppose that on one of those two peaks He had passed the night in prayer, and had there been joined by his disciples at the early dawn. By what external symbol, if by any, our Lord ratified this first great ordination to the Apostolate we do not know; but undoubtedly the present choice was regarded as formal and as final. Henceforth there was to be no return to the fisher's boat or the publican's booth as a source of sustenance; but the disciples were to share the wandering missions, the evangelic labours, the scant meal and uncertain home, which marked even the happiest period of the ministry of their Lord. They were to be weary with Him under the burning noon day, and to sleep, as He did, under the starry sky.

And while the choice was being made, a vast promiscuous multitude had begun to gather. Not only from the densely-populated shores of the Sea of Galilee, but even from Judæa and Jerusalem -- nay, even from the distant sea-coasts of Tyre and Sidon -- they had crowded to touch His person and hear His words.[1] From the peak He descended to the flat summit of the hill,[2] and first of all occupied Himself with the physical wants of those anxious hearers, healing their diseases, and dispossessing the unclean spirits of the souls which they had seized. And then, when the multitude were seated in calm and serious attention on the grassy sides of that lovely natural amphitheatre, He raised His eyes,[3] which had, perhaps, been bent downwards for a few moments of inward prayer, and opening His mouth,[4] delivered primarily to His disciples, but intending through them to address the multitude, that memorable discourse which will be known for ever as "the Sermon on the Mount."

[1] Luke vi. 17-19. Assuming, with little or no hesitation, that St. Luke intends to record the same great discourse as that given by St. Matthew, I have here, as in so many other places, combined the separate touches in the twofold narrative. The apparent differences are easily accounted for by any reasonable theory of the position of the Evangelists. At the same time I see no objection whatever to the supposition that our Lord may have repeated parts of His teaching at different times and places and to different audiences; or that St. Matthew has combined and summarized not one but many sermons delivered on the Galilæan hills. [2] The τόπος πεδινός of Luke vi. 17, which is too briefly rendered "the plain" in the English Version. Cf. Isa. xiii. 2, έπ΄ όρους πεδινοΰ άρατε σηµεϊον, LXX. [3] Luke vi. 20.

[4] Matt. v. 2. The expression marks the solemnity and importance of the discourse.

The most careless reader has probably been struck with the contrast between the delivery of this sermon and the delivery of the Law on Sinai. We think of that as a "fiery law," whose promulgation is surrounded by the imagery of thunders, and lightnings, and the voice of the trumpet sounding long and waxing louder and louder. We think of this as flowing forth in divinest music amid all the calm and loveliness of the clear and quiet dawn. That came dreadfully to the startled conscience from an Unseen Presence, shrouded by wreathing clouds, and destroying fire, and eddying smoke; this was uttered by a sweet human voice that moved the heart most gently in words of peace. That was delivered on the desolate and storm-rent hill which seems with its red granite crags to threaten the scorching wilderness; this on the flowery grass of the green hill-side which slopes down to the silver lake. That shoot the heart with terror and agitation; this soothed it with peace and love. And yet the New Commandments of the Mount of Beatitudes were not meant to abrogate, but rather to complete, the Law which was spoken from Sinai to them of old.[1] That Law was founded on the eternal distinctions of right and wrong -- distinctions strong and irremovable as the granite bases of the world. Easier would it be to sweep away the heaven and the earth, than to destroy the least letter, one yod -- or the least point of a letter, one projecting horn -- of that code which contains the very principles of all moral life. Jesus warned them that He came, not to abolish that Law, but to obey and to fulfil; while at the same time He taught that this obedience had nothing to do with the Levitical scrupulosity of a superstitious adherence to the letter, but was rather a surrender of the heart and will to the innermost meaning and spirit which the commands involved. He fulfilled the olden Law by perfectly keeping it, and by imparting a power to keep it to all who believe in Him, even though He made its cogency so far more universal and profound.[2]

[1] Τοϊς άρχαίοις (Matt. v. 21). Not "by," as in our A. V., but "to" them of old; "to eld men" (Wiclif). The Rabbis, too, spoke of the abiding permanence of the Law, but they applied the remark materially, not, as Jesus does, spiritually.

[2] See the beautiful remarks of St. Augustine, quoted in Archbishop Trench's Sermon on the Mount, p. 186.

The sermon began with the word "blessed," and with an octave of beatitudes. But it was a new revelation of beatitude. The people were expecting a Messiah who should break the yoke off their necks -- a king clothed in earthly splendour, and manifested in the pomp of victory and vengeance. Their minds were haunted with legendary prophecies, as to how He should stand on the shore at Joppa, and bid the sea pour out its pearls and treasure at His feet; how He should clothe them with jewels and scarlet, and feed them with even a sweeter manna than the wilderness had known. But Christ reveals to them another King, another happiness -- the riches of poverty, the royalty of meekness, the beatitude of sorrow and persecution. And this new Law, which should not only command but also aid, was to be set forth in beneficent manifestation -- at once as salt to preserve the world from corruption, and as a light to guide it in the darkness. And then follows a comparison of the new Law of mercy with the old Law of threatening; the old was transitory, this permanent; the old was a type and shadow, the new a fulfilment and completion; the old demanded obedience in outward action, the new was to permeate the thoughts; the old contained the rule of conduct, the new the secret of obedience. The command, "Thou shalt not murder," was henceforth extended to angry words and feelings of hatred.[1] The germ of adultery was shown to be involved in a lascivious look. The prohibition of perjury was extended to every vain and unnecessary oath. The law of equivalent revenge was superseded by a law of absolute self-abnegation. The love due to our neighbour was extended also to our enemy.[2] Henceforth the children of the kingdom were to aim at nothing less than this -- namely, to be perfect, as their Father in heaven is perfect.

[1] The word είκή (D, many uncials, the Vetus Itala, the Cureton Syriac, &c.) in Matt. v. 22, whether genuine or not, expresses the true sense, for there is such a thing as a righteous anger, and a justifiable indignation (Eph. iv. 26). Augustine finely and truly says, "Non fratri irascitur, qui peccato fratris irascitur"[1a] (Retract. i. 19). The word µωρέ in the same verse may be not merely "fool," but "rebel," "apostate;" the Hebrew morah (Numb. xx. 10). (Of course, I do not mean that µωρός is derived from, but merely that it was suggested by the Hebrew word, as is the case very often in LXX. renderings.) But the thing which Jesus forbids is not the mere use of particular expressions -- for if that were all, He might have instanced taunts and libels ten thousand times more deadly -- but the spirit of rage and passion out of which such expressions spring. Thus Raca (ώ άνθρωπε κενέ) is used, with due cause, by St. James (ii. 20), and µωρός is applied to the blind and wicked, not only by David (Ps. xiv. 1), but by our Lord Himself (Matt. xxiii. 17).

[1a] He is not angry with a brother who is angry at the sin of a brother. [2] Matt. v. 43, "and hate thine enemy," has been severly criticised by later Jews as a misrepresentation of the Mosaic Law. See, however, Deut. xxiii. 6; vii. 2. And although these precepts were of special significance, certainly many of the Rabbis, including Shammai himself, had made use of the Mosaic Law to justify the most violent national and religious hatred (v. Schöttgen, Hor. Hebr., ad loc.). He quotes, among other passages from the Talmud, Midr. Tehillîn, f. 26, 4: "Do not show kindness or pity to Gentiles." Lightfoot, ib., quotes one from Maimonides, and says, "Exemplum hoc unum satis sit pro plurimis, quae praesto sunt ubique."[2a] "The Mishna," says Gfrörer (Jahrh. d. Heils, i. 114), "is full of such passages," and if the Jews had not acted in the spirit of them, we should not have had the charges against them in Tacitus ("adversus omnes alios hostile adium,"[2b] H. v. 5) and Juvenal ("Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti,"[2c] Sat. xiv. 103). [2a] Let this one example suffice for the many which are every where at hand. [2b] against all others, bitter animosity.

[2c] "not to show the roads unless to one worshipping the same sacred things"

And the new life which was to issue from this new Law was to be contrasted in all respects with that routine of exaggerated scruples and Pharisaic formalism which had hitherto been regarded as the highest type of religious conversation. Alms were to be given, not with noisy ostentation, but in modest secrecy.[1] Prayers were to be uttered, not with hypocritic publicity, but in holy solitude. Fasting was to be exercised, not as a belauded virtue, but as a private self-denial. And all these acts of devotion were to be offered with sole reference to the love of God, in a simplicity which sought no earthly reward, but which stored up for itself a heavenly and incorruptible treasure. And the service to be sincere must be entire and undistracted. The cares and the anxieties of life were not to divert its earnestness or to trouble its repose. The God to whom it was directed was a Father also, and He who ever feeds the fowls of the air, which neither sow nor reap, and clothes in their more than regal loveliness the flowers of the field,[2] would not fail to clothe and feed, and that without any need for their own toilsome anxiety, the children who seek His righteousness as their first desire.

[1] There is no trace in the Talmud or elsewhere that it was a practice of the Pharisees to send a trumpeter before them when they distributed their alms (Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr. in Matt. vi. 2). The expression "do not sound a trumpet before thee," is merely a graphic touch for "do not do it publicly and ostentatiously" (cf. Numb. x. 3; Ps. lxxxi. 3; Joel ii. 15, &c.). Mr. Shore, in the Bible Educator, approves of Schöttgen's conjecture, which connects it with the trumpet-shaped openings of the alms-boxes in the Temple treasury (Neh. xii. 41); but surely "do not trumpet" could never mean "do not make your shekels rattle in those trumpet-shaped orifices." It is true that they were called shopherôth (Reland, De Spol Templ. Hierosol. xii.). Grotius connects the expression with Amos iv. 5; and Rashi with a supposed custom (Targ. Hos. xiv. 8) of blowing the trumpet during libations in the Temple.

[2] Compare the name Kaiserkrone for the imperial martagon. The lilies to which Christ alluded (Matt. vi. 28) are either flowers generally, or, perhaps, the scarlet anemone, or the Huleh lily -- a beautiful flower which is found wild in this neighborhood. In verse 27, ήλικια should be rendered "age," not "stature," as in John ix. 21; Eph. iv. 13; Heb. xi. 11. Cf. δάκτυλος άυέρα, Alc., and Ps. xxxix. 5.

And what should be the basis of such service? The self-examination which issues in a gentleness which will not condemn, in a charity that cannot believe, in an ignorance that will not know, the sins of others; the reserve which will not waste or degrade things holy; the faith which seeks for strength from above, and knows that, seeking rightly, it shall obtain; the self-denial which, in the desire to increase God's glory and man's happiness, sees the sole guide of its actions towards all the world.

The gate was strait, the path narrow, but it led to life; by the lives and actions of those who professed to live by it, and point it out, they were to judge whether their doctrine was true or false; without this neither words of orthodoxy would avail, nor works of power.

Lastly, He warned them that he who heard these sayings and did them was like a wise man who built a house with foundations dug deeply into the living rock, whose house, because it was founded upon a rock, stood unshaken amid the vehement beating of storm and surge: but he who heard and did them not was likened "unto a foolish man that built his house upon the sand; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house: and it fell, and great was the fall of it."[1]

[1] With this simile compare Ezek. xiii. 11; Job xxvii. 18. Schöttgen quotes an analogous comparison from the Pirke Abhôth iii. 17, and Abhôth de Rabbi Nathan, c. 23 (a late Jewish writer). For an admirable sketch of the topics handled in the Sermon on the Mount, see Westcott's Introd., p. 358. In outline he arranges itthus: -- 1. "The Citizens of the Kingdom (v. 1-16) -- their character absolutely (3-6); relatively (7-12); and their influence (13-16). 2. The New Law (17-48) as the fulfillment of the Old generally (17-20) and specially (murder, adultery, perjury, revenge, exclusiveness, 21-48). 3. The New Life (vi.-vii. 27); acts of devotion (vi. 1-18), aims (19-34), conduct (vii. 1-12), dangers (vii. 13-23). 4. The Great Contrast." Many Rabbinical parables -- always inferior in beauty, in point, in breadth, and in spirituality -- have been compared with separate clauses of the Sermon on the Mount. Since even the Mishna was not committed to writing till the second century, and since it is therefore impossible to estimate the diffusion of Christian thought even among hostile Rabbinic writers, as a friend observes, to suppose that the world is made in water-tight compartments, even when the division seem most absolute. In fact, hostility may be less a barrier than a channel, at least when accompanied by competition. Protestantism has reacted upon Judaism. But even if we suppose the Rabbinic parallels, such as they are, to be independent and precedent, yet, considering the facts that high moral truths have been uttered even by pagans, from the earliest times -- and considering that all discovery of moral truths is due to that revealing Spirit which is called in Scripture "the candle of the Lord" (Prov. xx. 27) -- the question of "originality," to which some writers attach so much importance, seems to be futile, and devoid of all significance. I have not thought it worth while to adduce these parallels, except in rare and interesting cases. The attack on the score of its not being "original" is the one of all others from which Christianity has least to fear. The question of mere literary precedence in the utterance or illustration of a moral truth is one which has no importance for mankind. A truth so enunciated that it merely lies "in the lumber-room of the memory, side by side with the most exploded errors," is practically no truth at all; it only becomes real when it is so taught as to become potent among human motives.

"Though truths in manhood darkly join,

Deep-seated in our mystic frame,

We yield all honor to the name

Of Him who made them current coin."

Such in barest and most colourless outline are the topics of that mighty sermon; nor is it marvellous that they who heard it "were astonished at the doctrine." Their main astonishment was that He taught "as one having authority, and not as the Scribes."[1] The teaching of their Scribes was narrow, dogmatical, material; it was cold in manner, frivolous in matter, second-hand, and iterative in its very essence; with no freshness in it, no force, no fire; servile to all authority, opposed to all independence; at once erudite and foolish, at once contemptuous and mean; never passing a hair's breadth beyond the carefully-watched boundary line of commentary and precedent; full of balanced inference, and orthodox hesitancy, and impossible literalism; intricate with legal pettiness and labyrinthine system elevating mere memory above genius, and repetition above originality; concerned only about Priests and Pharisees, in Temple and synagogue, or school, or Sanhedrin, and mostly occupied with things infinitely little. It was not indeed wholly devoid of moral significance, nor is it impossible to find here and there, among the débris of it, a noble thought; but it was occupied a thousandfold more with Levitical minutiae about mint, and anise, and cummin, and the length of fringes, and the breadth of phylacteries, and the washing of cups and platters, and the particular quarter of a second when new moons and Sabbath-days began.[2] But this teaching of Jesus was wholly different in its character, and as much grander as the temple of the morning sky under which it was uttered was grander than stifling synagogue or crowded school. It was preached, as each occasion rose, on the hillside, or by the lake, or on the roads, or in the house of the Pharisee, or at the banquet of the publican; nor was it any sweeter or loftier when it was addressed in the Royal Portico to the Masters of Israel, than when its only hearers were the ignorant people whom the haughty Pharisees held to be accursed. And there was no reserve in its administration. It flowed forth as sweetly and as lavishly to single listeners as to enraptured crowds; and some of its very richest revelations were vouchsafed, neither to rulers nor to multitudes, but to the persecuted outcast of the Jewish synagogue, to the timid inquirer in the lonely midnight, and the frail woman by the noonday well. And it dealt, not with scrupulous tithes and ceremonial cleansings, but with the human soul, and human destiny, and human life -- with Hope and Charity, and Faith. There were no definitions in it, or explanations, or "scholastic systems," or philosophic theorising, or implicated mazes of difficult and dubious discussion, but a swift intuitive insight into the very depths of the human heart -- even a supreme and daring paradox that, without being fenced round with exceptions and limitations, appealed to the conscience with its irresistible simplicity, and with an absolute mastery stirred and dominated over the heart. Springing from the depths of holy emotions, it thrilled the being of every listener as with electric flame. In a word, its authority was the authority of the Divine Incarnate; it was a Voice of God, speaking in the utterance of man; its austere purity was yet pervaded with tenderest sympathy, and its awful severity with an unutterable love. It is, to borrow the image of the wisest of the Latin Fathers, a great sea whose smiling surface breaks into refreshing ripples at the feet of our little ones, but into whose unfathomable depths the wisest may gaze with the shudder of amazement and the thrill of love.[3]

[1] The Scribes (Sopherîm) date as a distinct body from the period of Ezra. The name is derived from sepher, "or book," and means "Scripturalists" -- those who explained and copied the Law; not from saphar, "to count," because they counted all the letters of it (Derenbourg, Hist. Pal. 25). Their functions were to copy, read, amend, explain, and protect the Law. It was in the latter capacity that they invented the "fences," which, under the title of Dibherî Sopherîm, "words of the Scribes," formed the nucleus of the "tradition of the elders" (Matt. xv. 2; Gal. i. 14), or Oral Law (the Torah shebeal pî, or "Law upon the lip," as distinguished from the Torah shebeketeb, or "Law which is in writing"), any transgression of which is declared by the Mishna to be more heinous than a transgression of the words of the Bible (Sanhedrin, x. 3). The Sopherîm proper only lasted from Ezra to the death of Simon the Just, BC 300, and they were succeeded by the Tanaîm, or teachers of the Law -- the νοµικοί and νοµοδιδάσκαλοι of the Gospels, who lasted to AD 220, and fixed the "Words of the Scribes" into "Halachôth," or "rules of action, chiefly intended to form a seyag latôrh, or "hedge about the Law." The Tanaîm inherited a splendor of reputation which was reflected on them from their predecessors, who held a most exalted position (Ecclus. xxxix. 1-11). But the name γραµµατεύς still continued to exist although in a less lofty meaning than it had previously acquired. Secondhandness, the slavish dependence on precedent and authority, is the most remarkable characteristic of Rabbinical teaching. It very rarely rises above the level of a commentary at once timid and fantastic. R. Eliezer actually made it his boast that he had originated nothing; and Hillel's grand position, as Nasî, or President of the Sanhedrin, was simply due to his having remembered a decision of Shemaia and Abtalion. "Get for thyself a teacher," was a characteristic gnome of Joshua Ben Perachia, whom the Talmud calls "the Teacher of Christ." [2] Any one who chooses to take the trouble, may verify these assertions for himself. Much has been written lately in exaltation of the Talmud. Now the literature to which the general name of Talmud is given, occupies twelve immense folio volumes; and it would be strange indeed if out of this vast encyclopædia of a nation's literature, it were not possible to quote a few eloquent passages, some beautiful illustrations, and a considerable number of just moral sentiments which sometimes rise to the dignity of noble thoughts. But what seems to me absolutely indisputable, and what any one may judge of for himself, is that all that is really valuable in the Talmud is infinitesimally small compared with the almost immeasurable rubbish-heaps in which it is imbedded. Let any one, for instance, take in hand the recent French translation of one of the most important Talmudic treatises. The Talmud -- i.e., the Mishna and Gemara -- is divided into six Sedarîm, or "orders," the first of which is called Seder Zaraîm, or "Orders of Seeds," and the first treatise of this is called Berachôth, or "Blessings," and is composed of nine chapters on "the confession, worship, and service of the one God, and of prayers and benedictions offered to Him as the Giver of the blessings of Life." This has been translated into French by a learned Hebraist, M. Moïse Schwab, of the Bibliothèque Nationale. The subject of this treatise is infinitely more elevating and important than that of any other of the sixty-three massiktoth, or "treatises" of which the Mishna is composed. Now I will ask any reader or critic who considers that I have spoken too slightingly of the Scribes in the above passage, or have unduly depreciated the Talmud in other parts of this book, merely to take at haphazard any three perakîm, or chapters of the Berachôth, and make an abstract of them. I shall be indeed suprised if after accepting this little test he still retains the exalted conception of these Jewish writings which some recent writers -- notably the late lamented Mr. Deutsch -- have endeavored to create. Few English divines have known the Talmud so thoroughly as Dr. Lightfoot, the learned author of the Horae Hebraicae (d. 1675). He was a man of eminent candor and simplicity, and his estimate of the Talmud, after an almost lifelong study of it, was as follows: "Volumina ista legentem supra modum cruciant, torquent, et fatigant, styli difficultas tantum non insuperabilis, linguae asperitas tremenda, et rerum tractatarum STUPENDA INANITAS ET VAFRITIES. Nugis ubique scatent ita ac si nollent legi; obscuris ac difficilibus ac si nollent intelligi; ita ut ubique patientiâ Lectori sit opus, et nugas ferendo et asperitates."[2a] (Dedic. in Hor. Hebr. in Matth., 1658.) -- See Excursus V., "The Talmud and the Oral Law."

[2a] "The almost unconquerable difficulty of the style, the frightful roughness of the language, and the amazing emptiness and sophistry of the matters handled, do torture, vex, and tire him that reads them. They do every where abound with trifles in that manner as though they had no mind to be read; with obscurities and difficulties, as though they had no mind to be understood; so that the reader hath need of patience all along, to enable him to bear both trifling in sense, and roughness in expression."

[3] "Mira profunditas eloquorum tuorum, quorum ecce ante nos superficies blandiens parvulis: sed mira profunditas, Deus meus, mira profuunditas! Horror est intendere in eam; horror honoris et tremor amoris"[3a] (Augustine, Conf. xii. 14). On the general characteristics of Christian teaching there are some very beautiful and interesting remarks in Guizot, Meditations sur l'Essence de la Religion Chrétienne, p. 279; Dupanloup, Vie de Notre Seigneur, pp. lxxiv. seqq. To avoid repetition, I may refer on this subject to the third of my Hulseau Lectures on the Witness of History to Christ, pp. 134-149.

[3a] "Wondrous depth of thy words! whose surfaces, behold! is before us, inviting to little ones; yet are they a wondrous depth, O my God, a wondrous depth! It is awful to look therein; an awfulness of honor, and a trembling of love." (Ante-Nic. Lib.)

And we, who can compare Christ's teaching -- the teaching of One whom some would represent to have been no more than the Carpenter of Nazareth -- with all that the world has of best and greatest in Philosophy and Eloquence and Song, must not we too add, with yet deeper emphasis, that teaching as one having authority, He spake as never man spake? Other teachers have by God's grace uttered words of wisdom, but to which of them has it been granted to regenerate mankind? What would the world be now if it had nothing better than the dry aphorisms and cautious hesitations of Confucius, or the dubious principles and dangerous concessions of Plato? Would humanity have made the vast moral advance which it has made, if no great Prophet from on High had furnished it with anything better than Sakya Mouni's dreary hope of a nirvâna, to be won by unnatural asceticism, or than Mohomet's cynical sanction of polygamy and despotism? Christianity may have degenerated in many respects from its old and great ideal; it may have lost something of its virgin purity -- the struggling and divided Church of to-day may have waned, during these long centuries, from the splendour of the New Jerusalem descending out of heaven from God; but is Christendom no better than what Greece became, and what Turkey and Arabia and China are? Does Christianity wither the nations which have accepted it with the atrophy of Buddhism, or the blight of Islam?[1] Even as a moral system -- though it is infinitely more than a moral system -- we do not concede that Christianity is unoriginal; and we besides maintain that no faith has ever been able like it to sway the affections and hearts of men. Other religions are demonstrably defective and erroneous; ours has never been proved to be otherwise than perfect and entire; other systems were esoteric and exclusive, ours simple and universal; others temporary and for the few, ours eternal and for the race. K'ung Foo-tze, Sakya Mouni, Mahomet, could not even conveive the ideal of a society without falling into miserable error; Christ established the reality of an eternal and glorious kingdom -- whose theory for all, whose history in the world, prove it to be indeed what it was from the first proclaimed to be -- the Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of God.[2]

[1] A blight certainly in Turkey, Syria, Arabia, and Egypt, and surely everywhere non-progressive; but Islam being, as it is, a professed modification of Judaism and Christianity, can hardly be counted an independent religion, and is indeed a degeneracy even from Judaism. On Mahomet's teaching in general see some wise remarks in Prof. Mozley's Bampton Lectures On Miracles, p. 179. The reader may form some conception of K'ung Foo-tze from Dr. Legge's Life and Teaching of Confucius, which contains a translation of the Analects; and of Sakya Mouni from M. B. St. Hilaire's Le Bouddha et sa Religion (Paris, 1860). [2] See further The Witness of History to Christ, pp. 142, seqq.

And yet how exquisitely and freshly simple is the actual language of Christ compared with all other teaching that has ever gained the ear of the world! There is no science in it, no art, no pomp of demonstration, no carefulness of toil, no trick of rhetoricians, no wisdom of the schools. Straight as an arrow to the mark His precepts pierce to the very depths of the soul and spirit. All is short, clear, precise, full of holiness, full of the common images of daily life. There is scarcely a scene or object familiar to the Galilee of that day, which Jesus did not use as a moral illustration of some glorious promise or moral law. He spoke of green fields, and springing flowers, and the budding of the vernal trees; of the red or lowering sky; of sunrise and sunset; of wind and rain; of night and storm; of clouds and lightning; of stream and river; of stars and lamps; of honey and salt; of quivering bulrushes and burning weeds; of rent garments and bursting wine-skins; of eggs and serpents; of pearls and pieces of money; of nets and fish. Wine and wheat, corn and oil, stewards and gardeners, labourers and employers, kings and shepherds, travellers and fathers of families, courtiers in soft clothing and brides in nuptial robes -- all these are found in His discourses. He knew all life, and had gazed on it with a kindly as well as a kingly glance. He could sympathise with its joys no less that He could heal its sorrows, and the eyes that were so often suffused with tears as they saw the sufferings of earth's mourners beside the bed of death, had shone also with a kindlier glow as they watched the games of earth's happy little ones in the green fields and busy streets.[1]

[1] Few have spoken more beautifully of our Lord's teaching in these respects than Bishop Dupanloup, Vie de Notre Seigneur, l. c., in whom the main thought of the last paragraph will be found at much greater length. Much that I have said in this chapter is beautifully illustrated in a little poem by Arthur Hugh Clough, part of which (if it be not known to him) the reader will thank me for quoting --

"Across the sea, along the shore,

In numbers ever more and more,

From lonely hut and busy town,

The valley through, the mountain down,

What was it ye went out to see,

Ye silly folk of Galilee?

The reed that in the wind doth shake?

The weed that washes in the lake?

"A teacher? Rather seek the feet

Of those who sit in Moses' seat.

Go, humbly seek, and bow to them

Far off in great Jerusalem....

What is it came ye here to note?

A young man preaching in a boat.

"A Prophet! Boys and women weak

Declare -- and cease to rave --

Whence is it he hath learnt to speak

Say, who his doctrine gave?

A Prophet? Prophet wherefore he

Of all in Israel's tribes?"

He teacheth with authority

And not as do the Scribes.
