FURTHER MIRACLES.

"He sent forth His word, and healed them."

-- Ps. cvii. 20.

The Inauguration of the Great Doctrine was immediately followed and ratified by mighty signs. Jesus went, says one of the Fathers, from teaching to miracle.[1] Having taught as one who had authority, He proceeded to confirm that authority by accordant deeds.

[1] Euthymius. Matt. vii. 1-4; Mark i. 40-45; Luke v. 12-16. -- St. Matthew narrates twenty miracles; St. Mark, eighteen; St. Luke, nineteen; and St. John, seven. The total number of miracles related by the Evangelists is thirty-three.

It might have been thought that after a night of ceaseless prayer under the open sky, followed at early dawn by the choice of Twelve Apostles, and by a long address to them and to a vast promiscuous multitude, our Lord would have retired to the repose which such incessant activity required. Such, however, was very far from being the case, and the next few days, if we rightly grasp the sequence of events, were days of continuous and unwearying toil.

When the Sermon was over, the immense throng dispersed in various directions, and those whose homes lay in the plain of Gennesareth would doubtless follow Jesus through the village of Hattîn, and across the narrow plateau, and then, after descending the ravine, would leave Magdala on the right, and pass through Bethsaida[1] to Capernaum.

[1] i.e., the Western Bethsaida -- probably the pleassant spot on the lake with its gently sloping banks, abundant streams, and strip of bright sand, now called Ain et-Tâbijah.

As He descended the mountain,[1] and was just entering one of the little towns,[2] probably a short distance in advance of the multitude, who from natural respect would be likely to leave Him undisturbed after His labours, a pitiable spectacle met His eyes. Suddenly,[3] with agonies of entreaty, falling first on his knees, then, in the anguish of his heart and the intensity of his supplication, prostrating himself upon his face,[4] there appeared before Him, with bare head, and rent garments, and covered lip, a leper -- "full of leprosy" -- smitten with the worst and foulest form of that loathsome and terrible disease. It must, indeed, have required on the part of the poor wretch a stupendous faith to believe that the young Prophet of Nazareth was One who could heal a disease of which the worst misery was the belief that, when once thoroughly seated in the blood, it was ineradicable and progressive. And yet the concentrated hope of a like broke out in the man's impassioned prayer, "Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean." Prompt as an echo came the answer to his faith, "I will: be thou clean."[5] All Christ's miracles are revelations also. Sometimes, when the circumstances of the case required it, He delayed his answer to a sufferer's prayer. But we are never told that there was a moment's pause when a leper cried to him. Leprosy was an acknowledged type of sin, and Christ would teach us that the heartfelt prayer of the sinner to be purged and cleansed is always met by instantaneous acceptance. When David, the type of all true penitents, cried with intense contrition, "I have sinned against the Lord," Nathan could instantly convey to him God's gracious message, "The Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die."[6] [1] This definite mark of time and place is furnished by St. Matthew (viii. 1). I have combined with his narrative the incidents alluded to by the two other Synoptists. [2] Luke v. 12. Hattîn, or Magdala, would best suit the conditions mentioned. [3] This is implied in the καί ίδού of Luke v. 12; Matt. viii. 2. The phrase is peculiar to these two Evangelists, of whom St. Matthew uses it twenty-three, and St. Luke sixteen times (Westcott, Introd., p. 237, n.).

[4] προσεκύνει (Matt. viii. 2), γονυπετών (Mark i. 40), πεσών έπί πρόσωπον (Luke v. 12). A leper was regarded as one dead (Jos. Antt. iii. 11, § 3, πηδενί συνδιαιτωµένοµς καί νεκροΰ υηδέν διαφέροντας[4a]).

[4a] Dwelling with no one, and differing no respect from one dead. [5] "Echo prompta ad fidem leprosi maturam"[5a] (Bengal). St. Ambrose says, very fancifully, "Dicit volo propter Photinum; imperat propter Arium; tangit propter Manichæum."[5b] The prompt, almost impetuous gladness and spontaneity of these miracles contrasts with the sorrow and delay of those later ones, which Jesus wrought when His heart had been utterly saddened, and men's faith in Him had already begun to wane (cf. Matt. xiii. 58; Mark vi. 5). "Prima miracula fecit confestim, ne videretur cum labore facere"[5c] (Bengel). [5a] A prompt echo to the mature faith of the leper.

[5b] He says: I will, on account of Photinus; He commands on account of Arius; He touches on account of Manichæus.

[5c] He performed his first miracles without delay, that he might not seem to perform them with difficulty.

[6] 2 Sam. xii. 13.

Instantly stretching forth His hand, Our Lord touched the leper, and he was cleansed.

In a glorious violation of the letter of the Law, which attached ceremonial pollution to a leper's touch;[1] but it was at the same time a glorious illustration of the spirit of the Law, which was that mercy is better than sacrifice. The hand of Jesus was not polluted by touching the leper's body, but the leper's whole body was cleansed by the touch of that holy hand. It was even thus that He touched our sinful human nature, and yet remained without a spot of sin.[2]

[1] Lev. xiii. 26, 46; Numb. v. 2. -- "Quia Dominus Legis est non obsequitar Legi, sed Legem facit"[1a] (Ambr., in Luc.).

[1a] Being the Lord of the Law He is not its servant but its Maker. [2] H. de Sto. Victore (in Trench on Miracles, p. 237).

It was in the depth and spontaneity of His human emotion that our Lord had touched the leper into health. But it was His present desire to fulfil the Mosaic Law by perfect obedience; and both in proof of the miracle, and out of consideration to the sufferer, and in conformity with the Levitical ordinance, He bade the leper go and show himself to the priest, make the customary offerings, and obtain the legal certificate that he was clean.[1] He accompanied the direction with a strict and even stern injunction to say not one word of it to any one.[2] It appears from this that the suddenness with which the miracle had been accomplished had kept it secret from all, except perhaps a few of our Lord's immediate followers, although it had been wrought in open day, and in the immediate neighbourhood of a city, and at no great distance from the following multitudes. But why did our Lord on this, and many other occasions, enjoin on the recipient of the miracles a secrecy which they so rarely observed? The full reason perhaps we shall never know, but that it had reference to circumstances of time and place, and the mental condition of those in whose favour the deed were wrought, is clear from the fact that on one occasion at least, where the conditions were different, He even enjoined a publication of the mercy vouchsafed.[3] Was it, as St. Chrysostom conjectures, to repress a spirit of boastfulness, and teach men not to talk away the deep inward sense of God's great gifts? or was it to avoid an over-excitement and tumult in the already astonished multitudes of Galilee?[4] or was it that He be regarded by them in His true light -- not as a mighty Wonder-worker, not as a universal Hakim, but as a Saviour by Revelation and by Hope?

[1] We shall speak more of leprosy hereafter, when we consider others of our Lord's miracles. Perhaps no conception of it can be derived from any source more fearfully than from Lev. xiii., xiv. The reader will find the subject fully and learnedly treated in Jahn's Archaeologia Biblica, §§ 188, 189. The rites which accompanied the sacerdotal cleansing of a leper are described at length in Lev. xiv. It was a long process, in two stages. First the priest had to come to him outside the camp or town, to kill a sparrow over fresh water, to dip a lving sparrow with cedar-word, scarlet wool, and hyssop into the blood-stained water, to sprinkle the leper seven times with this strange aspergillum, and then let the living bird loose, an pronounce the man clear. The man was then to shave off his hair, bathe, remain seven days out of his house; again shave, and bathe, and return to the priest, bringing one lamb for a trespass-offering, and a second with a ewe-lamb for a burnt and sin-offering (or, if too poor to do this, two young pigeons), and flour and oil for a meat-offering. some of the blood of the trespass-offering, and some of the oil, was then put, with certain ceremonies, on the tip of his right ear, the thumb of his right hand, and the great toe of his right foot, the rest of the oil being poured upon his head. He was then pronounced clean. There could not well be any dispute about the reality of the cleansing, after ceremonials so elaboratge as this, which are the main topic of the Mishnaic tract Negaîm, in fourteen chapters. Since writing the above note I have read Delitzsch's Durch Krankheit zur Genesung, in which the whole rites are elaborately described. [2] ΄΄Ορα µηδενί µηδέν εϊπης (Mark i. 44). This probably is the correct reading of B. The expression is much stronger than usual (see xiii. 2; xiv. 2). For other instances of enjoined secrecy see Mark i. 25, 44 (Luke iv. 35; v. 14); Mark iii. 12 (Matt. xii. 16); v. 43 (Luke viii. 56). It will be seen from this that such commands were mainly given in the early part of the ministry. [3] The Gadarene demoniac (Mark v. 19; Luke viii. 39). [4] As is clearly indicated in the beautiful reference to Isa. xlii. in Matt. xii. 15-20. No true Prophet regards such powers as being the real root of the matter. At the best they are evidential, and that mainly to the immediate witnesses.

Whatever may have been the general reasons, it appears that in this case there must have been some reason of special importance. St. Mark, reflecting for us the intense and vivid impressions of St. Peter, shows us, in his terse but most graphic narrative, that the man's dismissal was accompanied on our Saviour's part with some overpowering emotion. Not only is the word, "He straitly charged him" (Mark i. 43), a word implying an extreme earnestness and even vehemence of look and gesture, but the word for "forthwith sent him away" is literally He "pushed" or "drove him forth."[1] What was the cause for this severely inculcated order, for this instantaneous dismissal? Perhaps it was the fact that by touching the leper -- though the touch was healing -- He would, in the eyes of the unreasoning and unspiritual orthodoxy, be regarded as ceremonially unclean. And that this actually did occur may be assumed from the expressly mentioned fact that, in consequence of the manner in which this incident was blazoned abroad by the cleansed sufferer, "He could not openly enter into a city, but was without in desert places."[2] St. Luke mentions a similar circumstance, though without giving any special reason for it, and adds that Jesus spent the time in prayer.[3] If, however, the dissemination of the leper's story involved the necessity for a short period of seclusion, it is clear that the multitude paid but little regard to this Levitical uncleanness, for even in the lonely spot to which Jesus had retired they thronged to Him from every quarter.

[1] έυβριµησάµενος αύτώ, εύθέως έξέβαλεν αύτόν (Mark i. 43). Euthymius explains this word by αύστηρώς έµβλέψας καί έπισείσας τήν κεφαλήν.[1a] It is true that both these words occur elsewhere in the picturesque and energetic Greek of the Gospels, but generally in very strong senses -- e.g. Matt. ix. 30, 38; Mark i. 12; xiv. 5; John xi. 33. In Aguila and Symmachus also the word is used of vehement indignation (Ps. vii. 11; Isa. xvii. 13). (Cf. ף ַעָז, implying sorrow, Gen. xl. 6, &c.) Some have supposed that έκβαλεϊν, merely in the sense of "send forth," is due

to the vagueness of the Hebrew words הַל ָ ש and ש ַרָנ; still a certain vehemence and urgency in our Lord's words to the leper is observable in the change from the third to the first person in Luke v. 14. The έξέβαλεν does not imply that the miracle was done in a house; it may mean "from the town" (Alf.).

[1a] looking upon him sternlyand shaking his head at him. [2] Mark i. 45. "It was," says Lange (Life of Chirst, E. Tr., ii. 443), "a sort of Levitical quarantine." He is wrong, however, in taking πόλιν to mean "that city," for St. Mark has not mentioned any city, and the word has no article.

[3] It is interesting to observe that St. Luke, more than the other Evangelists, constantly refers to the private prayers of Jesus (iii. 21; vi. 12; ix. 18, 28; xi. 1; xxiii. 34, 46).

Whether the healing of the centurion's servant[1] took place before or after this retirement is uncertain; but from the fact that both St. Matthew and St. Luke place it in close connection with the Sermon on the Mount, we may suppose that the thronging of the multitudes to seek Him, even in desert places, may have shown him that it would not be possible for Him to satisfy the scruples of the Legalists by this temporary retirement from human intercourse.

[1] Luke vii. 1-10; Matt. viii. 5-13. The points of difference between the healing of the nobleman's son and this miracle are too numerous to admit of our accepting the opinion of those who identify them.

Our Lord had barely reached the town of Capernaum, where He had fixed His temporary home, when He was met by a deputation of Jewish elders[1] -- probably the batlanîm of the chief synagogue -- to intercede with Him on behalf of a centurion, whose faithful and beloved slave[2] lay in the agony and peril of a paralytic seizure. It might have seemed strange that Jewish elders should take this amount of interest in one who, whether a Roman or not, was certainly a heathen, and may not even have been a "proselyte of the gate."[3] They explained, however, that not only did he love their nation -- a thing most rare in a Gentile, for, generally speaking, the Jews were regarded with singular detestation -- but had even, at his own expense, built them a synagogue, which, although there must have been several in Capernaum, was sufficiently beautiful and conspicuous to be called "the synagogue."[4] The mere fact of their appealing to Jesus shows that this event belongs to an early period of His ministry, when myriads looked to him with astonishment and hope, and before the deadly exasperation of after days had begun. Christ immediately granted their request. "I will go," he said, "and heal him." But on the way they met other messengers from the humble and devout centurion, entreating Him not to enter the unworthy roof of a Gentile, but to heal the suffering slave (as He had healed, the son of a courtier) by a mere word of power. As the centurion, though in a subordinate office, yet had ministers ever ready to do his bidding, so could no Christ bid viewless messengers to perform His will, without undergoing this personal labour? The Lord was struck by so remarkable a faith, greater than any which He had met with even in Israel. He had found in the oleaster what He had not found in the olive;[5] and He drew from this circumstance the lesson, which fell with such a chilling and unwelcome sound on Jewish ears, that when many of the natural children of the kingdom should be cast into outer darkness, many should come from the East and the West, and sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. But the centurion's messengers found on their return that the healing word have been effectual and that the cherished slave had been restored to health.

[1] St. Matthew's briefer and less accurate narrative represents the request as coming from the centurion himself, on the every-day principle that "qui facit per alium facit per se."[1a] For a similar case, comp. Matt. xx. 20 with Mark x. 35 (Trench, on Miracles, p. 236). Of course if Inspiration were a supernatural, miraculous interposition, instead of, as we believe, a guiding and illuminating influence, such apparent discrepancies would not exist. But, as the Jews

wisely said even of their adored Law םרא ינכ ךזשלכ הרכר הךזת, "the Law speaks with the tongue of the sons of men" (Gittin, 41, 3; Babha Metsia, 31, 2; Nedarim, 2, 1; Reland, Antt. Hebr. p. 140), so we say with St. Augustine, that the Evangelists are perfectly sober and truthful witnesses, though they were nit in trivial matters miraculously exempted from insignificant imperfections of memory, and speak to us as we speak to each other. I would not go so far as St. Augustine in saying that they wrote "ut quisque meminerat vel ut cuique cordi erat;"[1b] but I would ask with him, "An Scriptura Dei aliter nobiscum fuerat quam nostro more locutura?[1c] (De Cons. Evv. ii. 20.) In the face of such obvious variations -- trivial indeed, yet real -- such as exist between them, in recording exact words (e.g., those uttered in Gethsemane, or by the Apostles in the sinking ship), and facts (e.g., the order of the Temptations and the Title on the Cross), I do not see how their supernatural and infallible accuracy, as apart from their absolutely truthful evidence, can be maintained. As, once more, is observed by St. Augustine, "Per hujusmodi locutiones varias sed non contrarias discimus nihil in cujusque verbis nos inspicere debere nisi voluntatem,"[1d] &c. (ib. ii. 28). "Diversa multa," he says elsewhere, "adversa nulla esse possunt."[1e] The Manichæans, to whom this narrative was very distasteful, tried to reject it on the ground of this very discrepancy. The free and candid manner in which St. Augustine meets and answers them is well worth study. The reader will find some of his most important remarks on this subject quoted or referred to by Archbishop Trench, Sermon on the Mount, pp. 48-50. [1a]"He who does a thing by the agency of another person, dies it himself." [1b] as each one remembered or as each one pleased. [1c] Whether God's Scripture would be likely to speak with us otherwise than according to our manner.

[1d] In the light of expressions of this kind, which are different, but not in opposition, we learn that in examining the words of each [Evangelist] nothing should be taken into account except the import.

[1e] There may be many things diverse but none adverse. [2] It has been suggested, and is not impossible, that the ό παϊς of St. Matthew's Gospel may have risen out of a confusion from the Hebrew word. St. Luke, however, calls the slave ό παϊς µου (vii. 7) as well as St. Matthew.

[3] Alford points out that he is not designated by the terms usually applied to proselytes (e.g., in Acts x. 1, 2). He may have been one of the Samaritan soldiers of Herod Antipas, or he may have been at the head of a small Roman garrison at Capernaum. [4] Luke vii. 5, τήν συναγωγήν αύτός (of his own accord) ώκοδόµησεν ήµϊν. There were said to be 400 synagogues in Jerusalem, and if Capernaum be Tell Hûm, there are among its ruins the apparent remains of at least two synagogues. Perhaps when the traveller is sitting among the sculptured debris of white marble which crown the low bluff on which Tell Hûm stands, he may be in the ruins of the actual building, which by its splendor attested the centurion's liberal and kindly feelings towards the Jews, and which once rang with the echoes of the voice of Christ.

[5] Aug. in Joh. tr. xvi.

It is not strange that, after days as marvellous as these, it was impossible for Jesus to find due repose. From early dawn on the mountain-top to late evening in whatever house He had selected for His nightly rest, the multitudes came crowding about Him, not respecting His privacy, not allowing for His weariness, eager to see him, eager to share His miracles, eager to listen to His words. There was no time even to eat bread. Such a life is not only to the last degree trying and fatiguing, but to a refined and high-strung nature, rejoicing in noble solitude, finding its purest and most perfect happiness in lonely prayer, this incessant publicity, this apparently illimitable toil becomes simply maddening, unless the spirit be sustained by boundless sympathy and love. But the heart of the Saviour was so sustained. It is probably to this period that the remarkable anecdote belongs which is preserved for us by St. Mark alone. The kinsmen and immediate family of Christ, hearing of all that He was doing, came from their home -- perhaps at Cana, perhaps at Capernaum -- to get possession of His person, to put Him under constraint.[1] Their informants had mistaken the exaltation visible in all His words and actions -- the intense glow of compassion -- the burning flame of love; they looked upon it as over-excitement, exaggerated sensibility, the very delirium of beneficence and zeal. To the world there has ever been a tendency to confuse the fervour of enthusiasm with the eccentricity of a disordered genius. "Paul, thou art mad," was the only comment which the Apostle's passion of exalted eloquence produced on the cynical and blasé intellect of the Roman Procurator.[2] "He hath a devil," was the inference suggested to many dull and worldly hearers after some of the tenderest and divinest sayings of our Lord.[3] "Brother Martin has a fine genius," was the sneering allusion of Pope Leo X. to Luther. "What crackbrained fanatics." observed the fine gentlemen of the eighteenth century when they spoke of Wesley and Whitefield. Similar, though not so coarse, was the thought which filled the mind of Christ's wondering relatives, when they heard of this sudden and amazing activity, after the calm seclusion of thirty unknown and unnoticed years. As yet they were out of sympathy with Him; they knew him not, did not fully believe in Him; they said, "He is beside Himself." It was needful that they should be henceforth taught by several decisive proofs that He was not of them; that this was no longer the Carpenter, the brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon, but the Son of God, the Saviour of the world.

[1] Mark iii. 21, οι παρ' αύτοΰ -- a somewhat vague expression -- seems something like our colloquial expression "his people." From the curious accident that the word κρατήσαι occurs in the LXX. (2 Kings iv. *), in immediate connection with "eating bread," Bishop Wordsworth makes the surely too ingenious conjecture "that the mother of Chirst supposed that she was imitating the good shunamite in her conduct to the prophet Elisha, in endeavoring to constrain them [qu. Him? unless, indeed, he refers αύτόν to τόν όχλον, which is impossible] to eat bread."

[2] Acts xxvi. 24. Cf. 2 Cor. v. 13.

[3] John x. 20.
