JESUS AS HE LIVED IN GALILEE.

τό γάρ πάθος Χριοτοΰ ήµών άπάθειάέστιν ... καί τό δάκρυον αύτοΰ χάρα ήυετέρα[1]

-- Athan., De Incarn.

[1] Christ's suffering is our exemption from suffering, ... and his tears are our joy.

It is to this period of our Lord's earlier ministry that those mission journeys belong -- those circuits through the towns and villages of Galilee, teaching, and preaching, and performing works of mercy -- which are so frequently alluded to in the first three Gospels, and which are specially mentioned at this point of the narrative by the Evangelist St. Luke. "He walked in Galilee."[1] It was the brightest, hopefullest, most active episode in His life. Let us, in imagination, stand aside and see Him pass, and so, with all humility and reverence, set before us as vividly as we can what manner of man He was.

[1] Matt. iv. 23; ix. 35; Mark i. 39; Luke iv. 15, 44; John vii. 1: περιεπάτει -- "ambulando docebat"[1a] (Bretschneider). In this part of the narrative I mainly follow St. Luke's order, only varying from it where there seems reason for doing so. I have, however, already stated my disbelief in the possibility of a final harmony; and in a few instances where no special order is discernible in the narrative of the Evangelists, I have followed a plan distinctly sanctioned by the practice of St. Matthew -- viz., that of grouping together events which have a subjective connection. Any one who has long and carefully studied the Gospels has probably arrived at a strong opinion as to the possible or even probable order of events; but when he sees no two independent harmonists agreeing even in the common chronological principles or data (e.g., even as to the number of years in Christ's ministry), he will probably feel that the order he adoptswill carry no conviction to others, however plausible it may seem to himself. I agree, however, more nearly with Lange and Stier -- though by no means adopting their entire arrangement -- than with most other writers.

[1a] He was teaching while walking.

Let us then suppose ourselves to mingle with any one fragment of those many multitudes which at this period awaited Him at every point of His career, and let us gaze on Him as they did when He was a man on earth. [1]

[1] The general idea of this chapter, and many of its details, were suggested to me by an exceedingly beautiful and interesting little tract of Dr. F. Delitzsch, called Sehet welch ein Mensch. Ein Geschichtsgemälde.[1a] (Leipzig, 1869). Some may perhaps consider that both Dr. Delitzsch and I have given too much scope to the imagination; but, with the exception of one or two refernces to early tradition, they will scarcely find an incident, or even an expression, which is not sanctioned by notices in the Evangelists. [1a] Behold What a Man. An Historical Picture

We are on that little plain[1] that runs between the hills of Zebulon and Naphtali, somewhere between the villages of Kefr Kenna and the so-called Kana el-Jalîl. A sea of corn, fast yellowing to the harvest, is around us, and the bright, innumerable flowers that broider the wayside are richer and larger than those of home. The path on which we stand leads in one direction to Accho and the coast, in the other over the summit of Hattîn to the Sea of Galilee. The land is lovely with all the loveliness of a spring day in Palestine, but the hearts of the eager, excited crowd, in the midst of which we stand, are too much occupied by one absorbing thought to notice its beauty; for some of them are blind, and sick, and lame, and they know not whether to-day a finger of mercy, a word of healing -- nay, even the touch of the garment of this great Unknown Prophet as He passes by -- may not alter and gladden the whole complexion of their future lives. And farther back, at a little distance from the crowd, standing among the wheat, with covered lips, and warning off all who approached them with the cry Tamê, Tamê -- "Unclean! unclean! -- clad in mean and scanty garments, are some fearful and mutilated figures whom, with a shudder, we recognise as lepers.[2]

[1] Assochis; now called El Buttauf.

[2] א ֵמ ָמ (Lev. xiii. 45; Numb. vi. 9). Cf. Ezek. xxiv. 17, "cover not thy lips."

The comments of the crowd show that many different motives have brought them together. Some are there from interest, some from curiosity, some from the vulgar contagion of enthusiasm which they cannot themselves explain. Marvellous tales of Him -- of His mercy, of His power, of His gracious words, of His mighty deeds -- are passing from lip to lip, mingled, doubtless, with suspicions and calumnies. One or two Scribes and Pharisees who are present, holding themselves a little apart from the crowd, whisper to each other their perplexities, their indignation, their alarm.

Suddenly over the rising ground, at no great distance, is seen the cloud of dust which marks an approaching company; and a young boy of Magdala or Bethsaida, heedless of the scornful reproaches of the Scribes, points in that direction, and runs excitedly forward with the shout of Malka Meshîchah! Malka Meshîchah -- "the King Messiah! the King Messiah!" -- which even on youthful lips must have quickened the heart-beats of a simple Galilæan throng.[1]

[1] I take the supposed incident in part from Dr. Delitzsch; and after the announcement of John the Baptist (John i. 26, 32, &c.), and such incidents as those recorded in Luke iv. 41, the surmise of John iv. 29; vii. 41 must have been on many lips.

And now the throng approaches. It is a motley multitude of young and old, composed mainly of peasants, but with others of higher rank interspersed in their loose array -- here a frowning Pharisee, there a gaily-clad Herodian[1] whispering to some Greek merchant or Roman soldier his scoffing comments on the enthusiasm of the crowd. But these are the few, and almost every eye of that large throng is constantly directed towards One who stands in the centre of the separate group which the crowd surrounds.

[1] In the Talmudic legend of the apostasy of Menahem and his 160 scholars from the school

of Hillel to the service of Herod ( ךלמה חךןכעל; Chagiga, f. 16, 2; Reland, Antt. Hebr., p. 251) one sign of their abandonment of the Oral Law was glittering apparel. (Jost, Gesch. d. Judenth. i. 259.) Professor Plumptre ingeniously illustrates this fact by a reference to Luke vii. 24 (Dict. of Bibl., s. v. "Scribes").

In the front of this group walk some of the newly-chosen Apostles: behind are others, among whom there is one whose restless glance and saturnine countenance[1] accord but little with that look of openness and innocence which stamps his comrades as honest men. Some of these who are looking on whisper that is a certain Judas of Kerioth, almost the only follower of Jesus who is not a Galilæan. A little further in the rear, behind the remainder of the Apostles, are four or five women,[2] some on foot, some on mules, among whom, though they are partly veiled, there are some who recognise the once wealthy and dissolute but now repentant Mary of Magdala; and Salome, the wife of the fisherman Zabdî; and one of still higher wealth and position, Joanna, the wife of Chuza, the steward of Herod Antipas.[3]

[1] In the Apocryphal Gospels there is a notion that Judas had once been a demoniac, whom Jesus, as a boy, had healed (Ev. Inf. Arab. c. xxxv.; Hoffmann, Leben Jesu nach d. Apokr. 202). For the legendary notion of his aspect, see the story of St. Brandan, so exquisitely told by Mr. Matthew Arnold: --

"At last (it was Christmas night;

Stars shone after a day of storm)

He sees float by an iceberg white,

And on it -- Christ! -- a living form!

"That furtive mien, that scowling eye,

Of hair that red and tufted fell;

It is -- oh, where shall Brandan fly? --

The traitor Judas, out of hell."

[2] Perhaps more (Luke viii. 3, έτεραι πολλαί[2a]. It is curious that no mention is made of the wife of Peter or of the other married apostles (1 Cor. ix. 5). Of Susanna here mentioned by St. Luke, absolutely nothing further is known. Mary, the mother of James the Less, was another of these ministering women; and it is an illustration of the extreme paucity of names among the Jews, and the confusion that results from it, that there are perhaps as many as seven Marys in the Gospel History alone. (See a fragment attributed to Papias in Routh, Relig. Sacr. i. 16; Wordsworth on Matt. xii. 47; Ewald, Gesch. Christus, p. 401, 3rd edit.) The fact that they were ministering to Him of their substance shows, among other circumstances, that there was no absolute community of goods in the little band.

[2a] Many others.

[3] The Blessed Virgin was not one of this ministering company. The reason for her absence from it is not given. It is not impossible that a certain amount of constraint was put upon her by the "brethren of the Lord," who on three distinct occasions (Matt. xii. 46; Mark iii. 21; John vvii. 3) interfered with Jesus, and on one of those occasions seem to have worked upon the susceptibilities even of His mother. Meanwhile her absence from Christ's journeyings is an incidental proof of the deep seclusion in which she evidently lived -- a seclusion sufficiently indicated by the silence of the Gospels respecting her, and which accords most accurately with the incidental notices of her humble and meditative character.

But He whom all eyes seek is in the very centre of the throng; and though at His right is Peter of Bethsaida, and at His left the more youthful figure of John, yet every glance is absorbed by Him alone.

He is not clothed in soft raiment by byssus or purple, like Herod's courtiers, or in the luxurious friends of the Procurator Pilate: He does not wear the white ephod of the Levite, or the sweeping robes of the Scribe. There are not, on His arm and forehead, the tephillîn or phylacteries,[1] which the Pharisees make so broad; and though there is at each corner of His dress the fringe and blue riband which the Law enjoins, it is not worn of the ostentatious size affected by those who wished to parade the scrupulousness of their obedience. He is in the ordinary dress of his time and country. He is not bareheaded -- as painters usually represent Him -- for to move about bareheaded in the Syrian sunlight is impossible,[2] but a white keffiyeh, such as is worn to this day, covers his hair, fastened by an aghal or fillet round the top of the head, and falling back over the neck and shoulders. A large blue outer robe or tallîth, pure and clean, but of the simplest materials, covers His entire person, and only shows occasional glimpses of the ketôneth, a seamless woollen tunic of the ordinary striped texture, so common in the East, which is confined by a girdle round the waist, and which clothes Him from the neck almost down to the sandalled feet. But the simple garments do not conceal the King; and though in His bearing there is nothing of the self-conscious haughtiness of the Rabbi, yet, in its natural nobleness and unsought grace, it is such as instantly suffices to check every rude tongue and overawe every wicked thought.

[1] We cannot believe that Christ sanctioned by His own practice -- at any rate, in manhood -- the idle and superstitious custom of wearing those little text-boxes, which had in all probability originated merely in an unintelligent and slavishly literal interpretation of a metaphorical command. For further information about the tephillîn, I may refer the reader to my article on "Frontlets" in Dr. Smith's Dict. of the Bible, or to the still fuller article by Dr. Ginsburg in Kitto's Bibl. Cyclop. s. v. "Phylacteries."

[2] This must surely have occurred to every one after a moment's reflection, yet, strange to say, I cannot recall one of the great works of mediæval art in which the Saviour is depicted with covered head. the ordinary articles of dress now are the kumîs, or inner shirt; gumbâr, or kaftan, open gown of silk or cotton, overlapping in front; zannar, or girdle; abba, or abaiyeh, a strong, coarse cloak, in which the wearer usually sleeps; and tarbush, or fez. (See Thomson, Land and Book, I., ch. ix.)

And His aspect?[1] He is a man of middle size, and of about thirty years of age, on whose face the purity and charm of youth are mingled with the thoughtfulness and dignity of manhood. His hair, which legend has compared to the colour of wine, is parted in the middle of the forehead, and flows down over the neck. His features are paler and of a more Hellenic type than the weather-bronzed and olive-tinted faces of the hardy fishermen who are His Apostles; but though those features have evidently been marred by sorrow -- though it is manifest that those eyes, whose pure and indescribable glance seems to read the very secrets of the heart, have often glowed through tears -- yet no man, whose soul has not been eaten away by sin and selfishness, can look unmoved and unawed on the divine expression of that calm and patient face. Yet, this is He of whom Moses and the Prophets did speak -- Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary, and the Son of David, and the Son of Man, and the Son of God. Our eyes have seen the King in His beauty. We have beheld His glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. And having seen Him we can well understand how, while He spake, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice and said, "Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the paps that Thou hast sucked!" "Yea, rather blessed," He answered, in words full of deep sweet mystery, "are they that hear the word of God and keep it."

[1] See Excursus V., "On the Traditional Descriptions of the Appearance of Jesus."

One or two facts and features of His life on earth may here be fitly introduced.

[1] It seems impossible to trace the date or origin of the later Jewish conception of a suffering Messias, the descendant of Joseph or Ephraim, which is found in Zohar, Bab. Targ. Cant. iv. 5, &c. It is clear that the nation had not realized the point of view which was familiar to the Apostles after Pentecost (see Acts iii. 18; xvii. 3; xxvi. 22, 23), and which Jesus had so often taught them (Matt. xvi. 21; xvii. 10-12; Luke xvii. 25; xxiv. 25-27, 46) to regard as the fulfilment of olden prophecy (Ps. xxii.; Isa. I. 6; liii. 2, &c.).

[1b] He commanded that barley should be given to the cohorts which had deserted their standards.

[2] λγωσσόκοµον (John xii. 6), properly a little box in which flute-players kept the tongues or reeds of their flutes, έν ώ οι αύληταί άπετίθεσαν τάς γλωττίδας[2a] (Hesych.). Perhaps, as Mr. Monro suggests to me, a box may have been so called from the resemblance in shape to a reed mouthpiece, of which the essential point is an elastic valve which will open inwards. It seems unlikely that γλωσσόκοµος should have the same meaning as γλωσσοκοµεϊον. In the LXX. (2 Chron. xxiv. 8) it is used for the corban-box; and by Aquila (Exod. xxxvii. 1) for the Ark. [2a] in which the flute-players deposited the mouth pieces of their flutes. [3] Matt. xvii. 24-27.

[1] Matt. viii. 17.

[2] As usual, we owe this graphic touch, so evidently derived from an eye-witness, to the narrative of St. Mark (iv. 38).

[1] σπλαγχνϊζοµαι (Matt. ix. 36; xiv. 14; xv. 32; xx. 34; Mark i. 41; Luke vii. 13), συλλυπούµενος (Mark iii. 5), έστέναξεν (vii. 34), ένεβριµήσατο τώ πενύµατι (John xi. 33), έδάκρυσεν (ver. 35), έκλαυσεν (Luke xix. 41).

[2] Believe me, true joy is a stern reality.

[3] If we could attach any importance to the strange story quoted by Irenæus (Adv. Haer. v. 33, 3) as having been derived by Papias from hearers of St. John, we should only see in it a marked instance of this playful and imaginative manner in speaking at unconstrained moments to the simplest and truest-hearted of His followers. The words, which have evidently been reflected and refracted by the various media through which they have reached us, may have been uttered in a sort of divine irony, as though they were a playful description of Messianic blessings to be fulfilled, not in the hard Judaic sense, but in a truer and more spiritual sense. "The Lord taught, 'The days will come in which vines shall spring up, each gaving ten thousand stems, and on each stem ten thousand brances, and on each branch ten thousand shoots, and on each shoot ten thousand clusters, and on each cluster ten thousand grapes, and each grape, when pressed, shall give twenty-five measures of wine. And when any saint shall have seized one cluster, another shall cry, "I am a better cluster; take me, through me bless the Lord' " (Westcott, Introd., p. 433). Eusebius (H. E. iii. 39) speaks of Papias as a weak-minded man; and this passage is more like a Talmudic or 'Mohammedan legend than a genuine reminiscence (see Hofmann, Leben Jesu, p. 324); yet it perhaps admits of the explanation I have given. The book of Papias was called λόγων κυριακών έξηγήσεις,[3a] and another fragment of it on Judas Iscariot shows his credulity. (Neander, Ch. Hist., E. Tr., ii. 430.) [3a] Narrations of our Lord's sayings.

[4] Luke x. 21, ήγαλλιάσατο.
