GATHERING OPPOSITION.

΄Έξωθεν παραληφθεϊσαι άγραφοικενοφώνιαι[1]

-- JUSTINIAN, Nov. 146.

[1] Unwritten babblings received by tradition from without.

Although the discourse which we have just narrated formed a marked period in our Lord's ministry, and although from this time forward the clouds gather more and more densely about His course, yet it must not be supposed that this was the first occasion, even in Galilee, on which enmity against His person and teaching had been openly displayed.

[1] Luke vii. 48-50.

[2] Matt. ix. 6; Mark ii. 10; Luke v. 24. "But as the little bubbling and gentle murmurs of the water are presages of a storm, and are more troublesome in their prediction than in their violence; so were the arguings of the Pharisees symptons of a secret displeasure and an ensuing war; though at first represented in the civilities of question and scholastical discourses, yet they did but forerun vigorous objections and bold calumnies, which were the fruits of the next summer" (Jer. Taylor, Life of Christ, II. xii.).

[3] Nedarîm, f. 41, 1, in Schöttg., Hor. Hebr., p. 93; Keim, Gesch. Jesu, ii. 300. [4] See Ewald, Gesch. Christus, p. 376.

[1] Matt. xi. 19; v. supr., pp. 234, 248.

[1] Matt. xi. 16, 17.

[2] Except on the Great Day of Atonement. The principle of the answer given by Jesus to the disciples of John had already been recognized as to the four yearly fasts which seem to have become usual in the time of the prophet Zechariah (Zech. viii. 19). On the bi-weekly and others fasts of the Pharisees, see Buxtorf, Syn. Jud., cap. xxx. It is curious that the most ancient of the Rabbinic treatises -- the Megillath Taanithm written before the destrution of the Temple -- contains merely a list of days on which it is forbidden to fast; at the end of it are a certain number of days on which fasting is recommended; but this was no part of the original work (Derenbourg, Hist. de Pal. 2).

.[3] Ex. gr., Simeon the Just, who made the Law, Worship, and Charity the three bases of the world (Abhôth, i. 2), and "sa douce et vraie piété s'opposait à toute exagération, et surtout aux abstinences rigoureuses"[3a] (Derenbourg, Hist. Pal. 51). [3a] His meek and true piety was opposed to all exaggeration, and especially to rigorous fastings.

[1] Matt. ix. 11; xi. 19; Luke v. 30; vii. 34; xix. 7.

[2] ריםח ץראה מע אל (Pirke Abhôth, ii. 5). In the first clause, "no ignorant person" is literally

"no empty cistern" ( רונ). The expression am ha-arets, "people of the land" (v. ante, p. 90), is exceedingly common in the Rabbis, and marks the arrogantly tyrannous sacerdotalism of the learned class (cf. John vii. 49). At the end of the Mishnaic tract Horajôth we find that a Priest takes precedence of a serving Levite, a Levite of other Israelites, an Israelite of a bastard (Mamser), a Mamser of the Nethinim (Josh. ix. 27), a Nethin of an alien (Ger), a Ger of a freedman; but if the Mamser be a pupil of the Rabbis, and the High Priest an ignoramus (am ha-arets), then such a Mamser has the p0recedence of the High Priest!" (See Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr. in Matt. xxiii. 14.) Their boasts as to the dignity of a Talmîd chakam are like those of the Stoics, which proved so amusing to Horace (Ep. i. 1, 106; Cicero, Pro Muraena, 29). the definition of an am ha-arets given in Sota, f. 21, 1, is one who either does not repeat the daily Krishma, or does not wear tiphillîn, or tsîtsith, or does not wait on the learned. See Schöttgen, Hor. Hebr. in John vii. 49, for yet stronger specimens of this intense spirit of Pharisaism which it was the very object of Jesus to replace by a nobler Humanitarianism (Acts x. 34). there is prehaps no kind of caste-feeling more hateful than the self-glorifying arrogance of a pseudo-erudition.

[3] Our Lord, when He said, "Let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a publican" (Matt. xviii. 17), was simply adopting a current form of expression. The amazing virulence of Jewish exclusiveness is illustrated in Shabbath, xiv. 4; Babha Kama, viii. 6, 4; 2 Esdras vi. 55, &c. (Gfrörer, Jahrh. d. Heils i. 214.)

[4] In Bab. Berachôth, 43, 6, one of the six things forbidden to the pupils of the wise is "to sit at able in a company of the unlearned." Other instances of insolent self-assertion against the am ha-arets are given in Gfrörer, i. 191.

Early in His ministry, Jesus, with a divine and tender irony, had met the accusation by referring them to His favourite passage of Scripture -- the profound utterance of the prophet Hosea, of which He bade them "go and learn" the meaning -- "I will have mercy and not sacrifices." He had further rebuked at once their unkindliness and their self-satisfaction by the proverb, "They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick." The objection did not, however, die away. In His later days, when he was journeying to Jerusalem, these incessant enemies again raised the wrathful and scornful murmur, "This man receiveth sinners and eateth with them;"[1] and then it was that Jesus answered them and justified His ways, and revealed more clearly and more lovingly than had ever been done before the purpose of God's love towards repentant sinners, in those three exquisite and memorable parables, the lost sheep, the lost piece of money, and, above all, the prodigal son. Drawn from the simplest elements of daily experience, these parables, and the last especially, illustrated, and illustrated for ever, in a rising climax of tenderness, the deepest mysteries of the Divine compassion -- the joy that there is in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.[2] Where, in the entire range of human literature, sacred or profane, can anything be found so terse, so luminous, so full of infinite tenderness -- so faithful in the picture which it furnishes of the consequences of sin, yet so merciful in the hope which it affords to amendment and penitence -- as this little story? how does it summarise the consolations of religion and the sufferings of life! All sin and punishment, all penitence and forgiveness, find their best delineation in these few brief words. The radical differences of temperament and impulse which separate different classes of men -- the spurious independence of a restless free-will -- the preference of the enjoyments of the present to all hopes of the future -- the wandering far away from that pure and peaceful region which is indeed our home, in order to let loose every lower passion in the riotous indulgence which wastes and squanders the noblest gifts of life -- the brief continuance of those fierce spasms of forbidden pleasure -- the consuming hunger, the scorching thirst, the helpless slavery, the unutterable degradation, the uncompassionated anguish that must inevitably ensue -- where have these myriad-times-repeated experiences of sin and sorrow been ever painted -- though here painted in a few touches only -- by a hand more tender and more true than in the picture of that foolish boy demanding prematurely the share which he claims of his father's goods; journeying into a far country, wasting his substance with riotous living; suffering from want in the mighty famine; forced to submit to the foul infamy of feeding swine, and fain to fill his belly with the swine-husks which no man gave?[3] And then the coming to himself, the memory of his father's meanest servants who had enough and to spare, the return homewards, the agonised confession, the humble, contrite, heartbroken entreaty, and that never-to-be-equalled climax which, like a sweet voice from heaven, has touched so many million hearts to penitence and tears --

[1] διεγόγγυζον (Luke xv. 2), "kept angrily muttering to each other." (See supra, p. 270.) The contrast of this conduct with that of the Pharisees becomes more striking when we remember the extraordinary and almost ludicrous precautions which they took to secure the impossible end of avoiding every conceivable legal impurity in their chabhoorôth, or social meals. How ineradicable the feeling was, we may see most strikingly by observing that it still infected even some of the disciples and apostles long years after the resurrection of their Lord, who contended with Peter, saying, "Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them!" (Acts xi. 3) -- the exact echo of the caste-feeling here described (cf. Gal. ii. 12.) [2] In the lost sheep we have the stupid, bewildered sinner; in the lost drachma, the sinner stamped with God's image, but lying lost, useless, and ignorant of his own worth; in the prodigal son, the conscious and willing sinner.

[3] This conception of ignominy would be far more intense to a Jew than to us. The Jews detested swine so much, that they would only speak of a pig euphemistically as dabhar acheer, "another thing." The husks, κεράτια, are the long bean-like pods of the carob-tree, or Egyptian fig (Ceratonia siliqua, Linn.). I have tasted them in Palestine; they are stringy, sweetish, coarse, and utterly unfit for human sustenance. They are sold by fruiterers in Paris, and are said to be used in distilling maraschino. The tree was called the "locust-tree," from the mistaken notion that its κεράτια are the άκρίδες on which St. John fed (Matt. iii. 4; Lev. xi. 22). έδιδου, either "ever gave" or "chose to give" to him.

"And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off his father saw him and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the father said to the servants, Bring forth the best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet: and bring hither the fatted calf and kill it; and let us eat and be merry: for this my son was dead and is alive again, was lost and is found."

And since no strain could rise into sweeter and nobler tenderness -- since death itself could reveal no lovelier or more consolatory lesson than it conveys to sinful man -- to us it might seem that this is the true climax of the parable, and that here it should end as with the music of angel harps. And here it would have ended had the mystery of human malice and perversity been other than it is. But the conclusion of it bears most directly on the very circumstances that called it forth. The angry murmur of the Pharisees and Scribes had shown how utterly ignorant they were, in their cold dead hardness and pride of heart, that, in the sight of God, the tear of one truly repentant sinner is transcendently clearer than the loveless and fruitless formalism of a thousand Pharisees. Little did they suspect that penitence can bring the very harlot and publican into closer communion with their Maker than the combined excellence of a thousand vapid and respectable hypocrisies. And therefore it was that Jesus added how the elder son came in, and was indignant at the noise of merriment, and was angry at that ready forgiveness, and reproached the tender heart of his father, and dragged up again in their worst form the forgiven sins of this brother whom he would not acknowledge, and showed all the narrow unpardoning malignity of a heart which had mistaken external rectitude for holy love.[1] Such self-righteous malice, such pitiless and repulsive respectability, is an evil more inveterate -- a sore more difficult to probe, and more hard to cure, than open disobedience and passionate sin. And truly, when we read this story, and meditate deeply over all that it implies, we may, from our hearts, thank God that He who can bring good out of the worst evil -- honey out of the slain lion, and water out of the flinty rock -- could, even from an exhibition of such a spirit as this, draw His materials for the divinest utterance of all revelation -- the parable of the prodigal son.[2]

[1] There are several touches in the original which a translation can hardly preserve, but which show the deepest insight into the angry human heart in all its mean jealousies and rancors -- e.g., the sharp indignant ίδού (See!) with which the elder son begins his expostulation; the inability to recognize his free service as anything better than a constant slavery (έµοί τοσαϋτα έτη δουλεύω); the position of έµοί ("you never gave me even a kid that I might enjoy myself with my friends!"); the use of "this son of yours" instead of "my brother;" the exaggerated and concentrated malignity of the ό καταφαγών σου τόν βιον µτεά πορνών,[1a] describing his brother's wasted life in its worst and grossest form. This brutally uncharitable desire to make the worst of sin repented of, is the baseth touch of all. [1a] "who devoured thy living with harlots." (Noyes.) [2] I have here touched on one side of the parable only -- its individual meaning. Of course it involves, on all sides, infinitely more than has here been educed from it; especially the relation of Jews to the Gentile world, and the desperately jealous fury and rancor kindled in the Jewish mind (Acts xiii. 50; xxviii. 28, &c.) by the bare mention of the truth that God could accept, and pardon, and bless the Gentiles no less than the children of Abraham.

The relation of Jesus to publicans and sinners was thus explained, and also the utter antagonism between His spirit and that inflated religionism which is the wretched and hollow counterfeit of all real religion. The Judaism of that day substituted empty forms and meaningless ceremonies for true righteousness; it mistook uncharitable exclusiveness for genuine purity; it delighted to sun itself in the injustice of an imagined favouritism from which it would fain have shut out all God's other children; it was so profoundly hypocritical as not even to recognise its own hypocrisy; it never thought so well of itself as when it was crushing the broken reed and trampling out the last spark from the smoking flax;[1] it thanked God for the very sins of others, and thought that He could be pleased with a service in which there was neither humility, nor truthfulness, nor loyalty, nor love. These poor formalists, who thought that they were so rich and increased with goods, had to learn that they were wretched, and poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked. These sheep, which fancied that they had not strayed, had to understand that the poor lost sheep might be carried home on the shoulders of the Good Shepherd with a yet deeper tenderness; these elder sons had to learn that their Father's spirit, however little they might be able to realise it in their frozen unsympathetic hearts, was this: "It was meet that we should make merry and be glad, for this thy brother was dead and is alive again, was lost and is found."[2]

[1] "Qui peccatroi non porrigit manum -- quassatum calamum confringit, qui scintillam fidei contemnit in parvulis, linum extinguit fumigans."[1a] (Jer.) [1a] He who extends not his hand to the sinner -- breaks the bruised reed; he who despises the spark of faith in the little ones, quenches the smoking flax. [2] He will not encourage the jealous hatred which had peeped out in the elder son's half-repudiation of this relationship ("this son of thine," ό υίός σου ούτος, Luke xv. 30).

[1] These extravagances occur in the Book of Jubilees, a collection of fiercely fanatical Hagadôth which dates from the first century. For the fable of the Sabbatic river (which probably arose from the intermittent character of some of the springs about Jerusalem) see Josephus, B. J. vii. 5, § 1. It might be said, however, to violate the Sabbath rather than keep it, for it only ran every seventh day.

[2] You must not walk through a stream on stilts, for you really carried the stilts. A woman must not go out with any ribbons about her, unless they were sewed to her dress. A false tooth must not be worn. A person with the tooth-ache might not rinse his mouth with vinegar, but he might hold it in his mouth and swallow it. No one might write down two letters of the alphabet. The sick might not send for a physician. A person with lumbago might not rub or foment the affected part. A tailor must not go out with his needle on Friday night, lest he should forget it, and so break the Sabbath by carrying it about. A cock must not wear a piece of ribbon round its leg on the Sabbath, for this would be to carry something! Shammai would not entrust a letter to a pagan after Wednesday, lest he should not have arrived at his destination on the Sabbath. He was occupied, we are told, all the week with thinking as to how he should keep the Sabbatth. The Shammaites held that Sabbatism applied (1) to men, (2) to beasts, (3) to things. The Hillelites denied the last, not holding it necessary to put out a lamp which had been kindled before the Sabbath, or to remove fish-nets, or to prevent the dropping of oil in a press. Rabbinical authorities for each of these statements (though as usual the Talmud is self-contradictory about some of them) may be found in Schöttgen; Lightfoot; Keim, Gesch. Jesu, ii. 297; Otho, Lex. Rabb. s. v. "Sabbathum;" Buxtorf, De Synag. Jud., pp. 352-356; Derenbourg, Hist. Pal. 38. The Rabbi Kolonimos, having been accused of murdering a boy, wrote on a piece of paper, put it on the dead boy's lips, and so made the corpse rise and reveal the true murderer, in order to save himself from being torn to pieces. As this had been done on the Sabbath, he spent the rest of his life in penance, and on his death-bed ordered that for a hundred years every one who passed should fling a stone at his tomb, because every one who profaned the Sabbath should be stoned! Synesius (Ep. 4) tells a story of a pilot who, in the midst of a storm, dropped the rudder when the Sabbath began, and would only take it again when his life was threatened. Reland (Antt. Hebr., p. 518) does not quote the story accurately.

[3] See instances in Matt. xii. 1, et seq.; Mark ii. 23-28; iii. 1-6; Luke vi. 1-11; xiii. 14-17; xiv. 1-6; John v. 10, et seq.; vii. 23; ix. 14, et seq.

The earliest outbreak of the feeling in Galilee must have occurred shortly after the events narrated in the last chapter. The feeding of the five thousand, and the discourse in the synagogue of Capernaum, took place immediately before a Passover. None of the Evangelists narrate the events which immediately succeeded. If Jesus attended this Passover, He must have done so in strict privacy and seclusion, and no single incident of His visit has been recorded. It is more probable that the peril and opposition which He had undergone in Jerusalem were sufficient to determine His absence "until this tyranny was overpast."[1] It is not, however, impossible that, if He did not go in person, some at least of His disciples fulfilled this national obligation; and it may have been an observation of their behaviour, combined with the deep hatred inspired by His bidding the healed man take up his bed on the Sabbath day, and by the ground which He had taken in defending Himself against that charge, which induced the Scribes and Pharisees of Jerusalem to send some of their number to follow His steps, and to keep an espionage upon His actions, even by the shores of His own beloved lake. Certain it is that henceforth, at every turn and every period of His career -- in the corn-fields, in synagogues, in feasts, during journeys, at Capernaum, at Magdala, in Peræa, at Bethany -- we find Him dogged, watched, impeded, reproached, questioned, tempted, insulted, conspired against by these representatives of the leading authorities of His nation, of whom we are repeatedly told that they were not natives of the place, but "certain which came from Jerusalem."[2]

[1] John v. 16, 18.

[2] Matt. xv. 1; Mark iii. 22; vii. 1. Those, however, mentioned at an earlier period (Luke v. 17) were not the same as these hostile spies. We see from Acts xiv. 19; xvii. 13; Gal. ii. 12, how common among the Jews was the base and demoralizing spirit of heresy-hunting.

i. The first attack in Galilee arose from the circumstance that, in passing through the corn-fields on the Sabbath day,[1] His disciples, who were suffering from hunger, plucked the ears of corn, rubbed them in the palms of their hands, blew away the chaff, and ate. Undoubtedly this was a very high offence -- even a capital offence -- in the eyes of the Legalists. To reap and to thresh on the Sabbath were of course forbidden by one of the abhôth, or primary rules; but the Rabbis had decided that to pluck corn was to be construed as reaping, and to rub it as threshing; even to walk on grass was forbidden, because that too was a species of threshing; and no so much as a fruit must be plucked from a tree.[2] All these latter acts were violations of the toldôth, or "derivative rules." Perhaps these spying Pharisees had followed Jesus on this Sabbath day to watch whether He would go more than the prescribed techûm ha-Shabbeth, or Sabbath-day's journey of two thousand cubits;[3] but here they had been fortunate enough to light upon a far more heinous and flagrant scandal -- an act of the disciples which, strictly and technically speaking, rendered them liable to death by stoning. Jesus Himself had not indeed shared in the offence. If we may press the somewhat peculiar expression of St. Mark, He was walking along through the corn-fields by the ordinary path, bearing His hunger as best He might, while the disciples were pushing for themselves a road through the standing corn by plucking the ears as they went along.[4] Now there was no harm whatever in plucking the ears; that was not only sanctioned by custom, but even distinctly permitted by the Mosaic law.[5] But the heinous fact was that this should be done on a Sabbath! Instantly the Pharisees are round our Lord, pointing to the disciples with the angry question, "See! why do they" -- with a contemptuous gesture towards the disciples -- "do that which is not lawful on the Sabbath day?"

[1] This Sabbath is called in St. Luke by the mysterious name of the second-first Sabbath, έν σαββάτωδευτεροπρώτω -- i.e., the first of the second, not vice versâ as in the English version. There is not much importance in discovering the exact significance of this isolated expression, because the time of year is amply marked by the fact that the wheat (for the context shows that it could hardly have been barley) was ripe -- i.e., that the time was a week or two after the Passover, when the first ripe sheaf was offered as the first-fruits of the harvest. It is probable that in the warm hollow of Gennesareth corn ripened earlier than on the plains. The reading

δευτεροπρώτω is itself very doubtful, and is omitted by many MSS. (especially א, B, L) and versions, including the Syriac and Coptic. Mr. Monro very ingeniously conjectures that originally the eye of a weary copyist may have been misled into it be seeing the διαπορ. or διασπορ., which comes near it. If this led to a misreading δευτέρω, the πρώτω may have been added as a gloss with reference to the έτέρω in verse 6. Almost every commentator has a new theory on the meaning of the word, supposing it to be genuine. The only opinions which seem sufficiently probable and sufficiently supported to make it worth while to mention them are -- 1. The first Sabbath of the second month (Wetstein). 2. The first Sabbath in the second year of the Sabbatical cycle (Wieseler). 3. The first Sabbath after the second day of unleavened bread (Scaliger, Ewald, Keim, &c., following the analogy of σάβ. πρώτον in Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 5, 41). [2] Maimonides, Shabbath, c. 7, 8; Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr. 206; Sepp, Leben Jesu, ii. 329. Similarly, since "building" was one of the thirty-nine works forbidden on the Sabbath, curdling milk was also forbidden, because it was a sort of building. Forbiddenworks were divided into "fathers" (abhôth, άρχηγικώτατα αϊτια, Phil. De Vit. Moy. 686) and "descendants" (toldôth); and to build was on of the abhôth; to make cheese, one of the toldôth. [3] In the Jerus. Targ., Exod. xvi. 29, the words "beyond two thousand yards" are added, as also on Ruth i. 16. Yet the Pharisees had ingenious rules of their own for getting over the resultant inconveniences, which may be found in the Mishna (Erubhîn == mixtures, or amalgamations of distance, 10 chapters). The treatise Shabbath occupies 24 chapters. [4] Mark ii. 23, καί έγένετο παραπορεύεσθαι αύτόν διά τών σπορίµων, καί ήρξαντο οί µαθηταί αύτοΰ όδόν ποιεϊν τίλλοντες τούς στάχυας. In classical Greek, this would mean "began to make themselves a road by plucking." Meyer was the first to support this rendering, and he is followed by Volkmar, Bleek, Keim, &c., and by Bishop Wordsworth. It is doubtful, however, whether the classical usage of όδόν ποιεϊν can be pressed, and it must be confessed that on this supposition the phrase would be a very curious one. [5] Deut. xxiii. 25. I was suprised to see that the Arabs in some fields near the summit of Gerizim looked on with perfect indifference while our weary horses ate freely of the green springing corn.

With that divine and instantaneous readiness, with that depth of insight and width of knowledge which characterized His answers to the most sudden surprises, Jesus instantly protected His disciples with personal approval and decisive support. As the charge this time was aimed not at Himself but at His disciples, His line of argument and defence differs entirely from that which, as we have seen, He had adopted at Jerusalem. There He rested His supposed violation of the law on His personal authority; here, while He again declared Himself Lord of the Sabbath, He instantly quoted first from their own Cethubhîm, then from their own Law, a precedent and a principle which absolved His followers from all blame. "Have ye not read," He asked, adopting perhaps with a certain delicate irony, as He did at other times, a favourite formula of their own Rabbis, "how David not only went with his armed followers[1] into the Temple on the Sabbath day,[2] but actually ate with them the sanctified shewbread, which it was expressly forbidden for any but the priests to eat?" If David, their hero, their favourite, their saint, had thus openly and flagrantly violated the letter of the law, and had yet been blameless on the sole plea of a necessity higher than any merely ceremonial injunction, why were the disciples to blame for the harmless act of sating their hunger? And again, if their own Rabbis had laid it down that there was "no Sabbatism in the Temple;"[3] that the priests on the Sabbath might hew the wood, and light the fires, and place hot fresh-baked shewbread on the table, and slay double victims, and circumcise children, and thus in every way violate the rules of the Sopherîm about the Sabbath, and yet be blameless[4] -- nay, if in acting thus they were breaking the Sabbath at the bidding of the very Law which ordains the Sabbath -- then if the Temple excuses them, ought not something[5] greater than the Temple excuse these? And there was something greater than the Temple here. And then once more He reminds them that mercy is better than sacrifice. Now the Sabbath was expressly designed for mercy, and therefore not only might all acts of mercy be blamelessly performed thereon, but such acts would be more pleasing to God than all the insensate and self-satisfied scrupulosities which had turned a rich blessing into a burden and a snare. The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath, and therefore the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath.[6]

[1] Some, however, have imagined that David merely represented himself as being accompanied by followers. [2] This results both from the fact of the precedent being here adduced and from 1 Sam. xxi. 6 (compared with Lev. xxiv. 8, 9). It is by no means improbable that this very chapter had been read in the morning Synagogue service of the day. The service was probably over, because none of the three meals took place till then.

[3] So Maimonides, Pesach. 1 (following, of course, old and established authorities). Thus, too, it was lawful for the Israelites at the Feast of Tabernacles to carry their lulabîm on the Sabbath (Reland, Antt. Hebr. 486).

[4] Even Hillel had some partial insight into this truth. He settled the question (against the Benî Bathira, and the more Pharisaic Shammai), that if the Passover day fell on a Sabbath the Paschal lamb might be slain by each Israelite in his own house, because lambs were slain in the Temple on every Sabbath by the priests.

[5] µεϊζον, neuter, not masc., as in the English version (Matt. xii. 6). [6] Mark ii. 27, 28. A similar maxim (doubtless borrowed from this, and borrowed without profit) is found in the Talmud, "The Sabbath is given to thee, not thou to the Sabbath." (See Derenbourg, Hist. de Palest. 144.)

In the Codex Bezae, an ancient and valuable manuscript now in the University Library at Cambridge, there occurs after Luke vi. 5 this remarkable addition -- "On the same day, seeing one working on the Sabbath, He said to him, O man, if indeed thou knowest what thou doest, thou art blessed; but if thou knowest not, thou art accursed, and a transgressor of the law." The incident is curious; it is preserved for us in this manuscript alone, and it may perhaps be set aside as apocryphal, or at best as one of those ágrapha dógmata, or "unrecorded sayings" which, like Acts xx. 35, are attributed to our Lord by tradition only. Yet the story is too striking, too intrinsically probable, to be at once rejected as unauthentic. Nothing could more clearly illustrate the spirit of our Lord's teaching, as it was understood, for instance, by St. Paul.[1] For the meaning of the story obviously is -- If thy work is of faith, then thou art acting rightly: if it is not of faith, it is sin.

[1] Compare the closely analogous expressions of St. Paul about eating είδωλόθυτα (1 Cor. viii. 1). Some authors have rejected this story almost with contempt; yet could it be more wrong of the man (presumably for some strong and valid reason) to work than for the Jews to feast and idle? "It is better to plough than to dance," says St. Augustine; "they rest from good work, they rest not from idle work" (Enarrat. in Ps. xcii. 2).

ii. It was apparently on the day[1] signalised by this bitter attack, that our Lord again, later in the afternoon, entered the synagogue. A man -- tradition says that he was a stonemason, maimed by an accident, who had prayed Christ to heal him, that he might not be forced to beg -- was sitting in the synagogue.[2] His presence, and apparently the purpose of His presence, was known to all; and in the chief seats were Scribes, Pharisees, and Herodians, whose jealous, malignant gaze was fixed on Christ to see what He would do, that they might accuse Him. He did not leave them long in doubt. First He bade the man with the withered hand get up and stand out in the midst. And then He referred to the adjudication of their own consciences the question that was in their hearts, formulating it only in such a way as to show them its real significance. "Is it lawful," He asked, "on the Sabbath days to do good or to do evil? to save life (as I am doing), or to kill (as you in your hearts are wishing to do)?" There could be but one answer to such a question, but they were not there either to search for or to tell the truth. Their sole object was to watch what He would do, and found upon it a public charge before the Sanhedrin, or if not, at least to brand Him thenceforth with the open stigma of a Sabbath-breaker. Therefore they met the question by stolid and impotent silence. But He would not allow them to escape the verdict of their own better judgment, and therefore He justified Himself by their own distinct practice, no less than by their inability to answer. "Is there one of you," He asked, "who, if but a single sheep be fallen into a water-pit, will not get hold of it, and pull it out? How much than is a man better than a sheep?"[3] The argument was unanswerable, and their own conduct in the matter was undeniable; but still their fierce silence remained unbroken. He looked round on them with anger; a holy indignation burned in His heart, glowed on His countenance, animated His gesture, rang in His voice, as slowly he swept each hard upturned face with the glance that upbraided them for their malignity and meanness, for their ignorance and pride; and then suppressing that bitter and strong emotion as He turned to do His deed of mercy, He said to the man, "Stretch forth thy hand." Was not the hand withered? How could he stretch it forth? The word of Christ supplied the power to fulfil His command: he stretched it out, and it was restored whole as the other.

[1] So it would seem from Matt. xii. 9, 10; Mark iii. 1. It is true that the received text of Luke vi. 6 says έν έτέρω σαββάτω, but probably so vague a note of time is not intended to be pressed, and indeed the Codex Bezae omits the έτέρω. St. Luke, only aware that the incident took place on a Sabbath, may merely mean, "It was also on a Sabbath day that," &c. On the other hand, the µεταβάς έκείθεν of Matt. xii. 9 is more often used of longer journeys. The locality of these incidents is not further indicated, but it seems certain that they took place in Galilee. [2] This tradition was preserved in the Gospel of the Nazarenes and Ebionites. "Caementarius eram, manibus victum quaeritans. Precor te, Jesu, ut mihi restituas sanitatem, ne turpiter mendicem cibos."[2a] (Jer. in Matt. xii. 13.)

[2a] I was a mason, seeking a livelihood with my hands. I pray thee, Jesus, restore to me soundness of body that I may not basely beg my food. [3] In the Gemara it is only allowed to pull out a sheep if it be in danger of drowning; planks, however, might be put in a less extreme case, and food supplied (see Reland, Antt. Hebr. 521). So too a man may be only healed if in peril of death (Joma, viii. 6). Shemaia and Abtalion had not been blamed for breaking the Sabbath to revive the snow-covered and benumbed Hillel (v. infr. Excursus III., "Jesus and Hillel"). Stier suggests with much probability that many exceptions may have been permitted because of Christ's words. The institution of the erûbh showed how ready even the Pharisees were to tamper with Sabbatical observance when it merely suited their convenience (v. infr. Excursus IX., "Hypocrisy of the Pharisees").

Thus in every way were His enemies foiled -- foiled in argument, shamed into silence, thwarted even in their attempt to find some ground for a criminal accusation. For even in healing the man, Christ had done absolutely nothing which their worst hostility could misconstrue into a breach of the Sabbath law. He had not touched the man; He had not questioned him; He had not bid him exercise his recovered power; He had but spoken a word, and not even a Pharisee could say that to speak a word was an infraction of the Sabbath, even if the word were followed by miraculous blessing! They must have felt how utterly they were defeated, but it only kindled their rage the more. They were filled with madness,[1] and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus. Hitherto they had been enemies of the Herodians. They regarded them as half-apostate Jews, who accepted the Roman domination,[2] imitated heathen practices, adopted Sadducean opinions, and had gone go far in their flattery to the reigning house that they had blasphemously tried to represent Herod the Great as the promised Messiah. But now their old enmities were reconciled in their mad rage against a common foe. Something -- perhaps the fear of Antipas, perhaps political suspicion, perhaps the mere natural hatred of worldlings and renegades against the sweet and noble doctrines which shamed their lives -- had recently added these Herodians to the number of the Saviour's persecutors. As Galilee was the chief centre of Christ's activity, the Jerusalem Pharisees were glad to avail themselves of any aid from the Galilæan tetrarch and his followers. They took common council how they might destroy by violence the Prophet whom they could neither refute by reasoning nor circumvent by law.

[1] Luke vi. 11, άνοία, a kind of senseless rage.

[2] The very form of the name, Herodiani, probably indicates its Roman origin; I only say "probably," because Lipsius, Ueber den Ursprung und den Aeltesten Gebrauch des Christennamens, argues that the termination is an instance of the τύπος Άσίανος common in barbarian, and particularly Asiatic gentile or geographical adjectives.

This enmity of the leaders had not yet estranged from Christ the minds of the multitude. It made it desirable, however, for Him to move to another place,[1] because He would "neither strive nor cry, neither should any man hear His voice in the street," and the hour was not yet come when He should "send forth judgment to victory." But before His departure there occurred scenes yet more violent, and outbreaks of fury against Him yet more marked and dangerous. Every day it became more and more necessary to show that the rift between Himself and the religious leaders of His nation was deep and final; every day it became more and more necessary to expose the hypocritical formalism which pervaded their doctrines, and which was but the efflorescence of a fatal and deeply-seated plague.

[1] Matt. xii. 15 (Isa. xlii. 2). It is not necessarily implied that He left Galilee; or if He did, the events which follow may well have occurred before He was fully aware of the extent to which the virulence of the Pharisaic party had carried them.

[1] Matt. xv. 1-20; Mark vii. 1-23.

[2] Buxtorf, Syn. Jud., p. 236. For Rabbinical rules about ablutions, and their minutiæ, see Schwab's Berachôth, pp. 309, 398, 436-438. They occupy a large portion of the sixth seder of the Talmud, which is called Taharôth, or "Purifications," -- especially the tracts Mikvaôth, "lavers and baths," and Yadaîm, or "hand-washings," in four chapters. Yet the Talmudists admit that hand-washing (nitilath yadaim) is not necessary if the hands be clean. (Pieritz, Gosp. from Rabbinic Point of View, p. 111.)

Before giving our Lord's reply, St. Mark pauses to tell us that the traditional ablutions observed by the Pharisees and all the leading Jews were extremely elaborate and numerous. Before every meal, and at every return from market,[1] they washed "with the first,"[2] and if no water was at hand a man was obliged to go at least four miles to search for it. Besides this there were precise rules for the washing of all cups and sextarii[3] and banquet-couches (triclinia) and brazen vessels. The treatise Shûlchan-Arûk, or "Table arranged," a compendium of Rabbinical usages drawn up by Josef Karo in 1567, contains no less than twenty-six prayers by which these washings were accompanied. To neglect them was as bad as homicide, and involved a forfeiture of eternal life. And yet the disciples dared to eat with "common" (that is, with unwashen) hands!

[1] Some render Mark vii. 4, "And after market they do not eat (what they have purchased) until they have washed it." this is not impossible, but does not seem likely, although βαπτίσωνται (complete immersions nitîlôth) implies more than νίψωνται ("wash the hands") in verse 3. [2] πυγµή, i.e., thoroughly scrubbing each hand with the closed fist; the expression seems to

be borrowed from some uses of the Hebrew ף4ר ִנ ֶא, and the Syriac Version uses a similar word to render έπιµελώς "carefully" in Luke xv. 8. Epiphanius (Haer. xv. ad in.) uses the word in the sense of "frequently," and in the Vulgate it is rendered crebro, so that Erasmus suggested a reading πυκνή(?). Others follow Theophylact in making it mean "up to the elbow" (άχρι αγκώνος). The view given above is supported by the Rabbinical passages in Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr. ad loc. (See Schleusner, Lex. Nov. Test.)

[3] ξεστών (Mark vii. 4), one of St. Mark's Latinisms. Earthen vessels, if in any way rendered ceremonially unclean, were not washed, but broken (Lev. xv. 12). They were so particular about the sacred vessels that one day they washed the golden candlestick, and the Sadducees remarked to them "that soon they would think it necessary to wash the sun." (Chagiga, iii. 8; Grätz, Gesch. d. Jud. iii. 458). the first and second tracts of the Seder Taharôth, viz., the thirty chapters of Kelîm (vessels) and the eighteen of Oholôth (tents), deal with the defilements and purifications of dwellings, utensils, &c. Wotton (Mishna, i. 160) justly considers this the most Pharisaic "order" of the entire Mishna.

As usual, our Lord at once made common cause with His disciples, and did not leave them, in their simplicity and ignorance, to be overawed by the attack of these stately and sanctimonious critics. He answered their question by a far graver one. "Why," He said, "do you too violate the commandment of God by this 'tradition' of yours? For God's command was 'Honour thy father and thy mother,' but your gloss is, instead of giving to father and mother, a man may simply give the sum intended for their support to the sacred treasury, and say, 'It is Corban,' and then[1] -- he is exempt from any further burden in their support! And many such things ye do. Ye hypocrites!" -- it was the first time that our Lord had thus sternly rebuked them -- "finely[2] do ye abolish and obliterate the commandment of God by your traditions; and well did Isaiah prophesy of you, 'This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me; but in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandment of me.' "[3]

[1] Lightfoot's note on this passage is particulary valuable. He shows that our Lord is quoting a regular formula which occurs often in the tracts Nedarîm and Nezirôth, both of which deal with vows. In Matt. xv. 6 the sentence remains thus unfinished; it is broken off by aposiopesis, as though our Lord shrank from the disgraceful inferences which such a son would annex to his words, and preferred to substitute for them His own stronger declaration that their iniquitous diversion of natural charities into the channels of pious ostentation would of course undermine

all parental authority. ןָּנ ְר ָכּ means "a gift." It is rendered δώρον in Jos. Antt. iv. 4, § 4; B. J. ii. 9, § 4. To say the word "corban," however rashly and inconsiderately, involved a konam, or vow, and some of the Rabbis had expressly taught that a vow superseded the necessity of obedience to the fifth commandment. The explanation of this and the following verse seems to be that to say, "Be it corban," was a sort of imprecation by the use of which a thing was tabooed to any one else; and that if it had been said to a parent even in haste or anger, the Rabbis still treated it as irrevocable.

[2] καλώς άθετεϊτε (Mark vii. 9), used in strong irony. The Babha Kama, or "first gate," and two following treatises of the Mishna are on compensations, &c., and abound in such traditions which supersede the Law. Another remarkable instance of doing away with the commandment by tradition was the unanimous exposition of the lex talionis (Exod. xxi. 24; Deut. xix. 12) as meaning nothing more than a fine. I, of course, see that the dislike to the lex talionis was due to a certain moral progress through which the Greeks and Teutons also passed; but to profess unbounded and supersitious adoration for the mere dead letter of a law, and then to do away with its clearest enactments by mere quibbles and fictions, was obvious hypocrisy. [3] The iniquity which in the Middle Ages often extorted gifts of property for Church purposes from the ghastly terrors of dying sinners was a παράδοσις as bad as, perhaps worse than, that which Christ denounces.

This was not only a defence of the disciples -- because it showed that they merely neglected a body of regulations[1] which were in themselves so opposed to the very letter of the sacred law as, in many cases, to be more honoured in the breach than the observance -- but it was the open rebuke of One who assumed a superior and fearless authority, and a distinct reprobation of a system which guided all the actions of the Rabbinic caste, and was more reverenced than the Pentateuch itself. The quintessence of that system was to sacrifice the spirit to the letter, which, apart from that spirit, was more than valueless; and to sacrifice the letter itself to mere inferences from it which were absolutely pernicious. The Jews distinguished between the written Law (Torah Shebeketeb) and the traditional Law, or "Law upon the lip" (Torah Shebeal pîh); and the latter was asserted, by its more extravagant votaries, to have been orally delivered by God to Moses, and orally transmitted by him through a succession of elders. On it is founded the Talmud (or "doctrine"), which consists of the Mishna (or "repetition") of the Law, and the Gemara, or "supplement" to it; and so extravagant did the reverence for the Talmud become, that it was said to be, in relation to the Law, as wine to water; to read the Scriptures was a matter of indifference, but to read the Mishna was meritorious, and to read the Gemara would be to receive the richest recompense.[2] And it was this grandiose system of revered commentary and pious custom which Jesus now so completely discountenanced, as not only to defend the neglect of it, but even openly to condemn and repudiate its most established principles. He thus consigned to oblivion and indifference the entire paraphernalia of Hagadôth ("legends") and Halachôth ("rules"), which, though up to that period it had not been committed to writing, was yet devoutly cherished in the memory of the learned, and constituted the very treasury of Rabbinic wisdom.

[1] As it is to this day. Dr. Frankl says of the Ashkenazîm and Perûshîm at Jerusalem, that "they never study the Bible, and derive all their knowledge of it from the Talmud" (p. 34). [The Karaites, however, reject this doctrine of the Mekebalîm, and hold to the Bible only (id. p. 46).] "He that has learned the Scripture, and not hte Mishna, is a blockhead." "The Law is like salt, the Mishna like pepper, the Gemara like balmy spice." (See many such passages quoted from the Masseketh Soferîm, and elsewhere, in Buxtorf, Synag. Jud., ch. iii.; Carpzov. App. Cret., p. 563.) -- R. Menasseh Ben Israel compared the Law to the body, the Mishna to the soul, the Cabbala to the soul of the soul. (Allen's Mod. Judaism, p. 74.) -- The Pirke Abhôth ordains that at five a child should study the Bible, at ten the Mishna, at fifteen the Gemara. God Himself is represented as studying the Talmud, and repeating the decisions of the Rabbis! (Chagiga, p. 15, ap. Bartolocc. iii. 410). -- In a passage of the Babha Metsia, f. 59, which almost reaches sublimity in its colossal sense of conviction, the decisions of the wise are upheld not only against miracles, but even against a voice from heaven! the passage has been often quoted. (See Cohen, Les Déicides, or Schwab's Berachôth, p. 72.) [2] They asserted that God had taught Moses the Law by day, and the Mishna by night (Buxtorf, Syn. Jud. iii.). The Mishna was supposed to consist of five main elements:- -- 1. Traditional interpretations. 2. Undisputed constitutions. 3. Accepted opinions derived from the thirteen ways of reasoning. 4. Decrees of Prophets and Rabbis. 5. Legal precedents. (Maimon. Porta Mosis. See Etheridge, Hebr. Lit., p. 119.) -- The object of the Germara was to explain the Mishna, (1) lexically, (2) dogmatically, (3) inferentially, (4) mystically. According to

Aben Ezra, R. Sol. Jarchi, R. Bechai, Maimonides, &c., the Law was the "Statutes" (םיקח),

and the Oral Law the "judgments" (םימפשמ) of Deut. iv. 14. R. Josh. Ben Levi said that in Exod. xxiv. 12 "the Tables" meant the Decalogue; "the Law," the Pentateuch; "commandments," the Mishna; "which I have written," the Prophets and Hagiographa; and "that thou mightest teach them," the Gemara (Berachôth, f. 5 a). (Schwab, p. 234.)

Nor was this all: not content with shattering the very bases of their external religion, He even taught to the multitude doctrines which would undermine their entire authority -- doctrines which would tend to bring their vaunted wisdom into utter discredit. The supremacy of His disapproval was in exact proportion to the boundlessness of their own arrogant self-assertion; and turning away from them as though they were hopeless, He summoned the multitude, whom they had trained to look up to them as little gods, and spoke these short and weighty words:

"Hear me, all of you, and understand! Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth the man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, that defileth a man."[1]

[1] There is a singular and striking parallel to these words in Philo, De Opif. Mundi, i. 29. "There enter into the mouth," he says, expanding a saying of Plato, "meats and drinks, corruptible nourishment of a corruptible body; but there go forth from it words, immortal laws of an immortal soul, by means of which is governed the reasonable life." Compare too the fragment of Democritus, άν δέ σαυτόν ένδοθεν άνοίξης ποικίλον τι καί πολυπαθές κακών ταµεϊον εύρήσεις ... ούκ έξωθεν έπιρρεόντων, άλλ' ωσπερ έγγείους καί άυτόχθονας πηγάς έχόντων , άς άνίησινή κακία.[1a]

[1a] If thou dost open thyself from within, thou wilt find a certain storehouse of evil things which is many-colored and liable to many impressions ... base things not flowing in from without, but having, as it were, native and indigenous springs, which depravity sends forth.

The Pharisees were bitterly offended by this saying, as well indeed they might be. Condemnatory as it was of the too common sacerdotal infatuation for all that is merely ceremonial, that utterance of Jesus should have been the final death-knell of that superfluity of voluntary ceremonialism for which one of the Fathers coins the inimitable word etheloperissothréskeia.[1] His disciples were not slow to inform Him of the indignation which His words had caused, for they probably retained a large share of the popular awe for the leading sect. But the reply of Jesus was an expression of calm indifference to earthly judgment, a reference of all worth to the sole judgment of God as shown in the slow ripening of events. "Every plant which my Heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up. Let them alone. They be blind leaders of the blind; and if the blind lead the blind, shall they not both fall into the ditch?"

[1] "Superfluity of voluntary ceremonialism"

A little later, when they were in-doors and alone, Peter ventured to ask for an explanation of the words which He had uttered so emphatically to the multitude. Jesus gently blamed the want of comprehension among His Apostles, but showed them, in teaching of deep significance, that man's food does but affect his material structure, and does not enter into heart, or touch his real being; but that "from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, theft, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness."

Evil thoughts -- like one tiny rill of evil, and then the burst of all that black overwhelming torrent!

"These are the things which defile a man; but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man."[1]

[1] There is a well-known difficulty about Mark vii. 19, where καθαρίζον[1a] is both

ungrammatical and gives a very dubious sense. If with almost all the best MSS. (א, A, B, E, F, L, &c.) we read καθαρίζων,[1b] we may then connect it with the previous λέγει (ver. 18) -- i.e. "He said this ... purging, rendering clean, all meats" (cf. Acts xi. 5-9). It must, however, be admitted that the order of the words is a serous stumbling-block to this excellent interpretation. The only other way of explaining it is to make καθαρίζων agree with άφεδρών.[1c] [1a] purging [all meats]

[1b] "purging," "rendering clean"

[1c] the draught, drain, or sewer. (Alford, adopting -- correctly, no doubt -- the masculine form of the Greek participle, and connecting it with the word translated "sewer," adds: The άφεδρών (sewer) is that which, by the removal of the part carried off, purifies the meat; the portion available for nourishment being in its passage converted into chyle, and the remainder being cast out).
