THE TRANSFIGURATION.

"And this voice which came from heaven we heard,

when we were with Him in the holy mount."

-- 2 PETER i. 18.

None of the Evangelists tell us about the week which followed this memorable event. They tell us only that "after six days" He took with Him the three dearest and most enlightened of His disciples,[1] and went with them -- the expression implies a certain solemnity of expectation[2] -- up a lofty mountain, or, as St. Luke calls it, simply "the mountain."

[1] Matt. xvii. 1-13; Mark ix. 2-13; Luke ix. 28-36. The "about eight days after" of St. Luke (ix. 28) is merely an inclusive reckoning, but is one of the touches which are valuable as showing the independence of his narrative, which gives us several new particulars. [2] άναφέρει. Comp. Luke xxiv. 51.

The supposition that the mountain intended was Mount Tabor has been engrained for centuries in the tradition of the Christian Church; and three churches and a monastery erected before the close of the sixth century attest the unhesitating acceptance of this belief. Yet it is almost certain that Tabor was not the scene of that great epiphany. The rounded summit of that picturesque and wood-crowned hill, which forms so fine a feature in the landscape, as the traveller approaches the northern limit of the plain of Esdraelon, had probably from time immemorial been a fortified and inhabited spot,[1] and less than thirty years after this time, Josephus, on this very mountain, strengthened the existing fortress of Itaburion. This, therefore, was not a spot to which Jesus could have taken the three Apostles "apart by themselves." Nor, again, is there the slightest intimation that the six intervening days had been spent in travelling southwards from Cæsarea Philippi, the place last mentioned; on the contrary, it is distinctly intimated by St. Mark (ix. 30), that Jesus did not "pass through Galilee" (in which Mount Tabor is situated) till after the events here narrated. Nor again does the comparatively insignificant hill Paneum, which is close by Cæsarea Philippi, fulfil the requirements of the narrative.[2] It is, therefore, much more natural to suppose that our Lord, anxious to traverse the Holy Land of His birth to its northern limit, journeyed slowly forward till He reached the lower slopes of that splendid snow-clad mountain, whose glittering mass, visible even as far southward as the Dead Sea, magnificently closes the northern frontier of Palestine -- the Mount Hermon of Jewish poetry. Its very name means "the mountain," and the scene which it witnessed would well suffice to procure for it the distinction of being the only mountain to which in Scripture is attached the epithet "holy."[3] On those dewy pasturages, cool and fresh with the breath of the snow-clad heights above them, and offering that noble solitude, among the grandest scenes of Nature, which He desired as the refreshment of His soul for the mighty struggle which was now so soon to come, Jesus would find many a spot where He could kneel with His disciples absorbed in silent prayer.

[1] Chisloth-tabor (Josh. xix. 12; Judg. iv. 6).

[2] ΙΙανείον. The town is called on coins Καισάρεια ύτό ΙΙανείω. [3] 2 Peter i. 18.

And the coolness and solitude would be still more delicious to the weariness of the Man of Sorrows after the burning heat of the Eastern day and in incessant publicity which, even in these remoter regions, thronged his steps. It was the evening hour when He ascended,[1] and as He climbed the hill-slope with those three chosen witnesses -- "the Sons of Thunder and the Man of Rock" -- doubtless a solemn gladness dilated His whole soul; a sense not only of the heavenly calm which that solitary communion with His Heavenly Father would breathe upon the spirit, but still more than this, a sense that He would be supported for the coming hour by ministrations not of earth, and illuminated with a light which needed no aid from sun or moon or stars. He went up to be prepared for death, and He took His three Apostles with Him that, haply, having seen His glory -- the glory of the only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth -- their hearts might be fortified, their faith strengthened, to gaze unshaken on the shameful insults and unspeakable humiliation of the cross.

[1] This is evident from Luke ix. 32, 37, especially when compared with Luke vi. 12.

There, then, He knelt and prayed, and as He prayed He was elevated far above the toil and misery of the world which had rejected Him. He was transfigured before them, and His countenance shone as the sun, and His garments became white as the dazzling snow-fields above them. He was enwrapped in such an aureole of glistering brilliance -- His whole presence breathed so divine a radiance -- that the light, the snow, the lighting[1] are the only things to which the Evangelist can compare that celestial lustre. And, lo! two figures were by his side.[2] "When, in the desert, He was girding Himself for the work of life, angels of life came and ministered unto Him; now, in the fair world, when He is girding Himself for the work of death, the ministrants come to Him from the grave -- but from the grave conquered -- one from that tomb under Abarim, which His own hand had sealed long ago; the other from the rest into which He had entered without seeing corruption. There stood by Him Moses and Elias, and spake of His decease. And when the prayer is ended, the task accepted, then first since the star paused over Him at Bethlehem, the full glory falls upon His from heaven, and the testimony is borne to His everlasting sonship and power -- 'Hear ye Him,' "[3]

[1] λευκά ώς τό φώς (Matt. xvii. 2); λευκά λίαν ώς χιών (Mark ix. 3); λευκός ... έξαστράπτων (Luke ix. 29). It is interesting to observe that St. Luke, writing for Greeks and Romans, avoids the word µετεµορφώθη[1a] used by the other Evangelists, because his readers would associate that word with the conceptions with which they were familiar in Nicander, Antoninus Liberalis, and Ovid. (See Valcknaer, quoted by Bishop Wordsworth, ad loc.) [1a] was transfigured

[2] The καί ίδου[2a] of Matt. xvii. 3 shows how intense was the impression which the scene had made on the imagination of those who witnessed it. "The two who appeared to Him were the representatives of the Law and the Prophets: both had been removed from this world in a mysterious manner; ... both, like the greater One with whom they spoke, had endured that supernatural fast of forty days and nights; both had been on the holy mount in the visions of God. And now they came, solemnly, to consign into His hands, once and for all, in a symbolical and glorious representation, their delegated and expiring power." (Alford.) [2a] And behold!

[3] Ruskin, Mod. Painters, iii. 392.

It is clear, from the fuller narrative of St. Luke, that the three Apostles did not witness the beginning of this marvellous transfiguration. An Oriental, when his prayers are over, wraps himself in his abba,[1] and, lying down on the grass in the open air, sinks in a moment into profound sleep. And the Apostles, as afterwards they slept at Gethsemane, so now they slept on Hermon. They were heavy, "weighed down" with sleep, when suddenly starting into full wakefulness of spirit, they saw and heard.[2]

[1] Hence the merciful provision of the Mosaic law, that the outer robe was to be restored at night if taken as a pledge for debt. (See Exod. xxii. 26.) [2] So I would render διαγρηγορήσαντες in Luke ix. 32. It is a non-classical word, and has this meaning in Byzantine writers. Or perhaps the όια may imply "waking after an interval" -- "in the middle of it all." Both the context and the grammer sufficiently show that (though it occurs here only in the N. T.) it cannot mean "having kept awake," as Alford and Archbishop Trench (following Rost and Palm) render it.

In the darkness of the night, shedding an intense gleam over the mountain herbage, shone the glorified form of their Lord. Beside Him, in the same flood of golden glory,[1] were two awful shapes, which they knew or heard to be Moses and Elijah. And the Three spake together, in the stillness, of that coming decease at Jerusalem, about which they had just been forewarned by Christ.

[1] όφθέντες έν δόξη (Luke ix. 31).

And as the splendid vision[1] began to fade -- as the majestic visitants were about to be separated from their Lord, as their Lord Himself passed with them into the overshadowing brightness -- Peter, anxious to delay their presence, amazed, startled, transported, not knowing what he said[2] -- not knowing that Calvary would be a spectacle infinitely more transcendent than Hermon -- not knowing that the Law and the Prophets were now fulfilled -- not fully knowing that his Lord was unspeakably grater than the Prophet of Sinai and the Avenger of Carmel -- exclaimed, "Rabbi, it is best for us to be here;[3] and let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias." Jesus might have smiled at the naive proposal of the eager Apostle, that they six should dwell for ever in little succôth of wattled boughs on the slopes of Hermon. But it was not for Peter to construct the universe for his personal satisfaction. He had to learn the meaning of Calvary no less than that of Hermon. Not in cloud of glory or chariot of fire was Jesus to pass away from them, but with arms outstretched in agony upon the accursed tree; not between Moses and Elias, but between two thieves, who "were crucified with Him, on either side one."

[1] τό όραµα (Matt. xvii. 9). The word, which occurs eleven times in the Acts, but not elsewhere in the N. T., is applied to dreams (Acts xvi. 10; xviii. 9) and ecstacies (Acts xi. 5), but also to any impression on the spirit which is as clear as an impression on the senses (Acts vii. 31). Hence PHavorinus says, όράµατά είσι προφητών, όσα έγρηγορότες βλέπουσι οί προφήται[1a]

[1a] they are the visions of prophets, such visions as prophets see when awake. [2] This touch in all probability comes to us from St. Peter himself (Mark ix. 6). [3] καλόν in the New Testament seems sometimes to have a superlative sense. Cf. Matt. xviii.

8; xxvi. 24, &c., and Gen. xxxviii. 26, where כימ means "better," as "bona," in Plaut. Rud. iv. 4, 70. (Schleusner, s. v.)

No answer was vouchsafed to his wild and dreamy words; but, even as he spake, a cloud -- not a cloud of thick darkness as at Sinai, but a cloud of light, a Shechînah of radiance -- overshadowed them, and a voice from out of it uttered, "This is my beloved Son; hear Him." They fell prostrate, and hid their faces on the grass.[1] And as -- awaking from the overwhelming shock of that awful voice, of that enfolding Light -- they raised their eyes and gazed suddenly all around them,[2] they found that all was over. The bright cloud had vanished. The lightning-like gleams of shining countenances and dazzling robes had passed away;[3] they were alone with Jesus, and only the stars rained their quiet lustre on the mountain slopes.

[1] Matt. xvii. 6.

[2] Matt. ix. 8, έξάπινα περιβλεψάµενοι (cf. Matt. xvii. 8), one of the many inimitably graphic touches of truthfulness and simplicity -- touches never yet found in any "myth" since the world began -- with which in all three Evangelists this narrative abounds. We have proofs that on two of the three spectators this scene made an indelible impression. St. John most clearly alludes to it in John i. 14; 1 John i. 1. St. Peter (if, as I believe, the Second Epistle is genuine) is dwelling on it in 2 Peter i. in a manner all the more striking because it is partly unconscious. Thus, he not only appeals to it in confirmation of his preaching, but he uses just before the unusual word έξοσος for "death" [2 Peter i. 15 (cf. Luke ix. 31); it is, however, possible that δόξαν may here be the reading, as it seems to have been read by St. Chrysostom], and σκήνωµα (ver. 13; cf. Matt. xvii. 4) for "tabernacle;" and immediately after speaks (ver. 19) of "a light shining in a dark place," and immediately preceding the dawn -- which is another, and, so far as I am aware, hitherto unnoticed trace of the fact that the Transfiguration (of which the writer's mind is here so full) took place by night. On the word έξοδος Bengel finely remarks, "Vocabulum valde grave, quo continetur passio, crux, mors, resurrectio, adscensio."[2a] Archbishop Trench aptly compares "Post obitum, vel potius excessum, Romuli"[2b] (Cic. Rep. ii. 30), and says that St. Peter by the word έπόπτης[2c] (2 Peter i. 16) seems to imply a sort of initiation into holy mysteries (Studies in the Gospels, p. 206). Many have resolved the narrative of the Transfiguration into a myth; it is remarkable that, in this verse, St. Peter is expressly repudiating the very kind of myths (µΰθοι σεσοφισµένοι) under which this would be classed.

[1a] A very weighty word, in which is contained the passion, the cross, the death, the resurrection, the ascension.

[1b] "After the death, or rather the disappearance of Romulus" [1c] an eye-witness

[3] "Finis legis Christus; Lex et Prophetia ex Verbo; quae autem ex Verbo coeperunt, in Verbo desinunt"[3a] (St. Ambrose). (Wordsworth, in Matt. xvii. 8.) [3a] The end of the Law is Christ; the Law and Prophecy are from the Word; but what began from the Word ends in the Word.

At first they were afraid to rise or stir, but Jesus, their Master -- as they had seen Him before He knelt in prayer, came to them, touched them -- said "Arise, and be not afraid."

And so the day dawned on Hermon, and they descended the hill; and as they descended, He bade them tell no man until He had risen from the dead. The vision was for them; it was to be pondered over by them in the depths of their own hearts in self-denying reticence; to announce it to their fellow-disciples might only awake their jealousy and their own self-satisfaction; until the resurrection it would add nothing to the faith of others, and might only confuse their conceptions of what was to be His work on earth. They kept Christ's command, but they could not attach any meaning to this allusion. They could only ask each other, or muse in silence, what this resurrection from the dead could mean. And another serious question weighed upon their spirits. They had seen Elias. They now knew more fully than ever that their Lord was indeed the Christ. Yet "how say the Scribes" -- and had not the Scribes the prophecy of Malachi in their favour?[1] -- "that Elias must first come and restore all things?" And then our Lord gently led them to see that Elias indeed had come, and had not been recognised, and had received at the hand of his nation the same fate which was soon to happen to Him whom he announced. Then understood they that He spake to them of John the Baptist.[2]

[1] Mal. iv. 5. The LXX., without any authority from the Hebrew, read here Ήλίαν τόν Θεσβίτην.[1a]

[1a] Elijah the Tishbite

[2] Luke i. 17, "in the spirit and power of Elias;" cf. Matt. xi. 10. The Jewish expectation of Elias is well known. A thing of unknown ownership may be kept by the finder "till the coming of Elias." He was to restore to the Jews the pot of manna, the rod of Aaron, &c., and his coming generally was to be a χρόνος άποκαταστάσεως[2a] (cf. Acts iii. 21). See Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr. in Matt. xvii. 10, 11.

[2a] a time of restoration
