THE WOMAN TAKEN IN ADULTERY.

"Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all."

-- SHAKESPEARE.

In the difficulties which beset the celebrated incident which follows, it is impossible for us to arrive at any certainty as to its true position in the narrative.[1] As there must, however, be some à priori probability that its place was assigned with due reference to the order of events, and as there appear to be some obvious though indirect references to it in the discourses which immediately follow[2] (ex. gr., John viii. 15, 17, 24, 46), I shall proceed to speak of it here, feeling no shadow of a doubt that the incident really happened, even if the form in which it is preserved to us is by no means indisputably genuine.[3]

[1] John viii. 1-11. In some MSS. it is placed at the end of St. John's Gospel; in some, after Luke xxi., mainly, no doubt, because it fits on well to the verses 37, 38 in that chapter. Hitzig (Ueber Joh. Marc. 205) conjectured, very plausibly, that the fact which it records really belongs to Mark xii., falling in naturally between the conspiracy of the Pharisees and Herodians, an that of the Sadducees to tempt Christ -- i.e., between the 17th and 18th verses. In that case its order of sequence would be on the Tuesday in Passion week. On the other hand, if it has no connection with the Feast of Tabernacles, and no tinge of Johannean authorship, why should so many MSS. (including even such important ones as D, F, G) place it here? [2] Ex. gr., John viii. 15, 17, 24, 46.

[3] The whole mess of critical evidence may be seen fully treated in Lücke's Commentary (third edition), ii. 243-256. We may briefly summarize the grounds of its dubious genuineness by

observing that (1) it is not found in some of the best and oldest MSS. (e.g., א, A, B, C, L); (2) nor in most of the Fathers (e.g., Origen. Cyril, Chrosostom, Theophylact, Tertullian, Cyprian); (3) nor in many ancient versions (e.g., Sahidic, Coptic, and Gothic); (4) in other MSS. it is marked with obeli and asterisks, or a space is left for it, or it is inserted elsewhere; (5) it contains an extraordinary number of various readings ("variant singula fere verba in codicibus plerisque"[3a] -- Tischendorf); (6) it contains several expressions not elsewhere found in St. John; and (7) it differs widely in some respects -- particularly in the constant use of the connecting δέ -- from the style of St. John throughout the rest of the Gospel. Several of these arguments are weakened -- (i.) by the fact that the diversities of readings may be reduced to three main recensions; (ii.) that the rejection of the passage may have been due to a false dogmatical bias; (iii.) that the silence of some of the Fathers may be accidental, and of others prudential. The argument in its favor are -- 1. It is found in some old and important uncials (D, F, G, H, K, U) and in more than 300 cursive MSS., in some of the Itala, and in the Vulgate. 2. The tendencies which led to its deliberate rejection would have rendered all but impossible its invention or interpolation. 3. It is quoted by Augustine, Ambrose, and Jerome, and treated as genuine in the Apostolic constitutions. St. Jerome's testimony (Adv. Pelag. ii. 6) is particularly important, because he says that in his time it was found "in multis et Graecis et Latinis codicibus"[3b] -- and it must be remembered that nearly all of these must have been considerably older than any which we now possess. The main facts to be observed are, that though the dogmatic bias against the passage might be sufficient to account for its rejection, it gives us no help in explaining its want of resemblance to the style of St. John. A very simple hypothesis will account for all difficulties. If we suppose that the story of the woman accused before our Lord of many sins -- to which Eusebius alludes (H. E. iii. 39) as existing in the Gospel of the Hebrews -- is identical with this, we may suppose, without any imporbability, either (i.) that St. John (as Alford hesitatingly suggests) may here have adopted a portion of current synoptic tradition, or (ii.) that the story may have been derived originally from Papias, the pupil of St. John, and having found its way into the Gospel of the Hebrews, may have been adopted generally into some MSS. of St. John's Gospel (see Euseb. ubi supr.). Many recent writers adopt the suggestion of Holtzmann, that it belongs to the "Ur-marcus," or ground document of the Synoptists. Whoever embodies into the Gospels this traditionsally remembered story deserved well of the world.

[3a] In very many manuscripts there are variants for nearly every word. [3b] in many manuscripts both Greek and Latin.

At the close of the day recorded in the last chapter, Jesus withdrew to the Mount of Olives. Whether He went to the garden of Gethsemane, and to the house of its unknown but friendly owner, or whether -- not having where to lay His head -- He simply slept, Eastern fashion, on the green turf under those ancient olive-trees, we cannot tell; but it is interesting to trace in Him once more that dislike of crowded cities, that love for the pure, sweet, fresh air, and for the quiet of the lonely hill, which we see in all parts of His career on earth. There was, indeed, in Him nothing of that supercilious sentimentality and morbid egotism which makes men shrink from all contact with their brother-men; nor can they who would be His true servants belong to those merely fantastic philanthropists

"Who sign for wretchedness, yet shun the wretched,

Nursing in some delicious solitude

Their dainty loves and slothful sympathies."

Coleridge, Religious Musings.

On the contrary, day after day, while His day-time of work continued, we find Him sacrificing all that was dearest and most elevating to His soul, and in spite of heat, and pressure, and conflict, and weariness, calmly pursuing His labours of love amid "the madding crowd's ignoble strife." But in the night-time, when men cannot work, to call of duty required His presence within the walls of Jerusalem; and those who are familiar with the oppressive foulness of ancient cities can best imagine the relief which His spirit must have felt when He could escape from the close streets and thronged bazaars, to cross the ravine, and climb the green slope beyond it, and be alone with His Heavenly Father under the starry night.

But when the day dawned His duties lay once more within the city walls, and in that part of the city where, almost alone, we hear of His presence -- in the courts of His Father's house. And with the very dawn His enemies contrived a fresh plot against Him, the circumstances of which made their malice even more actually painful than it was intentionally perilous.

It is probable that the hilarity and abandonment of the Feast of Tabernacles, which had grown to be a kind of vintage festival, would often degenerate into acts of licence and immorality, and these would find more numerous opportunities in the general disturbance of ordinary life caused by the dwelling of the whole people in their leafy booths. One such act had been detected during the previous night, and the guilty woman had been handed over to the Scribes[1] and Pharisees. [1] It is observable that in no other passage of St. John's Gospel (though frequently in the Synoptists) are the Scribes mentioned among the enemies of Christ; but here a few MSS. read οί άρχιερεϊς, "the chief priests."

Even had the morals of the nation at that time been as clean as in the days when Moses ordained the fearful ordeal of the "water of jealousy"[1] -- even had these rulers and teachers of the nation been elevated as far above their contemporaries in the real, as in the professed, sanctity of their lives -- the discovery, and the threatened punishment, of this miserable adulteress could hardly have failed to move every pure and noble mind to a compassion which would have mingled largely with the horror which her sin inspired. They might, indeed, even on those suppositions, have inflicted the established penalty with a sternness as inflexible as that of the Pilgrim Fathers in the early days of Salem or Providence; but the sternness of a severe and pure-hearted judge is not a sternness which precludes all pity; it is a sternness which would not willingly inflict one unnecessary pang -- it is a sternness not incompatible with a righteous tenderness, but wholly incompatible with a mixture of meaner and slighter motives, wholly incompatible with a spirit of malignant levity and hideous sport.

[1] See Numb. v. 14-29.

But the spirit which actuated these Scribes and Pharisees was not by any means the spirit of a sincere and outraged purity. In the decadence of national life, in the daily familiarity with heathen degradations, in the gradual substitution of a Levitical scrupulosity for a heartfelt religion, the morals of the nation had grown utterly corrupt. The ordeal of the "water of jealousy" had long been abolished, and the death by stoning as a punishment for adultery had long been suffered to fall into desuetude. Not even the Scribes and Pharisees -- for all their external religiosity -- had any genuine horror of an impurity with which their own lives were often stained.[1] They saw in the accident which had put this guilty woman into their power nothing but a chance of annoying, entrapping, possibly even endangering this Prophet of Galilee, whom they already regarded as their deadliest enemy.

[1] As is distinctly proved by the admissions of the Talmud, and by the express testimony of Josephus. In the tract Sotah it is clear that the Mosaic ordeal of the "water of jealousy" had fallen into pratical desuetude from the commonness of the crime. We are there told that R. Johanan Ben Zakkal abolished the use of it (see Surenhusius, Mischna, ii. 290, 293).

It was a curious custom among the Jews to consult distinguished Rabbis in cases of doubt and difficulty;[1] but there was no doubt or difficulty here. It was long since the Mosaic law of death to the adulteress had been demanded or enforced; and even if this had not been the case, the Roman law would, in all probability, have prevented such a sentence from being put in execution. On the other hand, the civil and religious penalties of divorce were open to the injured husband; nor did the case of this woman differ from that of any other who had similarly transgressed. Nor, again, even if they had honestly and sincerely desired the opinion of Jesus, could there have been the slightest excuse for haling the woman herself into His presence, and thus subjecting her to a moral torture which would be rendered all the more insupportable from the close seclusion of women in the East.

[1] Sepp, Leben Jesu, iv. 2, 17.

And, therefore, to subject her to the superfluous horror of this odious publicity -- to drag her, fresh from the agony of detection, into the sacred precincts of the Temple[1] -- to subject this unveiled, dishevelled, terror-stricken woman to the cold and sensual curiosity of a malignant mob -- to make her, with total disregard to her own sufferings, the mere passive instrument of their hatred against Jesus; and to do all this -- not under the pressure of moral indignation, but in order to gratify a calculating malice -- showed on their parts a cold, hard cynicism, a graceless, pitiless, barbarous brutality of heart and conscience, which could not but prove, in every particular, revolting and hateful to One who alone was infinitely tender, because He alone was infinitely pure.

[1] It is indeed said in the Talmud (Sotah, 1, 5) that adulteresses were to be judged at the gate of Nikanor, between the Court of the Gentiles and that of the women (Surenhusius, Mischna, iii. 189); but this does not apply to the mere loose asking of an opinion, such as this was.

And so they dragged her to Him, and set her in the midst -- flagrant guilt subjected to the gaze of stainless Innocence, degraded misery set before the bar of perfect Mercy. And then, just as though their hearts were not full of outrage, the glibly begin, with ironical deference, to set before Him their case. "Master, this woman was seized in the very act of adultery. Now, Moses in the Law commanded us to stone[1] such; but what sayest Thou about her?"

[1] The τάς τοιαύτας is contemptuous; but where was the partner of her crime! The Law commanded that he too should be put to death (Lev. xx. 10). As to stoning being the proper punishment of adultery, a needless difficulty seems to have been raised (see Deut. xxii. 22-24). There is no ground whatever for concluding with Lightfoot (Hor. Hebr. ad loc.) that she was merely betrothed. (See Ewald, Gesch. Christus, 480; Alterthümsk, 254-268; Hitzig, Joh. Marc. 209.) The Rabbis say that "death," where no form of it is specified, is meant to be strangulation; but this is not the case (compare Exxod. xxxi. 14 with Numb. xv. 32-35).

They thought that now they had caught Him in a dilemma. They knew the divine trembling pity which had loved where others hated, and praised where others scorned, and encouraged where others crushed; and they knew how that pity had won for Him the admiration of many, the passionate devotion of not a few. They knew that a publican was among His chosen, that sinners had sat with Him at the banquet, and harlots unreproved had bathed His feet, and listened to His words. Would He then acquit this woman, and so make Himself liable to an accusation of heresy, by placing Himself in open disaccord with the sacred and fiery Law? or, on the other hand, would He belie His own compassion, and be ruthless, and condemn? And, if He did, would He not at once shock the multitude, who were touched by His tenderness, and offend the civil magistrates by making Himself liable to a charge of sedition? How could He possibly get out of the difficulty? Either alternative -- heresy or treason, accusation before the Sanhedrin or delation to the Procurator, opposition to the orthodox or alienation from the many -- would serve equally well their unscrupulous intentions. And one of these, they thought, must follow. What a happy chance this weak, guilty woman had given them!

Not yet. A sense of all their baseness, their hardness, their malice, their cynical parade of every feeling which pity would temper and delicacy repress, rushed over the mind of Jesus. He blushed for His nation, for His race; He blushed, not for the degradation of the miserable accused, but for the deeper guilt of her unblushing accusers.[1] Glowing with uncontrollable disgust that modes of opposition so irredeemable in their meanness should be put in play against Him, and that He should be made the involuntary centre of such a shameful scene -- indignant (for it cannot be irreverent to imagine in Him an intensified degree of emotion which even the humblest of His true followers would have shared) that the sacredness of His personal reserve should thus be shamelessly violated, and that those things which belong to the sphere of a noble reticence should be thus cynically obtruded on His notice -- He bent his face forwards from His seat, and as though He did not, or would not, hear them, stooped and wrote with His finger on the ground.

[1] In the Rabbinical treatise Berachôth, R. Papa and others are reported to have said that it is better for a man to throw himself into a furnace than to make any one blush in public, which they deduced from Gen. xxxviii. 25. (Schwab, Berachôth, p. 404.)

For any others but such as these it would have been enough. Even if they failed to see in the action a symbol of forgiveness -- a symbol that the memory of things thus written in the dust might be obliterated and forgotten[1] -- still any but these could hardly have failed to interpret the gesture into a distinct indication that in such a matter Jesus would not mix himself.[2] But they saw nothing and understood nothing, and stood there unabashed, still pressing their brutal question, still holding, pointing to, jeering at the woman, with no compunction in their cunning glances, and no relenting in their steeled hearts.

[1] Comp. Jer. xvii. 13.

[2] It seems to have been well understood. See Wetstein ad loc.

The scene could not last any longer; and, therefore, raising Himself from His stooping attitude, He, who could read their hearts, calmly passed upon them that sad judgment involved in the memorable words --

"Let him that is without sin among you,[1] first cast the stone at her."[2]

[1] i.e., free from the taint of this class of sins. Cf. Luke vii. 37. [2] πρώτος τόν λίθον (E,G, H, K, &c.). Cf. Deut. xvii. 7. (Surenhusius, Mischna, iv. 235.)

It was not any abrogation of the Mosaic law; it was, on the contrary, an admission of its justice, and doubtless it must have sunk heavily as a death-warrant upon the woman's heart. But it acted in manner wholly unexpected. The terrible law stood written; it was not the time, it was not His will, to rescind it. But, on the other hand, they themselves, by not acting on the law, by referring the whole question to Him as though it needed a new solution, had practically confessed that the law was at present valid in theory alone, that it had fallen into desuetude, and that even with his authority they had no intention of carrying it into action. Since, therefore, the whole proceeding was on their part illegal and irregular, He transfers it by these words from the forum of law to that of conscience. The judge may sometimes be obliged to condemn the criminal brought before him for sins of which he has himself been guilty, but the position of the self-constituted accuser who eagerly demands a needless condemnation is very different. Herein to condemn her would have been in God's sight most fatally to have condemned themselves; to have been the first to cast the stone at her would have been to crush themselves.

He had but glanced at them for a moment, but that glance had read their inmost souls. He had but calmly spoken a few simple words, but those words, like the still small voice to Elijah at Horeb, had been more terrible than wind or earthquake. They had fallen like a spark of fire upon slumbering souls, and lay burning there till "The blushing, shame-faced spirit" mutinied within them. The Scribes and Pharisees stood silent and fearful; they loosed their hold upon the woman; their insolent glances, so full of guile and malice, fell guiltily to the ground. They who had unjustly inflicted, now justly felt the overwhelming anguish of an intolerable shame, while over their guilty consciences there rolled, in crash on crash of thunder, such thoughts as these: -- "Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another, thou comdemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things. And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? or despisest thou the riches of His goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? but after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up to thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his deeds." They were "such" as the woman they had condemned, and they dared not stay.

And so, with burning cheeks and cowed hearts, from the eldest to the youngest, one by one gradually, silently they slunk away. He would not add to their shame and confusion of face by watching them: He had no wish further to reveal His knowledge of the impure secrets of their hearts; He would not tempt them to brazen it out before Him, and to lie against the testimony of their own memories; He had stooped down once more, and was writing on the ground.[1]

[1] The MS. U (the Cod. Manianus in St. Mark's at Venice) has here the curious reading έγραψεν είς τήν γήν ένός έκάστου αύτών τάς άµαρτίας -- "He wrote on the ground the sins of each one of them;" which shows how early began the impossible and irrelevant surmises as to what He wrote. This is the only passage where Christ is said to have written anything.

And when He once more raised His head, all the accusers had melted away: only the woman still cowered before Him on the Temple-floor. She, too, might have gone: none hindered her, and it might have seemed but natural that she should fly anywhere to escape her danger, and to hide her guilt and shame. But remorse, and, it may be, an awful trembling gratitude, in which hope struggled with despair, fixed her there before her Judge. His look, the most terrible of all to meet, because it was the only look that fell on her from a soul robed in the unapproachable majesty of a stainless innocence, was at the same time the most gentle, and the most forgiving. Her stay was a sign of her penitence; her penitence, let us trust, a certain pledge of her future forgiveness. "Two things," as St. Augustine finely says, "were here left alone together -- Misery and Mercy."

"Woman," He asked, "where are those thine accusers? did no one convict thee?"

"No man, Lord." It was the only answer which her lips could find power to frame; and then she received the gracious yet heart-searching permission to depart --

"Neither do I convict thee. Go; henceforth sin no more."[1] [1] "Convict" is perhaps better than "condemn" (which means "convict and sentence") here. Perhaps ή γυνή, the less direct address, is better than γύναι. After µηκέτι I read άπό τοΰ νΰν with D, omitting καί. But every variation of reading is uncertain in this paragraph

Were the critical evidence against the genuineness of this passage far more overwhelming than it is, it would yet bear upon its surface the strongest possible proof of its own authentic truthfulness. It is hardly too much to say that the mixture which it displays of tragedy and of tenderness -- the contrast which it involves between low, cruel cunning, and exalted nobility of intellect and emotion -- transcends all power of human imagination to have invented it; while the picture of a divine insight reading the inmost secrets of the heart, and a yet diviner love, which sees those inmost secrets with larger eyes than ours, furnish us with a conception of Christ's power and person at once too lofty and too original to have been founded on anything but fact. No one could have invented, for few could even appreciate, the sovereign purity and ineffable charm -- the serene authority of condemnation, and of pardon -- by which the story is so deeply characterised. The repeated instances in which, without a moment's hesitation, He foiled the crafty designs of His enemies, and in foiling them taught for ever some eternal principle of thought and action, are among the most unique and decisive proofs of His more than human wisdom; and yet not one of those gleams of sacred light which were struck from Him by collision with the malice or hate of man was brighter or more beautiful than this. The very fact that the narrative found so little favour in the early centuries of Church history[1] -- the fact that whole Churches regarded the narrative as dangerous in its tendency[2] -- the fact that eminent Fathers of the Church either ignore it or speak of it in a semi-apologetic tone -- in these facts we see the most decisive proof that its real moral and meaning are too transcendent to admit of its having been originally invented, or interpolated without adequate authority into the sacred text. Yet it is strange that any should have failed to see that in the ray of mercy which thus streamed from heaven upon the wretched sinner, the sin assumed an aspect tenfold more heinous, tenfold more repulsive to the conscience of mankind -- to every conscience which accepts it as a law of life that it should strive to be holy as God is holy, and pure as He is pure.

[1] St. Augustine (De Conjug. Adult, ii. 6) says that some people of weak faith removed the paragraph from their MSS.., "quasi permissionem peccandi tribuerit Qui dixit Deinceps noli peccare."[1a] -- St. Ambrose too says that "non mediocrem scrupulum movere potuit imperitis."[1b]. (Apol. David, ii. 1.)

[1a] as if He who said: Henceforth sin no more, had granted permission to sin. [1b] It could excite no ordinary scruple in unthinking readers. [2] The Patriarch Nikon (in the tenth century) distinctly says that the passage had been expunged from the Armenian Version because it was thought pernicious for the majority (βλαβεράν τοϊς πολλοϊς). Bishop Wordsworth thinks that the extreme severity of the Eastern Church against adultery facilitated the rejection of the passage by them.

However painful this scene must have been to the holy and loving heart of the Saviour, it was at alleviated by the sense of that compassionate deliverance -- deliverance, we may trust, for Eternity, no less than Time -- which it had wrought for one guilty soul. But the scenes that followed were a climax of perpetual misunderstandings, fluctuating impressions, and bitter taunts, which caused the great and joyous festival to end with a sudden burst of rage, and an attempt of the Jewish leaders to make an end of Him -- not by public accusation, but by furious violence.

For, on the same day -- the eighth day of the feast if the last narrative has got displaced, the day after the feast if it belongs to the true sequence of events -- Jesus continued those interrupted discourses which were intended almost for the last time to set clearly before the Jewish nation His divine claims.

He was seated at that moment in the Treasury -- either some special building[1] in the Temple so called, or that part of the court of the women which contained the thirteen chests with trumpet-shaped openings -- called shopherôth -- into which the people, and especially the Pharisees, used to cast their gifts. In this court, and therefore close beside Him, were two gigantic candelabra, fifty cubits high and sumptuously gilded,[2] on the summit of which, nightly, during the Feast of Tabernacles, lamps were lit which shed their soft light over all the city. Round these lamps the people, in their joyful enthusiasm, and even the stateliest Priests and Pharisees, joined in festal dances, while, to the sound of flutes and other music, the Levites, drawn up in array on the fifteen steps which led up to the court, chanted the beautiful Psalms which early received the title of "Songs of Degrees."[3]

[1] Jos. Antt. xix. 6, § 1. Compare Luke xxi. 1; Mark xii. 41. [2] Pictures of these colossal lamps are given in Surenhusius's Mischna, ii. 260. The wicks of the four lamps which stood on each candelabrum were made of the cast-off clothes of the priests.

[3] Ps. cxx.-cxxxiv.

In allusion to these great lamps, on which some circumstance of the moment may have concentrated the attention of the hearers, Christ exclaimed to them, "I am the Light of the world." It was His constant plan to shape the illustrations of His discourses by those external incidents which would rouse the deepest attention, and fix the words indelibly on the memories of His hearers. The Pharisees who heard His words charged Him with idle self-glorification; but He showed them that He had His Father's testimony, and that even were it not so, the Light can only be seen, only be known, by the evidence of its own existence; without it, neither itself nor anything else is visible.[1] They asked Him, "Where is Thy Father?" He told them, that, not knowing Him, they could not know His Father; and then He once more sadly warned them that His departure was nigh, and that then they would be unable to come to Him. Their only reply was a taunting inquire whether, by committing suicide, He meant to plunge Himself in the darkest regions of the grave?[2] Nay, He made them understand, it was they, not He, who were from below -- they, not He, who were destined, if they persisted in unbelief of His eternal existence, to that dark end. "Who art thou?" they once more asked, in angry and faithless perplexity. "Altogether that which I am telling you,"[3] He calmly answered. They wanted Him to announce Himself as the Messiah, and so become their temporal deliverer; but He will only tell them the far deeper, more eternal truths, that He is the Light, and the Life, and the Living Water, and that He came from the Father -- as they, too, should know when they had lifted Him up upon the cross. They were looking solely for the Messiah of the Jews: He would have them know him as the Redeemer of the world, the Saviour of their souls.

[1] "Testimonium sibi perhibet lux: ... sibi ipsa testis est, ut cognoscatur lux."[1a] (Aug.) [1a] Light furnishes evidence for itself: ... it is its own witness, that the light may be known. [2] See Jos. B. Jud. iii. 8, § 5, τούτων µέν αϊδης δέχεται τάς ψυχάς σκοτιώτερος.[2a] [2a] "While the souls of those [whose hands have acted madly against themselves] are received by the darkest place in Hades" [3] John viii. 25, τήν άρχην ότι καί λαλώ ύµίν. A vast number of renderings have been proposed for this text. Some may be rejected at once -- as Lücke's, "To begin with, why do I even speak to you?" and Meyer's, "Do ye ask what I say to you at the first?" That of De Wette, Stier, Alford, &c., is "Essentially that which I speak" -- i.e., My being is My revelation -- I am the Word. The objection to the rendering in our English version is that it makes λαλώ, "I am speaking," equivalent to έλεξα, "I said:" but, on the other hand, we never elsewhere find Christ using such an expression as "I am that which I speak." The same objection applies to the interpretation of Augustine and others, "I am, what I am saying to you, The Beginning" (Rev. xxi. 6; xxii. 13; 1 John ii. 13). Lange seems to me to be right in rendering it "To start with (or, 'in the first place'), that which I represent Myself as being." Mr. Monro suggests to me the view that the question of the Jews, Σύ τίς εί, evidently refers to the mysterious έγώ είµι of the previous verse (ver. 24). Treating the question as virtually an interruption, Jesus tells them (ver. 28) that they should not understand the έγώ είµι till a later experience; but returning to λόγος and λαλώ (vv. 37, 38, 40, 43) gives a hint as to the έγώ είµι in 44, 47, and a yet fuller answer in 57, 58; yet not so full or clear as in ix. 37. On this view viii. 25 might perhaps means, "I will tell you first of all what I say."

As they heard Him speak, many, even of these fierce enemies, were won over to a belief in Him: but it was a wavering belief, a half belief, a false belief, a belief mingled with a thousand worldly and erroneous fancies, not a belief which had in it any saving power, or on which He could rely. And He put it to an immediate test, which revealed its hollowness, and changed it into mad hatred. He told them that faithfulness and obedience were the marks of true discipleship, and the requisites of true freedom. The word freedom acted as a touchstone to show the spuriousness of their incipient faith. They knew of no freedom but that political freedom which they falsely asserted; they resented the promise of future spiritual freedom in lieu of the achievement of present national freedom. So Jesus showed them that they were still the slaves of sin, and in name only, not in reality, the children of Abraham, or the children of God. They were absorbed with pride when they thought of the purity of their ancestral origin, and the privilege of their exclusive monotheism;[1] but He told them that in very truth they were, by spiritual affinity, the affinity of cruelty and falsehood,[2] children of his who was a liar and a murderer from the beginning -- children of the devil.[3] That home-rebuke stung them to fury. They repaid it by calling Jesus a Samaritan, and a demoniac.[4] Our Lord gently put the taunt aside, and once more held out to them the gracious promise that if they will but keep His sayings, they not only shall not die in their sins, but shall not see death. Their dull, blind hearts could not even imagine a spiritual meaning in His words. They could only charge Him with demoniac arrogance and insolence in making Himself greater than Abraham and the prophets, of whom they could only think as dead.[5] Jesus told them that in prophetic vision, perhaps too by spiritual intuition, in that other world, Abraham, who was not dead, but living, saw and rejoiced to see His day. Such an assertion appeared to them either senseless or blasphemous. "Abraham has been dead for seventeen centuries; Thou art not even fifty[6] years old; how are we to understand such words as these?" Then very gently, but with great solemnity, and with that formula of asseveration which He only used when he announced His most solemn truths, the Saviour revealed to them His eternity, His Divine pre-existence before He had entered the tabernacle of mortal flesh:

[1] Alike the Bible and the Talmud abound in proofs of the intense national arrogance with which the Jews regarded their religion and their descent. [2] John viii. 44. Untruthfulness seems to have been in all ages a failing of the Jewish national character. "Listen to all, but believe no one -- not even me," said the Hebrew poet Sapir to Dr. Frankl (Jews in the East, E. Tr., ii. 11).

[3] I am aware that some make Jesus call the Jews not "children," but "brethren of the devil," translating τοΰ πατρός τοΰ διαβόλου (ver. 44), of "the father of the devil," and rendering the end of verse 44 "he is a liar, and his father too;" but I do not understand this demonology. [4] John viii. 48, "Thou art a Samaritan" (what intense national hatred breathes in the words!), "and hast a demon." Similarlyt the Arabs attribute all madness to evil spirits (δαιµονάς == Medjnoun enté). (Renan, Vie de Jesus, 272.)

[5] Luke xvi. 22; Matt. xxii. 32.

[6] In some valueless MSS. this is quite needlessly corrected into "forty." It is strange that modern writers like Gfrörer should have revived the mistaken inference of Irenæus from this verse that Jesus lived fifty years on earth. The belief that He died at the age of thirty-three may be regarded as nearly certain, and it cannot even be safely conjectured from this passage either that the sorrows of His lot had marred His visage, or that the deep seriousness of His expression made Him appear older than He was. It is obvious that the Jews are speaking generally, and in round numbers: "Thou hast not yet reached even the full years of manhood, and hast Thou see Abraham?"

"Verily, verily I say unto you, Before Abraham came into existence, I am."[1]

[1] John viii. 58, Άβραάµ γενέσθαι, έγώ είµί. There could be no more distinct assertion of His divine nature. I have pointed out elsewhere that those who deny this must either prove that He never spoke those words, or must beloieve that He -- the most lowly and sinless and meek-hearted of men -- was guilty of a colossal and almost phrenetic intoxication of vanity and arrogance. For the Jews, more intensely than any other nation which the world has ever known, recognized the infinite transcendence of God, and therefore a Jew, being merely man, to claim Divinity, would not only be inconsistent with ordinary sense and virtue, but inconsistent with anything but sheer blasphemous insanity. See the Author's Hulsean Lectures, The Witness of History to Christ, p. 85.

Then, with a burst of impetuous fury -- one of those paroxysms of sudden, uncontrollable, frantic rage to which this people has in all ages been liable upon any collision with its religious convictions -- they took up stones to stone Him.[1] But the very blindness of their rage made it more easy to elude them. His hour was not yet come. With perfect calmness He departed unhurt out of the Temple.

[1] The unfinished state of the Temple buildings would supply them with huge stones close at hand.
