Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles recently taught us that “periodic tests absolutely are essential to learning.” This year has been a significant testing time for all of us.

My goal has always been to attend the temple regularly when one is accessible to me. Earlier this year, however, regular temple attendance was suddenly no longer an option for any of us.

In retrospect, I can see how not going to the temple slowly began to affect other areas of my life. Without the sanctifying power of temples, our own spiritual shields and well-being can start to diminish.

But how can I strengthen my spiritual shield when I’m up against physical limitations—like not being able to attend the temple? Remembering our temple experiences can be key when we’re not able to enter the temple physically. We can recall memories of our past temple attendance and envision how our heart and spirit would feel if we were to step into a temple—a house of God—today.

We can start by trying to remember how it feels to walk up to the entrance of a temple. We can imagine how it feels to stop at the recommend desk and hear the words, “Welcome to the house of the Lord.” We can picture how it feels to enter the changing rooms and put away worldly belongings—how it feels to dress completely in white.

We can imagine sitting and waiting for an ordinance to begin, listening to the sound of gentle hymns playing while we bask in the peace.

And we can think of how when the ordinances begin, we are reminded of why we are on this earth.

We can remember how inside the temple, we are given a glimpse of eternity in our mortal journey and we are reminded of the big picture.

And we can invite the Spirit, encouraging us to prepare “to obtain every needful thing” (Doctrine and Covenants 109:15).

Spending time in the temple does all that for us, and so much more. Whenever we go to the house of God, we leave armed with power (see Doctrine and Covenants 109:22).

Living close to the house of the Lord doesn’t guarantee us entry, even when we are “recommended to the Lord.” This year has shown us that. But wherever we live, and however long we have to wait until temples are operating again, we can choose to visualize the feelings, thoughts, and teachings we experience when we step foot into the house of the Lord.

I am grateful for Jesus Christ, who encourages our continuous learning and spiritual introspection. He is there to reach out to us when we fall short and catches us when we feel we are sinking. He brings us above the water into the light with compassion and love, and He walks with us as we emerge stronger and more resolute than before. And the blessings of His house will always be available to us as we move forward on the covenant path—whether they are opened or closed.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="145193037" id="aside1_p1">You can submit your own article, ideas, or feedback at <a href="https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/liahona?lang=eng">liahona.ChurchofJesusChrist.org</a>. We can’t wait to hear from you!</p> [/SIDEBAR]
