Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Acknowledgments

The idea for this book was born in a discussion that I had in Kiev, Ukraine, with Elder Mark Anderson and his wife, Sister Marilyn Anderson, of Salt Lake City. I was at that time presiding over the Ukraine Kiev Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and Elder and Sister Anderson were serving as full-time missionaries in that mission (his fifth and her fourth mission for the Church). We were discussing some of the remarkable stories of spiritual conversion in the mission, and the Andersons suggested the importance of preserving and sharing these with the international Church. I want to thank them for that idea and for encouraging me to undertake this project.

It is impossible to adequately thank the many individuals who have contributed directly or otherwise to the production of this book. I would especially like to thank those new Latter-day Saints in Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus who participated in this project by sharing the stories of their spiritual conversion. A total of fifty-three gave written accounts to me, and a number of others shared their experiences in conversation with me. The total of these accounts is more than one hundred.

Their contribution is the heart and soul of this book, and their testimonies of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ have changed my life forever. I thank each of them deeply, both those few whose experiences are recounted in these pages and the many more who, for reasons of limited space, could not be specifically included.

I am particularly indebted to Olga Kuzmina and Natalya Karabeshkina for gathering many of the written accounts of converts in Ukraine and for translating and typing much of this material. I thank Anatoly Neverov for helping me obtain conversion accounts from Belarussian Latter-day Saints.

A number of former missionaries who served in these lands also made contributions to the story. Matt Ericson, Anthony Brown, Daniel Reneau, James Harris, Lee Wilkerson, Ulrike Wein, James Karper, Quinton Spencer, and Matthew Rowe sent me written accounts of experiences. I discussed specific experiences or checked details with other former missionaries, including John Lunt, Thomas Wright, Richard Jackson, Richard Davis, Georgianna Standiford, Russell van der Werf, Aaron Love, Tania Rands, Melinda Richards, Cynthia Robbins, Bryan Jarman, Scott Suggs, Robin Curtis, Tyson Richardson, Curtis Bingham, Thomas Abbott, Rex Griffiths, Arvil Swaney, and Mary Guymon.

I benefited greatly from the wisdom and counsel of Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and Elder Dennis B. Neuenschwander of the Seventy, President of the Europe East Area of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

I also found invaluable the constructive advice of Matthew K. Heiss of the Church Historical Department and the James Moyle Oral History Program of the Church. The printed compilation of his three oral history interviews with Colleen and me on September 7, 13, and 15, 1994, was a valuable resource for this project.

Susan Sheffield and Keith Terry read the entire manuscript and offered invaluable editorial and technical assistance that greatly facilitated the success of the project. Linda R. Gundry at Deseret Book was the editor for this project. Her efforts made an important contribution to the final result.

Ruth H. Biddulph, my mother, also read the entire manuscript, offering gentle and insightful critique and strong, inspiring encouragement, as always.

I must express my gratitude to our five adult children— Barbara, Catherine, Helen, Sylvia, and Michael—and to their spouses and our thirteen grandchildren for willingly accepting a separation of three years from us. Hopefully, this manuscript will give meaning to their sacrifice.

Finally, I owe enormous gratitude to my wife, Colleen. She lived through those three years and witnessed many of the incredible experiences upon which this book is based. Her insight concerning these events has not only confirmed but also significantly deepened my own. The four volumes of her personal journals written during our mission have been an invaluable resource.

Colleen's generous consent for my use of some of her poetry, written during the mission and compiled in her book titled Slavic Harvest (1994), has enriched this volume. Her critique of the manuscript has been very helpful. Her support and encouragement of this project has made an important contribution to its completion.

I alone must assume full responsibility for any errors and inadequacies that remain.

This book is dedicated to that "chosen generation" whom the Lord "hath called . . . out of darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Peter 2:9).
