Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Introduction

Before 1989, approximately one-third of the population of the earth resided in countries ruled by Communist regimes whose official ideologies proclaimed the objective of freeing human consciousness completely from the "harmful delusion" of religious belief. While this goal of universal atheism was never fully attained in any of these lands, the power of the state was utilized to greatly restrict religious liberty, and enormous resources were expended to teach atheism at every level of society through much of the twentieth century.

Then, during a remarkable two-year period (1989 to 1991), Communist rule collapsed in the Soviet Union (officially known as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or USSR) and eight other countries in east-central Europe. Across this vast area from Central Europe to the Pacific, spanning twelve time zones and more than one-sixth of the land surface of the earth, approximately 425 million people reside.

Even before the fall of Communism, there was a significant beginning for freedom of conscience in the Soviet Union and east-central Europe during the latter 1980s. This was accompanied by a major religious reawakening in all of these countries, and especially among the nations and ethnic groups within the Soviet Union.

Among those who embraced new religious convictions are many converts to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Some of these have written brief accounts of their spiritual awakening and conversion. Others have orally conveyed similar accounts. The purpose of this book is to permit these new Latter-day Saint voices of faith to be heard in other countries, that all might be "edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:22; see also 84:110; Ephesians 4:12).

The coming of freedom of expression and religious liberty to the former Soviet Union and the countries of east-central Europe was a miraculous process comparable to the deliverance of ancient Israel from Egyptian bondage and Babylonian captivity in biblical times. As this momentous unshackling of the soul was occurring, many of the people of the USSR experienced a spiritual awareness in which they became active religious seekers for the first time in their lives.

Many of these religious seekers returned to the traditional churches and faiths of their lands. Others avoided denominational affiliation but became Christians in their personal convictions. Some turned to non-Christian sects and faiths. Others accepted the teachings of Protestant evangelists from the West. A rapidly growing number of new Christians have found a spiritual home in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

This is the story of the spiritual odyssey of new Latter-day Saints in some of the successor states of the former Soviet Union. Insofar as possible, this story is told from the perspective of their own testimonies and often in their own words. I have, nevertheless, attempted to integrate their diverse experiences into general themes and to provide a historical and social context.

This book combines material from fifty-three written accounts by new Latter-day Saints of their spiritual conversion, for which I have received permission to utilize. A number of others have given me oral accounts with permission to tell their experiences in this book.

In some of these accounts, I have felt it advisable not to use the real name of the individual, and in a few other cases I have been asked not to personally identify them. I have scrupulously honored each of these requests.

Except in a few cases, I have used only first names in this account. Ukrainians, Russians, and Belarussians generally prefer to be addressed by fellow Latter-day Saints using their first names only, such as "Tamara," or "Sister Tamara." My use of their first names is not, therefore, an indication of disrespect, but a bowing to their wishes and normal conventions. When referring to a few top Church leaders, missionaries, and official representatives, I have used the traditional title of "president" or "sister" or "elder," followed by their family name.

These new converts are descended from many nations, peoples, and mixed ethnic groups long ruled by the Russian and Soviet empires. The dominant national origins of these new Latter-day Saints are of the Eastern Slavic peoples: Ukrainians, Russians, and Belarussians. Other nationalities also have some significant representation among these converts. Jews and Poles are significant minorities in Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia. There are also Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians, Georgians, Armenians, Azeris, Tatars, Germans, Moldovans, Greeks, Cherkassians, and Karelo-Finns among the new Latter-day Saints. Some Russians and Ukrainians also have a mixed ancestry with the Turkic peoples of the Caucasus and Central Asia. Some Eastern Slavs also intermarried with the Mongoloid peoples of East Asia.

My wife, Colleen, and I became acquainted with these new Latter-day Saints during the time I presided over the Ukraine Kiev Mission and its predecessor, the Austria Vienna East Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. During the years 1991 to 1994, we lived eight months in Vienna, regularly commuting into Ukraine, and twenty-nine months in Kiev.

We became acquainted with many converts from Ukraine, a number also from Belarus and Russia, and a few from Latvia, Estonia, Moldova, Armenia, and Georgia. We also came to know converts from Poland, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Albania, and some of the republics of former Yugoslavia.

Each new convert to the gospel of Jesus Christ has his or her own miraculous story to tell. Remarkably, each personal odyssey with the Spirit is unique. Every human culture across the earth also has its own distinct attributes for expressing the story of conversion.

Yet the access of all peoples to the Holy Spirit is the same. The "language of the Spirit" is understood similarly by the elect among every nation, kindred, tongue, and people of the earth. The process of the "mighty change of heart" toward the Lord is the same, and his spiritual blessings to all people who will receive him are the same, as Ammon and his brethren learned during their ministry to the Lamanites: "Now my brethren, we see that God is mindful of every people, whatsoever land they may be in; yea, he numbereth his people, and his bowels of mercy are over all the earth" (Alma 26:37).

In telling the stories of these Latter-day Saints, Ihave occasionally quoted short passages from other works. Parenthetical citations following these quotations give only the author, title, and page number of the quoted material. Full publication information for each source is found in the bibliography following the final chapter of this book.

The spiritual awakening of the soul from the Communist version of "scientific atheism" is a beautiful and inspiring story. There is space in one book to present only a few of the many accounts that have been offered to me. I do so with the hope that these new voices of faith will edify the Saints in other lands and that they will help build a bridge of love and understanding among peoples of faith across the earth.
