Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Chapter 1

"Prepare Ye for That Which Is to Come"

"Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh."

—Doctrine and Covenants 1:12

It happened on a beautiful Sunday at the beginning of August 1961 in Moscow's Central Baptist Church. I was sitting on the front row of a side balcony that permitted me to look down at the faces of parishioners who filled the pews and jammed the aisles on the ground floor of the church.

That year I was completing a summer program in the Soviet Union for my graduate studies at Indiana University. My conversations on religion with several new acquaintances in Moscow and Leningrad had kindled a strong desire within me to share my faith in Jesus Christ. Yet I was painfully aware of the restrictions against religious expression in that land. Nikita Khrushchev's renewed campaign of state persecution of religious organizations and believers was at its peak in 1961.

Westerners visiting churches in the USSR were often moved by the deep piety of the people, and I was no exception. I remembered hearing earlier of the visit of Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles to this very building two years before, when he was serving as secretary of agriculture under United States president Dwight D. Eisenhower. Elder Benson had been deeply moved here, and the public witness of Christ he had shared in this building had touched many who were present, according to the Reverend Ilya Orlov, with whom I had visited before the service.

I looked down upon a sea of deeply devout, yearning faces. Tears were streaming down the cheeks of many. I sensed in these people an incredible spiritual desire for light and truth. My own emotions overflowed, and inwardly I asked, When, O Father, shall they enjoy the opportunity to receive the fulness of thy restored gospel? Immediately I felt a peaceful, warm, comforting feeling that seemed to respond, In mine own due time they shall receive.

The Day of the Berlin Wall

A few days later our study group flew to Stalingrad (now known as Volgograd). After visiting this historic city, we took a riverboat down the southern part of the Volga, across the Volga-Don Canal, and along the Don River to the city of Rostov.

It was a very interesting journey past thatch-roofed villages. I felt as if I had passed through a time warp and was back in the nineteenth century. Because of a painful sunburn, I stayed in the shade of a lower deck during much of the cruise, but on the last day I felt well enough to go on the top deck to view the small settlement we were then approaching, a few kilometers upstream from metropolitan Rostov.

I studied for a moment the little streets of this dingy town that rose steeply up the hill from the docks. Then, suddenly, I could see future missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on those very streets. I could see that there would someday be members of the LDS Church in that village and that organized branches would exist within the vicinity.

My first reaction to this impression was to question it. Future missionary work and Latter-day Saints in Moscow were believable to my thinking, but this remote outpost of the eighteenth-century Don Cossacks seemed hard to visualize as a gathering place for a future Zion.

Yet again I received the same impression, this time more powerful than the first: Latter-day Saint missionaries will one day walk these very streets; members of the Church will be here; organized branches will be in the vicinity. After that I no longer doubted that this impression was of the Lord.

I quickly climbed the stairway from the deck to the bridge and asked the captain for the name of this little town, so that I could record the experience in my journal. He told me it was called Aksai. I logged that name in my journal, along with a brief account of my experience. Whether or not its fulfillment would come in my lifetime remained to be seen, but I felt confident that one day the gospel would be taught in the Soviet Union, including this region, and it was important for me to record in my journal this premonition of that future event.

Afterward, this experience remained silently stored in my journal for many years, known only to members of my immediate family and one or two others. The date I recorded for it was 13 August 1961. A week later I learned of the erection of the Berlin Wall by the Soviet Union. I realized much later, however, that my experience at Aksai had come on the very day of the erection of the wall. How strange it now seems to me to have received such a premonition on the very day that the Soviet Union erected that great barrier against freedom, for the fulfillment of my impression would be possible only after the fall of that infamous wall. Because of my involvement in those then-future events, I must tell how I became interested in the Soviet Union.

Preparation

My interest in the Soviet Union began at age seven as I studied a volume owned by my parents on world geography. For some reason I was particularly drawn to the pages showing the geography of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Russia was represented in red, Ukraine in yellow, and the remaining republics in a variety of other colors. Over and over I tried to pronounce the names of cities, territories, and rivers. I also located the USSR on my world globe, telling myself that someday I would visit that land.

Certain passages in my patriarchal blessing, which I received at age thirteen, hinted at things that caused me to hope that one day I might preach the gospel in that land. The patriarchal blessing of my younger sister Susan explicitly foretold that at least one of her children would preach the gospel in "the land of Russia." (Her daughter, Sherry Sheffield, would serve in the Russia St. Petersburg Mission from 1992 to 1994.) Later I learned that my future wife, Colleen, had received a similar promise in her patriarchal blessing, that through the services of her future family, the gospel would be preached "in the land of Russia."

These expectations and desires guided my career choice and my university studies at both undergraduate and advanced postgraduate levels. Then, for almost thirty years, I was a political science professor, specializing in the Soviet Union, at Rutgers University in New Jersey and the University of Victoria in Canada. At Victoria I was chair of the Department of Political Science.

Four times during those three decades my professional writing on the Soviet Union involved me in research projects in various cities of the USSR. I spent time in Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, Tbilisi, and Yerevan. On each trip I sensed that one day the gospel would be preached in each of those cities. I never got over that impression.

One day as I was reading in History of the Church, I was both intrigued and reassured by the Prophet Joseph Smith's remarkable statement in 1843 about how the bringing of the gospel "to the people of that vast empire" of Russia is a subject "to which is attached some of the most important things concerning the advancement and building up of the kingdom of God in the last days, which cannot be explained at this time" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 6:41).

In April 1974, President Spencer W. Kimball opened to the leaders and members of the Church a visionary plan for taking the gospel to all the earth, challenging Latter-day Saints to make the quiet resolve to "lengthen our stride." The Saints were asked to pray that barriers to the spreading of the gospel, such as the Iron Curtain, might be removed. He promised that the Lord would "open the doors" in those lands denied the gospel—as soon as members of the Church were prepared in faith to walk through them. During this time a number of Church leaders prophesied specifically that the Lord would miraculously open a way for the Soviet Union to receive the gospel when members of the Church were ready.

I became aware of the beginnings of missionary work in Moscow and Leningrad while on a trip there in the spring of 1990. The USSR was in the midst of Mikhail Gorbachev's attempted political reforms, and greater freedom of religion had already commenced. I was briefly visiting Moscow to arrange for a more extensive sabbatical research year at the Institute of State and Law during 1991 and 1992. After making all necessary arrangements for my sabbatical residency at the Institute, I was invited by an American acquaintance working in Moscow to attend a Book of Mormon study group he was having at his apartment with ten Russians and an Estonian. It was an inspiring evening to meet people whose reading of the Book of Mormon had already converted them to the gospel.

The following Sunday on my flight home, I stopped in Leningrad to attend worship services in the first branch of local members. I met missionaries from the Finland Helsinki Mission who had been sent there by their mission president, Steven R. Mecham. I was thrilled to meet the Russian branch president, Yuri Terebinin, and other local leaders who conducted the meetings of the branch.

President Terebinin invited me to speak in sacrament service. I cannot describe how wonderful it was to openly bear testimony of the gospel to Russians in their own language. I was overcome with emotion at the sight of the gospel making its way into the Soviet Union, saying over and over to myself: I have waited so long to witness this! I can hardly believe the time has finally arrived!

I returned home so excited that it was difficult to concentrate on my work at the university. I explained to Colleen what I had seen and my great desire for us to go on a mission together to the Soviet Union. My enthusiasm must have infected her; she was eager to go with me.

The Call

The problem with my leaving the university and Colleen her elementary school teaching job was simply that we would not reach retirement age (sixty-five) until the year 2000. That was a decade away, and I expressed fears that by that time the liberal reform era of Gorbachev might come to an end, and events would then snuff out further opportunity to preach the gospel in the USSR. I explored the possibility of taking a nonprofessional leave of absence or, if necessary, an early retirement, but found that neither option was open to me. Still we looked forward to sharing the gospel in Moscow during our sabbatical year of research.

A few months later, on 22 January 1991, Elder L. Tom Perry of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles interviewed Colleen and me in Victoria. Four days later, on 26 January, President Thomas S. Monson telephoned us and extended a call to me as mission president over an unspecified Russian-speaking mission, effective 1 July 1991. We accepted this call with inexpressible joy, even though we expected that it would be necessary to resign our teaching positions.

The next morning, however, I arrived at my university office to find a personal letter from the president of the university, offering an unusual one-time opportunity to take retirement ten years early at a favorable settlement. This special opportunity was offered only to those scheduled for retirement in the year 2000.

I sat in my office and stared with wonder at the letter. I had told no one at the university of our mission call. Now suddenly the very thing that had concerned us most about the future had been carefully orchestrated by the Lord to allow us to move ahead with our mission. We poured out our hearts in thanksgiving to the Lord for this miraculous blessing. Additional miracles helped us sell our home immediately and arrange all of our personal effects so we could leave for our mission.

Colleen also was able to arrange a favorable early retirement from her teaching position. She had always believed that the promise in her patriarchal blessing about preaching the gospel in "the land of Russia" referred to her descendants, not to her. But one year before the call came, she felt inspired to begin her study of the Russian language. She completed a one-year introductory course at the university before leaving for the mission, which gave her a head start on learning Russian.

The day before we left for the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah, we were informed that our assignment would be to preside over missionaries serving in Kiev, Ukraine. We would live initially in Vienna, Austria, but it was the hope of the Brethren that three new missions in the Soviet Union would soon officially be announced: one in Moscow, one in St. Petersburg (formerly Leningrad), and one in Kiev. We would then move into the country and preside over one of those three missions.

Prophecies Fulfilled

In July 1990, Latter-day Saint missionaries arrived in Moscow under the direction of President Gary L. Browning of the Finland Helsinki East Mission. Converts were baptized who initially attended an international branch in Moscow. In March 1991, the first branch totally administered by local Russians opened in Moscow—almost thirty years after the spiritual premonition I received at the Central Baptist Church.

The subsequent impressions that came to me during my visit thirty years before to Aksai, near Rostov-on-the-Don, began to be fulfilled in the fall of 1991. As mission president, I was assigned by Elder Hans B. Ringger of the Seventy, president of the Europe Area, to visit specified cities in Ukraine, southern Russia, and Moldova to determine their potential for future missionary work. One of these assigned cities was Rostov-on-the-Don.

On 27 November 1991, Elder Ivan Stratov (a Russian-Australian from Melbourne) and I were the first missionaries to visit Rostov-on-the-Don and the nearby suburban community of Aksai. At Aksai we walked up those very streets I had seen thirty years before from a boat on the Don River. We mingled with the people and met some choice contacts.

Just three years later, in 1994, the first assigned missionaries began proselyting in Rostov from the Russia Samara Mission. On 1 July 1994, the Russia Rostov Mission officially commenced. Soon there were a number of converts to the Church in the Rostov area, and several branches were quickly organized.

The premonition I received on the day the Berlin Wall was erected was completely fulfilled five years after the wall's great collapse in 1989. The Soviet Union and its East European empire were no more. By the mid-1990s, missionaries were serving in fifteen new missions from Central Europe to central Siberia, nine of which were in the former Soviet Union. Converts to the LDS Church already resided in approximately thirty cities of the former USSR.

All this was unthinkable to me in 1961. But the Lord, almost imperceptibly, had been preparing the land and the people, as well as the missionaries, for the coming harvest of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. Colleen wrote the following poem to express her joy at the reopening of these lands to missionary work.

The Harvest

So vast is the field, The laborers few. We serve the true Master, And His will we do. The famine is ended, The long drought is gone. The seed has been planted; We greet a new dawn. So long we have waited To work this parched field. To water its furrows And dream of great yield. The field is now white, The harvest is choice. We thrust in our sickles; We reap and rejoice! —Colleen C. Biddulph
