Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Chapter 2

"Searching in Darkness"

"Searching in darkness, nations have wept; Watching for dawn, their vigil they've kept."

—Hymns, no. 264

An old Russian and Ukrainian religious legend predicted the coming of the anti-Christ to their lands. Many Ukrainians, Russians, and Belarussians who have read the Book of Mormon comment on the close similarity of the Communist doctrine of scientific atheism to the teachings of Korihor, the ancient Nephite anti-Christ (see Alma 30:12-28).

I agree with this observation. Many aspects of the Leninist critique of religion, and especially of Christ, correspond closely to the arguments of Korihor. The Leninist version of Marxism, which enjoyed a protected monopoly over ideas in the Soviet Union for more than seventy years, was the most pervasive anti-Christ doctrine of the twentieth century. Yet the light of Christ continued to shine in darkness, although the darkness comprehended it not. This light attracted many souls (see John 1:5, 9).

Resisting the "Science of Atheism"

Natasha grew up near the Ukrainian city of Kherson, where the Dnieper River empties into the Black Sea. She was a brilliant student and was one of the few in her area chosen to go to Moscow with a full fellowship to complete her graduate studies at Moscow State Pedagogical University, a top institution for training professors to teach the techniques of the Russian language.

In Moscow she obtained her candidate of sciences degree (comparable to a Ph.D. in the West). All of her marks were "excellent," except in the required course of "scientific atheism," in which she received a "poor" mark. For such a bright young student, why the poor marks in a class that should not have been difficult for her? It was her attitude, not her academic skill.

In the USSR, all educational institutions from kindergarten to advanced universities had required course material, supervised by the Communist Party, designed to teach that all religion is "harmful superstition" and that atheism is the only socially acceptable and "scientific" outlook. The Soviet Constitution formally granted citizens "the right to conduct religious worship or atheistic propaganda" (Article 52), but not "religious propaganda." Religion could be taught legally only within a government-registered church or "house of prayer" to people at least eighteen years of age. Many Catholic and Baptist leaders were arrested for trying to teach children, but the Orthodox Church strictly complied with the law.

Natasha had argued with her scientific atheism instructor. She disagreed with him about the validity of his evidence for the assertion that God does not exist. The professor quoted her the statement by Yury Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut who had been in space and "found no God out there." He simply quoted the dogmas of the party about religion. By this time, Natasha had read the philosophical debates about the existence of God in the works of Russian writers like Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy. Compared to their analyses, she found the dogmas her professor spouted to be totally inadequate.

Natasha's other professors urged her to retake the final examination for the atheism course and to answer the questions in the way the professor expected, so that her "poor" mark would not appear on an otherwise brilliant academic record. Natasha had integrity and refused to do this. She stood on principle, no matter how it might affect her academic record. She had agonized long over the question, Does God exist? In all her readings in literature and philosophy, she was confused as to her own personal view and beliefs. She simply refused to accept uncritically the Communistic dogmas on the nonexistence of God.

Valery's Background

But Natasha was not alone. Her husband, Valery, was also a brilliant student. He had grown up in a small town, not far from the city of Zaporozhe in Ukraine, and was the son of dedicated Communists who had held positions of local leadership in the party. He had been taught nothing concerning religion by his parents, but his grandmother was a believer.

Valery's grandmother decided when he was a child to have him baptized into the Russian Orthodox Church, but his parents, who learned of her plans, removed him from her at the last moment to avoid this religious sacrament. It was not uncommon for children of members of the Communist Party to be secretly baptized by a grandmother or a parent; but it was a serious offense and a black mark against the family if the Party found out, since its members were expected to be "exemplary atheists." In this case, however, Valery's parents were opposed, as a matter of principle, to religious baptism.

His excellent grades in school won Valery admission to Moscow State University, plus a stipend. It was a prestigious opportunity in the USSR, especially for a student from a distant, small town in Ukraine. Party and other connections were decisive in obtaining such opportunities in the USSR. On the other hand, as a matter of party policy, youth who were known to be religious or to come from the families of religious believers were systematically excluded from higher educational opportunities. Although there were believers in God in higher education and among the "creative and scientific intelligentsia," for the most part they were secret believers, what one scholar called "Nicodemuses."

On the heels of his brilliant scholarship at Moscow State University, Valery was admitted to the Institute of International Relations of the USSR Council of Ministers. This was an elite training center for future career diplomats in the Soviet government.

He had studied English for many years, but it was at the institute that Valery obtained an excellent command of the language. The institute stocked American books, magazines, and periodicals that were not available to the Soviet public, and Valery read them avidly. For some reason he could not understand, Valery felt especially drawn to read about Utah. This was an intellectual curiosity only; he was not at that time a seeker of religion.

Valery was assigned by his superiors, however, to be not an American affairs specialist but a Southeast Asian economic specialist. He was shipped off to Hanoi, Vietnam, to learn the languages, culture, and political economy of that region as part of his graduate education.

Valery was back in Moscow during the Gorbachev era. He noted the increasing freedom of inquiry and expression. He was fascinated to see that most professors and scholars seemed relieved that they no longer had to defend scientific atheism. It was evident that many of the Communist Party's large cadre of scholars and instructors lacked enthusiasm for teaching atheism or other ideological dogmas they were assigned to defend. Among the intelligentsia, many secret religious believers "came out of the closet," openly discussing their faith.

The economic crisis that accompanied the decline of Communist control and increasing freedom of expression led many educated people, as well as ordinary citizens, to feel a sense of spiritual vacuum or confusion in their lives. Many who later became LDS converts described going through this experience.

Natasha and Valery were among those who experienced these feelings. They and many others were considering not only questions about their political and economic future but also deeper, more profound questions of human existence: Who am I? What is the meaning of life, and what is our personal destiny after death? Where can we find a valid standard of moral conduct? Where is truth, justice, beauty, purity, love, and hope for man?

To answer these questions, members of the intelligentsia and also ordinary citizens began to turn their attention to the study of religion. The question was, however, where to turn to find the answers to these religious questions. Should one return to the traditional church? Should one explore foreign or new religious confessions? What about reading the Bible or other religious works on one's own without denominational affiliation? The result of all these vital questions was a remarkable upsurge of interest in religion as the influence of the Communist view of the world began to crumble, especially during the last years of the Gorbachev era.

Searching for a Spiritual Home

Vyacheslav (Slava) and Zoya, husband and wife, were among those searching for spiritual answers. Both are of Jewish ancestry, so their families had suffered the tragedy of anti-Semitism for generations in Ukraine and throughout the Russian empire.

One of Zoya's great-grandfathers was murdered in the presence of his wife and children during a pogrom in the latter nineteenth century. Before Zoya's birth, her mother and grandparents had survived World War II by fleeing eastward to Kazakhstan, just ahead of the German occupation troops who shot Jews systematically, massacring two hundred thousand Jews and others in a ravine in Kiev called Babi Yar. Zoya's father served in the Soviet Red Army.

Slava's grandfather Gulko, a poor young man with a bride in tow, arrived in Kiev just before World War I. At the end of the war, he narrowly escaped death when he was seized by the anti-Semitic troops of Simon Petliura's Ukrainian Nationalist Army during the civil war after the Bolshevik Revolution. He managed to flee his captors in the dead of a cold winter night, traveling without outer clothing, a coat, or boots. He survived and returned to hide with his wife and family. Gulko became a very devout Jewish participant in the Kiev synagogue, promising God that he would give his only son to be a rabbi to an increasingly atheistic society.

The son was Slava's father, who dashed these fervent hopes by becoming an atheist like most of his generation. Then Josef Stalin forcibly closed the Kiev synagogue. Slava's father became a young officer in World War II and was seriously wounded during the conflict. His wounds were thought fatal, but miraculously he recovered and returned home.

Although Slava's father was an atheist, Grandfather Gulko insisted on having his grandson Slava circumcised a few days after his birth in 1950. In his early youth Slava was greatly embarrassed to be the only one of his Jewish and Gentile companions who had undergone this rite of Judaism, but he later regarded it as a singular honor, showing that he was set apart for a special relationship with God.

Unfortunately, Slava's grandfather died when Slava was nine years old. This ended the family's religious influence in his early life. His father raised him an atheist. Even so, he later studied the ancient history of his people. He read a book detailing the history of the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem and the fall of that city to Rome. Still in his youth, he developed a strong inner feeling that he was descended from the great King David.

As gifted students, Slava and Zoya, like their peers, were taught an atheistic perspective in school. By the ninth grade, Slava had chosen a career as a nuclear physicist and later fulfilled his dream with great distinction, becoming a department head in an elite government research faculty on nuclear physics. Zoya, who was gifted in languages (especially English), became an instructor of English in a special school in Kiev that was attended by children of the Ukrainian politically elite. Her skills included translating.

Slava had come to accept the notion that "religion is the opium of the people," but by 1989 he and Zoya began to feel the same spiritual emptiness that enveloped the minds of others. Aware of the void in their lives, they made a conscious decision to begin a search for spirituality. First they tried a return to Judaism. They read the Torah carefully and attended synagogue. This failed to fulfill their spiritual longings and desires. They continued to feel lonely and spiritually bereft but still hopeful of ultimate success in their quest for spiritual growth.

Next they encountered the Baha'i faith. At first they found its ecumenical objective of uniting all faiths in one to be appealing. Soon, however, they became dissatisfied and discontinued their association with the movement. After this stint in religious discovery, Slava and Zoya began to investigate Christianity, reading the New Testament and coming close to an acceptance of Jesus as the Messiah.

In exploring various Christian beliefs, they could not bring themselves to seriously investigate Russian Orthodoxy. Instead, Slava and Zoya investigated Protestantism through "The Campus Crusade for Christ" program shortly after its arrival in Kiev. That failed to satisfy their spiritual quest, so they moved in the direction of Roman Catholicism during a long visit to Poland. Skepticism and spiritual unfulfillment persisted, but as late as the fall of 1991, they had not given up their search. Slava and Zoya were yet to find a spiritual home in Christ and to be major participants in establishing his kingdom in Ukraine.

Seeking for Answers

There were others searching for spiritual fulfillment. One of these was Leonid. He was the son of the assistant to the president of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, and his mother was also a member of the academy. As Leonid tells it: "I grew up absorbing a materialist understanding of the world. I was an atheist. At least I had been taught to be, like so many others."

As part of an effort to improve his life and health, Leonid began to study Eastern philosophy and medicine. This led him to study Eastern religions, such as Hinduism, Islam, Buddhism, Taoism, and Yoga. Leonid felt a longing for something he could not fully grasp or articulate. He describes the feeling as "an expectation of something beautiful that would happen in my life." This impelled him to continue his search.

Sergei had also been raised as an atheist. Like most citizens in the Soviet Union, he had no access to the Bible or other religious materials. As he moved into higher education, however, Sergei had access to a copy of the New Testament at his institute, though he read it only out of intellectual curiosity. He was not yet ready to seek God; in fact, to commit to such a course would have jeopardized his educational opportunities.

"Five years later," he recalled, "I met a Christian believer, and I argued a lot with him about the Bible. I asked questions that no one could answer: Why, if God really spoke through prophets anciently, are there no prophets now? If there are really miracles in the Bible, why are there no such miracles and revelations now? Has God's attitude changed toward us?" Repeatedly he asked these questions when confronted by Christian believers, and no one could answer them adequately. Sergei waited decades for the true answers to his questions.

Dmitry the Believer

Dmitry is a Russian, born in Siberia. He became a Christian while serving in the Soviet Red Army, at which time he read and accepted the New Testament. After completing military service, he enrolled in one of the major Russian Orthodox seminaries in the USSR, completing the program with high marks. Dmitry was deeply converted to Christ but was unable to accept many of the doctrines and practices of the Russian Church. For this reason he purposefully resisted ordination to the office of priest, though he continued as an activist in directing choirs and organizing Sunday school classes.

Dmitry's religious activism got him into serious trouble with authorities. Arrested and convicted of illegal religious activity, he was sentenced to serve three years in brutal forced-labor camps that Solzhenitsyn and Moroz vividly described in their writings.

During the Brezhnev era, a few churches and prayer houses of the Russian Orthodox and Evangelical Christian Baptist faiths were legally registered and permitted to function with ordained clergy. There were also many unregistered "underground" (and therefore illegal) religious bodies functioning, but those who participated in such groups were subject to arrest. Even legally invested priests could get into serious trouble if they were considered "activists" for the faith. Priests were expected to perform the sacraments of the church for those attending services, but not to get involved in actively propagating their Christian faith.

Prior to his prison sentence, Dmitry was an activist who was unordained and operating classes that were not apparently registered. Upon his release, Dmitry was permitted to live in a large city in Ukraine, where he associated with the university. He was granted the opportunity to teach a course at the university during the more liberal period of Gorbachev's rule. He titled his course "The Bible As Literature." Even then such a course was controversial. His classes were, in fact, a rigorous study of biblical theology and Russian religious philosophy. As a brilliant teacher, he gathered a considerable following who were attracted to his course. This brought Dmitry to the attention of the Russian Orthodox bishop, who, in the absence of an adequate seminary, invited all new acolyte priests to take Dmitry's course. Protestant pastors also enrolled. His fame as a religious teacher spread throughout the region.

Dmitry was a devoted believer in the Bible, yet within himself he was not satisfied with any religious system or interpretation of the holy scriptures he had studied, whether Orthodox, Catholic, or Protestant. Through those trying years he remained a hungry Christian seeker after religious truth, while purchasing and reading every new and old book on religion that appeared on the shelves.

The single room where Dmitry lived was part of an old, collapsing, prerevolutionary building filled from floor to ceiling with religious books, journals, and magazines. He kept open a narrow corridor among these stacks of books and journals that was wide enough for passage and a bed. His restless religious search consumed his life.

Because of his diligence, one day in the future Dmitry would find a book of scripture that would totally alter his life. He would discover the Book of Mormon.

Lifetime Seeker of Mormonism

Pyotr is a Belarussian physician in his forties who lives in Minsk. He attended the Baptist Church, but throughout his life has called himself a "Mormon." His father, now deceased, became acquainted during World War II with a Latter-day Saint serviceman in France who taught and baptized him.

Pyotr's father returned from the war with a small notebook containing some translations of passages from the Book of Mormon. He dared not bring any printed religious materials home at that time, because it was illegal and very dangerous to do so. From that small notebook, Pyotr declares, his father raised him to be a Mormon. Pyotr loved the passages of scripture and read them over and over. He also understood and strictly observed the Word of Wisdom, abstaining from alcohol, tobacco, tea, and coffee throughout his life.

Pyotr called himself a Mormon not only to his associates at the Baptist Church but also to many of his other friends. He claims he even told this to the military draft board. Pyotr dreamed of the time when he might actually read the Book of Mormon in its entirety and be baptized officially into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

All these future Latter-day Saints were seeking in the dark. Still, the Spirit of the Lord was preparing them to accept the restored gospel of Jesus Christ when it would come to the Soviet Union. They awaited spiritual deliverance and were ready to receive that "marvellous work and a wonder" (Isaiah 29:14) that was yet to come.
