Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Chapter 3

"He . . . Brake Their Bands in Sunder"

"He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder."

—Psalm 107:14

Nineteen eighty-five was a fateful year in the Soviet Union. Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev, the youngest member of the Soviet leadership, was chosen by his colleagues in the Politburo to be general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. It came at a time of unprecedented deterioration of economic performance in the USSR. The party leadership recognized that economic crisis would jeopardize both the domestic stability of the country and its international power.

After making some modest attempts to improve economic performance, Gorbachev and his supporters formulated a major plan for economic reform, which they called "restructuring" (or in Russian, perestroika). This new reform had important implications for the freedoms that were yet to come. Initially, perestroika involved only economic measures: the decentralizing of economic decision making, the replacing of "command from above" with contracts between individual enterprises, and material incentives to encourage greater worker productivity.

Gorbachev and his associates soon came to recognize, however, that economic stagnation could not be resolved by simply decentralizing the economy and devising new incentives. Poor economic performance, he believed, was rooted in worker apathy caused by a feeling of powerlessness. Workers and citizens felt they had no control over their own lives. Gorbachev was sensitive to the times and felt that the causes of the growing economic crisis were political, social, and spiritual in nature and that something had to be done.

In August 1986, the newspaper Pravda carried a statement from Gorbachev declaring that perestroika required a "genuine revolution in the minds and hearts of people." The working people must shed mental and spiritual authoritarianism in order to overcome "alienation from their work." People must be free to openly express differing opinions and to participate in making decisions. This was a startling declaration in light of the entrenched, conservative Communists that ran all levels of the government.

Everyone, he came to believe, should be free to criticize higher officials as well as fellow workers publicly, even in the media. This he called "openness" (or glasnost). Glasnost became public policy throughout the country in 1986 and 1987. Those who watched affairs in the USSR began to feel that glasnost might be the beginning of freedom of expression. Soon Gorbachev began to speak of the importance of a "pluralism of opinions" in all public discourse. He felt that such expression was healthy for the people and that it would empower them.

Then, in 1988, Gorbachev concluded through experience that glasnost could be effective only if there existed legal safeguards for freedom of expression against retaliation by officials, who would stand firmly in the way if there were no teeth in glasnost. He felt that freedom of speech and of the press must be protected by law.

Freedom of expression, however, in itself was not enough. The entire government needed to be democratized by allowing citizens to independently participate in politics. This had to include the right to seek office in competitive elections and the right to organize autonomous groups to support legislative proposals. The party and the state should relinquish control so that social groups could become self-managing and a genuine "civil society" could develop. All of this Gorbachev called "democratization."

Stephen White, a British analyst of Soviet politics, summarizes the momentous political changes that then occurred:

Competitive elections were held for the first working parliament in Soviet history. The media began to reflect a variety of points of view. The economy was exposed to private and cooperative ownership as part of a wider transition to market relations. An attempt was made to construct a "renewed federation" that would take the place of the overcentralized union of the previous seventy years. And "new thinking" in international affairs led to a series of changes in East-West relations. (Stephen White, After Gorbachev, p. ix)

Gorbachev did not at first go so far, however, as to propose that rival parties be permitted to compete with the Communist Party. After all, the General Secretary saw himself as a Communist as well as a reformer. It was the party that put him in power. He hoped that a reformed party could voluntarily win the support of the people and allow greater political and social autonomy. He was frank enough to admit and declare that if, however, the Communist Party could not maintain the voluntary support of the people, it no longer deserved the right to rule. Gorbachev boldly stated this in 1988.

Religious Reform Begins

Throughout the upheaval of the era, Gorbachev counted on his liberal reforms to win the support of intellectuals and the masses against the hard-line authoritarians in the Communist Party apparatus who were blocking his policies. Instead, glasnost and democratization unleashed new political forces that the party could no longer control, and the failure of economic reform led to greater mass disillusionment with Gorbachev and the party.

Freedom of thought and social organization would not be complete, Gorbachev realized, without including religion. While there is no evidence that he was personally religious, from 1986 onward he had experts drafting legislation for freedom of religion.

This was a difficult and contentious battle between "new thinking" reformers and hard-liners determined to be true to the behest of Lenin, who had declared: "Every religious idea, every idea of God, even flirting with the idea of God, is unutterable vileness, vileness of the most dangerous kind, 'contagion' of the most abominable kind. Millions of sins, filthy deeds, acts of violence, and physical 'contagions' . . . are far less dangerous than the subtle, spiritual idea of a God" (V. I. Lenin, Selected Works, 11:675-76).

On 29 April 1988, Mikhail Gorbachev received Patriarch Pimen of the Russian Orthodox Church and other synod members for a formal meeting in the Kremlin. This was the first formal meeting between party and church leaders since 4 September 1943, when Stalin sought and received church support to mobilize citizens for the war with German fascism.

Undoubtedly, one motivation for this second historic accommodation between party and church leaders was to again mobilize popular support, this time against the powerful institutional foes of perestroika.

The Soviet government gave material support and publicity to the grand celebration of the millennium of Orthodox Christianity in Kiev and Moscow. This took place from 5 June through 16 June 1988. Many foreign dignitaries were invited, with the electronic and print media of the USSR covering the event. The celebration offered high visibility. All these events signaled the rehabilitation of the Russian Orthodox Church as a social institution and as a worthy part of national Russian, Ukrainian, and Belarussian culture.

Growing Religious Ferment

Meanwhile, during the period of the latter 1980s, government bodies had quietly been permitting the registration of local churches. During this period it was still very difficult for faiths other than the Russian Orthodox Church to receive legal registration. This was especially true in Ukraine, where the Greek Catholic Church and autocephalic churches had been major underground faiths since the Stalin era.

In fact, the chairman of the Ukrainian State Council for Religious Affairs claimed erroneously in 1989 that "in hundreds of statements, signed by tens of thousands of citizens, there is a request to register only Orthodox Church societies and not that of other religions" (Keston News Service, 16 March 1989, pp. 8-9).

Although denied legal registration by the Ukrainian government, the Autocephalic (independent Ukrainian) Orthodox Church, suppressed by Stalin in 1930, began to openly participate again. In August 1989, the Lvov Parish of the Church of Saints Peter and Paul threw off jurisdiction of the Russian Moscow Patriarchate and announced its adherence to the Ukrainian Autocephalic Orthodox Church.

A number of other Orthodox churches in the western part of Ukraine followed suit. In October 1990, the Autocephalic Church was finally officially registered.

The Greek Catholic Church follows the liturgy of Eastern Christianity but subordinates itself to the Pope in Rome. This church was suppressed in the Stalin era, and its buildings and parishioners were handed over to the Russian Orthodox Church. Like the Autocephalic Church, it remained an operating underground church for fifty years—a monumental struggle for those who kept the religious flame burning.

In 1989 Greek Catholics began to openly participate in services in many cities of western Ukraine, although they had not been granted official recognition. On 18 June 1989, one hundred thousand people seeking freedom of religious expression gathered openly in Ivano-Frankivsk. On 29 October 1989, Ukrainian Catholics seized the Church of the Transfiguration in Lvov, which had originally been theirs. More than fifty churches in western Ukraine followed suit by transferring their affiliation from the Russian Orthodox Patriarchate in Moscow to the Vatican in Rome.

It was learned that Gorbachev was going to Rome for an accommodation with Pope John Paul II on 1 December 1989. The announcement sent tens of thousands of Ukrainian Catholics into the streets in Lvov on 26 November, just a week before Gorbachev left for Rome. They demonstrated for their rights to be legally recognized in Ukraine. After Gorbachev visited the Vatican, Myroslav Cardinal Lubachivsky, primate of the Ukrainian Church, was permitted to return after fifty-three years in exile.

Events on the religious front were beginning to move rapidly toward freedom of worship. Early in 1990 the Ukrainian government permitted the registration of six hundred Catholic parishes in western Ukraine. Already in Lithuania the Vilnius Cathedral had been returned to the dominant Roman Catholic Church. The government permitted registration of new parishes by this time.

Among Protestants there was a growing avalanche of involvement in religious affairs. The Baptists, Adventists, and some other Russian Protestant sects that had existed in the Russian Empire before 1917 were on the move. A few of these had remained legally registered throughout the Soviet era, but the Reform Baptists, Pentacostals, and Jehovah's Witnesses functioned illegally.

In Russia new congregations of Baptists, Adventists, Pentacostals, Lutherans, Methodists, and Jehovah's Witnesses received legal recognition in 1988 and 1989, but in Ukraine these groups had trouble obtaining registration until 1990. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was registered by the government of the Russian Republic in 1991. This was a major achievement for the Church. The Baha'i World Faith and the Unification Church were also granted official registration that same year.

The New Law on Religious Freedom

In May 1990, after four years of discussion, sharp debate, and delay, the draft of the new "Law on the Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organizations" was read in the USSR Supreme Soviet (Parliament). This historic law was finally enacted on 26 September 1990 in Moscow, going into effect on October 9.

The new law was a major thrust forward for freedom of religion; it guaranteed full legal status for religious organizations, freedom of conscience, and freedom of worship. The separation of church and state was proclaimed, as well as the equality of all faiths. Religious groups were ensured the right to proselyte freely throughout the Soviet Union.

The law specifically forbade government interference in religious activities or discrimination on the basis of religious belief. It barred government from further funding of atheistic campaigns or from financing religious activities.

Religious bodies were granted the right to own their places of worship and other property, which included the right to import literature from abroad and to publish their own literature in the country. They also received the right to engage in charitable activity and to provide religious education in public schools (after hours), as well as in their own institutions.

Parents were assured the right to bring up their children in their own religious faith. Personal income taxes for members of the clergy were made equal to that of other citizens. While income tax had been 13 percent for other Soviet citizens, the clergy had been required to pay as much as 64 percent of their personal income. This had been a long-standing Soviet policy.

The right of religious bodies to own property had already been included in the new "Law on Property Ownership," enacted by the USSR Supreme Soviet in November 1989. The USSR renewed its adherence to all of the human rights commitments of the United Nations Charter and Helsinki Process, including a statement during the final months of the existence of the Soviet Union in late 1991 that religious liberty is an "inalienable right."

The Crumbling of an Empire

Freedom of expression and participation unleashed long-suppressed national feelings among the subject peoples within the Soviet empire. It must be remembered that the Soviet Union was made up of many smaller national and ethnic groups. Some of these, such as Ukraine and the Baltic Republics, had in the past been nations in their own right. Others, as colonial peoples, developed national identity under Soviet rule. Beyond the Soviet Union were all the east-central European nations that were closely tied to the Soviet Union by diplomatic, military, and economic association.

When it was evident that, unlike previous Soviet leaders, Gorbachev would not forcibly suppress nationalist demonstrations in the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria, Communist rule collapsed quickly in these countries during 1989. The Federation of Yugoslavia also disintegrated, as did Communist rule in Albania.

The Soviet Communist Party so declined in authority and effectiveness that after March 1990, Gorbachev tended to circumvent its institutions, ruling primarily through his office as president of the USSR. By this time the leadership had recognized the right of other political parties to legally organize and participate.

Meanwhile, nationalist politics within the fifteen republics of the USSR began to follow the example of east-central Europe. Lithuania declared independence on 11 March 1990, and the Republic of Georgia on 9 April 1991. Boris Yeltsin had been freely elected president of the Russian Republic and was carrying out a strong nationalist agenda. Nationalist movements were moving toward independence in Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, Latvia, Estonia, Transcaucasia, and the central Asian republics.

Gorbachev's Legacy

In hindsight, I believe it was providential that full freedom of religion for all faiths and commitment to international human rights provisions were accomplished before the breakup of the Soviet Union. The new nationalist states that succeeded the USSR were more concerned about restoring traditional national culture and supporting the old dominant religions. The legacy of human rights and religious equality established in the Gorbachev era could not easily be dispensed with by new states seeking international aid and recognition. The Gorbachev legislation and public policy on religious freedom provided a protection for the "nontraditional" confessions that would continue after the Soviet Union itself had passed into history.

All of the movements toward freedom of religion seemed to transpire within a very short time. It came so rapidly that many Church members were startled by the quick movement of the LDS missionary force into those countries that only a decade before had iron doors erected to kept out the gospel.

The Lord's Timetable

Since the 1970s, the leaders and general membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have unitedly prayed in a concerted way for the Lord to open Communist lands for the preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Then, when it happened so very quickly, many were astounded, not expecting to see the answer to those prayers in our lifetime.

Yet, during the brief period of what the Communist Party had considered would be its "Twelfth Five-Year Plan," (1986-1991), a revolution of freedom peacefully transformed this authoritarian society, overthrowing the party, the Soviet state, and its international empire. Miraculously, this revolution was essentially nonviolent, opening the way for 425 million people in the Soviet Union and east-central Europe to freely receive the gospel of Jesus Christ and the teachings of other faiths.

The unfolding of these dramatic events should remind us of Nephi's great testimony of the Lord: "For behold he is mightier than all the earth" (1 Nephi 4:1). The Lord has his own timetable, and when the season approaches for a great people to receive his word, all of the elaborate barriers designed by the evil one melt away like the hoarfrost before the warm rays of the sun.

Truly in our day is fulfilled the prophecy of the psalmist:

"He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder. . . .

"For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder. . . .

"He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions.

"Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!" (Psalm 107:14, 16, 20-21).
