Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Chapter 5

"No Power Shall Stay My Hand"

"Whosoever I will shall go forth among all nations, and it shall be told them what they shall do; for I have a great work laid up in store, for Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will, and no power shall stay my hand."

—Doctrine and Covenants 38:33

By 1991 the power of separatism among the main nationalities was so strong that the survival of the Soviet Union itself was in serious question. Gorbachev attempted to preserve the USSR by proposing a new "Union Treaty."

This new treaty would grant powerful authority and autonomy to the national republics under a weaker federal government, ruled jointly by a council composed of Gorbachev as USSR president and the fifteen presidents of the national republics. Even this weak federalism was very hard to sell to the nationalities.

Meanwhile, a number of Gorbachev's leading colleagues in Moscow who were alarmed at this proposal and the decline of central control determined that they must seize power to prevent the destruction of the USSR and the ruin of Socialism. The leading conspirators were Vladimir Alexandrovich Kryuchkov, chairman of the KGB (Soviet secret police); Dmitri Timofeyevich Yazov, a leading army general who was USSRminister of defense; Valentin Sergeyevich Pavlov, USSR prime minister; and Gennady Ivanovich Yanayev, USSR Vice President (to President Gorbachev). Kryuchov was the real mastermind of the conspiracy.

In addition, the leading conspirators obtained the support of Anatoly Ivanovich Lukyanov, chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet (the Parliament); Boris Karlovich Pugo, USSR minister of internal affairs (including supervision of regular police); Valery Ivanovich Boldin, Gorbachev's chief of staff; Oleg Dmitriyevich Baklanov, Communist Party secretary responsible for the defense industry; Alexander Ivanovich Tizyakov, head of the Association of State Enterprises; Oleg Semyonovich Shenin, Communist Party secretary responsible for personnel; and Vasily Alexandrovich Starodubtsev, head of the Peasants Union. President Gorbachev and his family were resting at their holiday home near the Black Sea, in Foros in the Crimea, when the coup began.

The Coup Begins

On Monday, 19 August 1991, the people of the USSR awoke to mass media announcements that this junta of conspirators had assumed power and was imposing a state of emergency. All political gatherings were banned, and the human rights enactments of the Gorbachev era were suspended. Meetings of the parliaments of national republics were banned for at least six months. Red Army troops were sent into Moscow and also surrounded Kiev and other capital cities of the national republics.

My wife, Colleen, was in Vienna, and I was in Kiev, visiting the sixteen missionaries serving there, when the coup began. Elder Ivan Stratov, the zone leader, and I were searching for an auditorium where Elders Boyd K. Packer and Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve could speak to members of the Church and their guests on their forthcoming visit of 11-13 September.

We had secured a suitable hall on Lvov Square in the early morning of 19 August and were sitting with the director of the Hall of Artists to sign the documents and provide a financial deposit when an aide came into the room and turned on the radio so that the three of us could hear the "Declaration of the State of Emergency" and all that it entailed. Since there was no specific mention of religious meetings, the director signed the agreement, but I thought to myself, All human rights are rescinded. If the coup succeeds, it will mean the end to foreign missionary work in the Soviet Union and perhaps the banning of meetings of the LDS Church.

Since the junta included the heads of the KGB, the Red Army, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs (which supervises the civilian police throughout the USSR), it appeared likely that all the resources of power were in the hands of the hard-line conspirators. The crowds on the metro and the trams were quiet, staring morosely at the floor. The feeling of gloom was palpable.

Seeking a Course of Action

I was staying at the old Lebid Hotel on Victory Square. As I returned to my room to attempt a call to the Area Presidency in Frankfurt, the ugly young men who hung around the hotel (whom I recognized from long experience as KGB toughs placed there to keep tabs on foreigners) confronted me brazenly with triumph written on their faces. "Preacher, pray for me! Help Jesus save my soul!" One of them knelt in my path and pawed at my suit mockingly, then laughed lustily as I pushed past them. The fact that they were making no effort to hide their identity and the triumphant sneers on their faces seemed to be saying, "You are an enemy who will soon be gone!"

There was no way to get through to Frankfurt, so I determined to go to an old apartment recently purchased by the Church and wait for the missionaries to come. Missionaries had been called by Elder Stratov to meet me there.

Two of the young KGB toughs followed me openly, about ten yards behind, laughing and hooting, to the University Metro Station, where we descended the escalator down deep to the platform. I was determined not to lead them to the meeting with the missionaries, so I rode for several stops until I saw a train stopped in the station going the opposite direction. I suddenly jumped off the eastbound metro and made it onto the westbound train before the doors closed electronically.

After several stops west, I ascended to the street and immediately got onto a crowded old tram. At that time I didn't know the transportation system in Kiev well enough to discern where I was headed, but I jumped off and boarded an electric trolley that seemed to be going in the direction I felt would be the center of the city.

When I saw the fountains of October Revolution Square at the end of the number 18 trolley line, I knew that my instincts had been correct. I knew how to get to the apartment from the main metro stop on the square, and soon I arrived there to find most of the missionaries already quietly assembled, sitting on the floor because we still did not have sufficient furniture.

Elder and Sister Charles Creel, our missionary couple in Kiev, had stopped by the consulate of the United States on their way to the meeting. They learned that Kiev was surrounded by a large contingent of the Red Army, just outside the city. The U.S. State Department was urging all Americans to leave the Soviet Union as soon as possible.

I spent nearly an hour trying to get through to the Area Presidency on the apartment telephone, but to no avail. By that time the remaining missionaries had arrived, and we knelt and solemnly commenced the meeting with prayer.

The Lord's Comfort

I had not taken time to think what I should say to the missionaries to raise their spirits and could not tell them any instructions from the Area Presidency. I had been mission president for just over one month, and this was my first crisis. I opened my scriptures as I stood up to speak, hoping to find something appropriate. My scriptures opened exactly to Doctrine and Covenants, section 35, verses 24-27, which I asked them to turn to, then led them in reading:

Keep all the commandments and covenants by which ye are bound; and I will cause the heavens to shake for your good, and Satan shall tremble and Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish;

And Israel shall be saved in mine own due time; . . . Lift up your hearts and be glad, your redemption draweth nigh.

Fear not, little flock, the kingdom is yours until I come. Behold, I come quickly. Even so. Amen.

I realized by an overflowing manifestation of the Spirit that this scripture was the word of the Lord to us in our situation. I bore witness that this crisis was in the hands of the Lord and that Satan would have no power to end the work of the Lord at that time in that country. "The Lord is able to shake the heavens for our good," I told them. "Zion shall rejoice and flourish here, and Israel shall be saved in Ukraine. We need not fear."

I asked them not to wear their name tags and to return to their apartments as individual companionships, not all walking together. They were told to pack one suitcase with their most essential things and have it ready to go immediately. During the crisis they could go to appointments already made but otherwise were to stay in their apartments. Every night and every morning the missionaries from the two missionary districts of Kiev were to call their district leaders, who would report to the zone leader, and he to me, that all was well.

They asked if scheduled baptisms could be performed that week in the Dnieper River, which runs through Kiev. My immediate reaction was to say no, but the Spirit seemed to say, "Yes, if you are careful and can do so unobtrusively." Eight persons were baptized in the river that historic week, one for each missionary companionship.

There were fewer than sixty members of the Church in Ukraine at that time and only three men ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood. I interviewed several other worthy brethren and ordained them elders in the Melchizedek Priesthood so they would have sufficient authority if the missionaries had to be temporarily withdrawn from Kiev. We discussed how they would function, and they promised with emotion to be true to the gospel and the Church. Several older adult sisters begged me to allow them to hide the missionaries in their apartments. "We are ready to risk prison, even our lives, that the gospel may go forth. We must not lose the blessing of the priesthood," they implored. "Please do not take the missionaries away from us!"

I explained to them that we would remain in Kiev if officially permitted, but we would not stay without legal permission. Then I promised them that through the power given their Ukrainian brethren, the Lord's work would continue and flourish in Kiev, no matter what happened, if they would keep the commandments, follow their appointed spiritual leaders, seek for personal revelation, and obey their governmental authorities. They promised to do so. It was a poignant meeting, attended by the Spirit and by the expression of many tender feelings for one another.

The Coup Failed: The Role of a Future Mormon

The Ukrainian Parliament refused to disband as the junta in Moscow demanded. I wondered if the Red Army troops encircling Kiev would attack and occupy the city. With Elder Creel's shortwave radio we listened to the BBC broadcast in London and learned of the events in Moscow. We were also able to call missionaries in Moscow (part of the Helsinki East Mission under President Gary L. Browning) and learn of their circumstances, but we were unable to reach the outside world.

For two nights I listened to the truck convoys crossing Victory Square. I could see the headquarters building of Rukh, the Ukrainian nationalist organization, across the street. Instead of the official Ukrainian Soviet flag, it flew the blue and gold flag of Ukrainian independence. When awakened in the middle of the night by the truck convoys, I would look outside to see if the flag was still fluttering in the light of the square. Seeing the flag, I knew there had not yet been a Soviet occupation of the Ukrainian capitol, and I would go back to sleep.

On my second day at the mission apartment, a phone call came through from the Creels' daughter who lives in Las Vegas, where it would have been the middle of the night. I asked her to call Elder Hans B. Ringger in Frankfurt and my wife in Vienna to report that we were all well and planning to stay in Kiev unless the Brethren decided that we must leave.

Miraculously, she got through again ten minutes later to report that she had completed the calls I had requested and that Elder Ringger confirmed that it was correct to remain in Kiev and do all that I had instructed the missionaries to do. He had been trying to reach us from Frankfurt, but only Las Vegas succeeded—twice! The operator told the Creels' daughter that she must have some special connections "above" to get through twice in ten minutes.

I returned to the Hotel Lebid to find that CNN Television had been set up in the lobby, showing Russian president Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin and his brave supporters in Moscow defying the tanks. All the hotel employees and guests were watching and cheering. The menacing KGB toughs had all mysteriously disappeared from the hotel.

It was apparent that the coup was unraveling. A key reason was that Red Army colonels and majors who had been commanded by the generals to attack the crowds protecting the Russian White House in Moscow bravely refused to lead their men to attack citizens. One of these brave senior officers was Vasily Lubarets, a Ukrainian who would later be baptized into the Church in Kiev. He was assigned to the USSR General Staff in Moscow and was required to explain to junior officers under his command the plan of attack. He has written an account of this event:

If I were to fulfill the command given me, I would never be able to forgive myself in the future, for our army has never attacked defenseless citizens. On the other hand, if I told the junior officers the truth, I would risk the lives of my wife, my daughters, and myself.

I understood clearly that I had to make a choice and that time would not wait for me, . . . so I said to the junior officers the following: "A coup has been committed in the country. The putschers have grabbed power, and they are criminals. They will give you weapons and orders to shoot at people, but remember that there are soldiers in places where your children, mothers, and wives are, and those soldiers could get the same orders, too."

"What shall we do?" they asked me. "If we do not fulfill the orders, they will kill us!" "Yes, they will kill us, but it is better to be a victim than a killer." These were my last words to the formation. Later there were two sleepless nights near the radio; then there was the victory of the unarmed people upon the tanks. There were lists in the Party Military Department with the names of people who had to be arrested, and my name was there, too. They began to arrest worthy officers in other divisions. Finally, after waiting three days and two nights, common sense and the law won in this country.

The brave colonels and majors like Vasily Lubarets, and some courageous generals too, saved the Soviet Union from a disaster like Tiannanmen Square in China and helped defeat the coup of the junta in Moscow. Vasily Lubarets learned only later, after his baptism in Kiev into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that his bravery had also helped to save the opportunity for him, his family, and his people to receive the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Lord's Miracle

On the third day of the attempted coup, it was clear to all the crowds assembled in the center of Kiev on October Revolution Square, soon to be named "Independence Square," that the coup had miraculously failed. I wanted to be in this rejoicing crowd, but I had forbidden the missionaries to be in political demonstrations, so I felt that I must set an example and keep my distance. But old men ran past me shouting: "Thanks be to God; we are free! Thanks be to God for our freedom!"

All the missionaries assembled again at the mission apartment on the third day, 21 August. We'd all come to the testimony meeting fasting with thanksgiving before the Lord, rejoicing that our mission would continue. Our tall, Russian-Australian zone leader, Elder Ivan Stratov, stood up and recited with deep power and feeling, from perfect memory, the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"The Standard of Truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 4:540).

No one felt that he had been melodramatic. Tears of gratitude and resolve streamed down our faces as we heard him charge us to show our thanks to the Lord by serving with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. No one who was there will ever forget those electrifying words of the Prophet Joseph delivered from the very soul of a great young servant of the Lord with a thick Aussie accent.

I read to them from section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants, verse 5: "And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them." I also read section 38, verse 33, with them: "Whosoever I will shall go forth among all nations, and it shall be told them what they shall do; for I have a great work laid up in store, for Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will, and no power shall stay my hand."

We knew that we had witnessed a miracle of the Lord. "For behold, he is mightier than all the earth, then why not mightier than [the ministers of state and the generals and the KGB, who have conspired to deny the freedom of the people to hear his word]?" (1 Nephi 4:1).

We rejoiced in testimony together in acknowlegement of the great good brought about by the hand of the Lord. We recommitted to give our whole souls to him in obedience and service, that his great future harvest in Ukraine would, indeed, come to pass. It was a sacred day, never to be forgotten.

The End of the USSR

USSR's President Gorbachev returned on 22 August, as he remarked, "to a different world" from that which he had left. Yeltsin, the president of the Russian Republic, was the great hero of the country, and Gorbachev played less and less of a central role as events developed. The coup had failed, but its defeat had effectively destroyed any further allegiance to the central government.

On 20 August, Estonia declared its independence. The next day Latvia followed suit. Ukraine declared independence on 24 August, Belarus on 25 August, Moldova on 27 August, Azerbaijan on 30 August, and Kirgizstan and Uzbekistan on 31 August. Taikistan declared independence on 9 September, Armenia on 23 September, and Turkmenistan on 27 October. This left only Russia and Kazakhstan in the Soviet Union, and with the power clearly in the hands of the two republic presidents, Boris Yeltsin and Nursultan Nazarbayev, rather than Mikhail Gorbachev.

Gorbachev continued to try to put the union back together in some kind of loose system, but particularly Ukraine's failure to cooperate with these plans led to the final breakdown of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Gorbachev resigned on 25 December, and on 31 December the USSR ceased to be. The greatest territorial empire in the world, which Russian tsars and Soviet Communists had taken five hundred years to gather into one state, was gone with one stroke of Gorbachev's pen!

President Yeltsin outlawed the Communist Party in Russia due to its central role in the abortive coup. The presidents of the other new successor republics followed suit and abolished the Party, which had once ruled with absolute power throughout this great Eurasian subcontinent. Many former Communists, however, survived in new political movements and in some cases again occupied positions of political leadership in the new republics. (After a ruling by the Constitutional Court of Russia in November 1992, new communist parties were allowed to organize in the Russian Federation. The new Russian Communist Party has become one of the major opponents of President Yeltsin.)

Gorbachev, a Modern Cyrus

A few days before Gorbachev's resignation as president of the USSR, I had a long talk with a Baptist minister named Ivan Medvedev in Donetsk about the historical role of Mikhail Gorbachev. We agreed that he would be regarded in history as both a tragic and a heroic figure. A person of great intelligence, civility, and ability, he was nevertheless not able to reform and save either Communism or the Soviet Union as an empire of nations. His economic initiatives were implemented too slowly and tentatively and failed miserably. He ended his six-year period on the world stage not only despised by Communist hard-liners but also rejected by the overwhelming majority of the citizenry that had originally taken hope in his program and promises.

We agreed, nevertheless, that Gorbachev would be remembered as one who brought human rights—especially freedom of expression and freedom of religion—to the Soviet peoples. We agreed that, in biblical terms, Gorbachev was the "Cyrus" of the Slavic peoples and other captive nations. Pastor Medvedev expressed the conviction that "Gorbachev was the Cyrus whom God called to permit a great captive people to return and build the spiritual walls of Zion in this country!"

I heartily agreed and still agree.
