Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Chapter 6

"The Morning Breaks"

"The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled!"

—Hymns, no. 1

At the beginning of the twentieth century, leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were hoping to receive approval from the tsarist government to introduce the restored gospel into the Russian Empire. To this end, Elder Francis M. Lyman of the Council of the Twelve Apostles and president of the European Mission visited the capital city of St. Petersburg and offered a prayer of dedication on 6 August 1903. This hope was not to be realized for an additional eighty-seven years.

The Dedication of Russia and Armenia

St. Petersburg was renamed Leningrad during the Soviet era. When missionary work was able to commence in Leningrad, Elder Russell M. Nelson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles offered a special prayer of gratitude and rededication in that city on 26 April 1990. In Moscow during the Mormon Tabernacle Choir's tour, Elder Nelson and Elder Dallin H. Oaks went to a park near the Kremlin walls on 25 June 1991, where Elder Nelson offered a blessing on the people of the Soviet Union. On the previous day, 24 June, Elder Oaks and Elder Nelson, accompanied by Elder Hans B. Ringger of the Seventy and president of the Europe Area, had gathered with others in a brief ceremony to bless and dedicate the Republic of Armenia. Elder Oaks offered a prayer in Yerevan, at a site in view of Mount Ararat (see "Two Republics in USSRAre Dedicated," p. 3).

Recognition of the Church in Kiev

When Colleen and I first arrived in Kiev in 1991, we learned that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was not yet officially registered. Members of the Church had already met in April in the prescribed way to petition the government for official recognition. They had sent this application to the city administration of Kiev with the help of a noted Ukrainian lawyer and jurist, Vasily Kisil, who was employed to assist the Church.

In early August 1991, there still was no word from the government on our application. We were already planning for a September visit to Kiev by two Apostles from the headquarters of the Church in Salt Lake City: Elder Boyd K. Packer and Elder Dallin H. Oaks. I was hoping that they might be coming to offer a dedicatory prayer for the Church and a blessing for the people of Ukraine, but I was afraid this might not happen if the Church was not officially recognized by the government before their arrival.

Dr. Kisil assured me that everything possible was being done to secure official registration, yet he had been unsuccessful in obtaining any answer to the application. Colleen and I, with our zone leader, Elder Stratov, then went to the Lord with the prayer that somehow the Church's petition to the government might receive a positive response before the arrival of the Brethren on 11 September.

The next day was fast Sunday in Kiev, and one of the curious visitors who attended Church services was a man who introduced himself to me as Viktor Cherinko, a deputy of the City Soviet (the legislative assembly for Kiev). As a legislator, he chaired important legislative committees in the fields of economic development and environmental protection.

Mr. Cherinko had heard of the Mormons and had a favorable opinion of the Church, welcoming us as a positive new element in the Kiev community. I explained to him our desire for the city government to act quickly on our application for official registration. He promised to help.

After the August political coup had failed, Mr. Cherinko introduced directly into the assembly a bill to officially register "The Kiev Community of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." This bill was passed by the City Soviet at midnight on 9 September 1991, two days before the arrival of Elder Packer, Elder Oaks, and Elder Dennis B. Neuenschwander, who as a member of the Seventy was serving as second counselor in the Europe Area Presidency.

The Dedication Site

On 10 September, Colleen and I prayerfully visited a number of parks and inspirational view points in Kiev. In case Elder Packer was coming to dedicate Ukraine, and just in case we might be asked to suggest a site, I wanted to be prepared with one or more proposals.

We walked up the trail through the forest to the statue of Prince Vladimir ("Volodymyr" in Ukrainian) on a beautiful vantage point high above the Dnieper River and the central part of Kiev. We had looked at several other places, but both of us instantly felt a wonderful feeling that, if asked, we would recommend this site. If we were not asked for a suggestion, however, we would say nothing.

Vladimir was the Grand Prince of Kiev who was converted to Christianity and then oversaw the baptism of the inhabitants of the whole city in the Dnieper River in 988. This was the official beginning of the reception of Christianity by the ancestors of the Russian, Ukrainian, and Belarussian people.

The huge statue depicts Vladimir in the attitude of prayer, his eyes upward as he holds aloft a cross. It is a very peaceful, beautiful, and spiritual spot. The statue was erected in the middle of the nineteenth century, and I am unaware of any other public religious statues, apart from those in churches, that survived the seventy-year rule of Communism. Somehow this one did.

The Dedication of Ukraine

The Brethren arrived on 11 September, and I reported to them the successful registration of the Church. Elder Packer declared that he had received the assignment from the First Presidency to offer a dedicatory prayer and asked if we would like to show him some possible spots where it might be done. The first place we took the Brethren was to the Vladimir statue, and Elder Packer immediately declared that it was the right place.

At 6:00 a.m. on 12 September 1991, twenty missionaries serving in Kiev, about twenty members of the Church, Colleen, and I accompanied Elders Packer, Oaks, and Neuenschwander to the Vladimir statue.

Some of the members were confused about the location and started down a walk toward another park, not far from the correct spot. A total stranger stopped them, saying: "You are going the wrong way. The Mormon gathering is at the Vladimir statue." This seemed strange because we did not publicly announce the dedication. Those invited had been instructed to keep the meeting private.

I was asked to conduct this historic service, which commenced about 7:00 a.m. with the singing of the hymn "Joseph Smith's First Prayer" (Hymns, no. 26), followed by an opening prayer offered by branch president Valery Stavichenko. Elder Oaks and Elder Neuenschwander spoke briefly; then Elder Packer delivered the dedicatory prayer.

Elder Packer's prophetic blessing included the poetic words of an earlier latter-day Apostle, Parley P. Pratt:

The morning breaks, the shadows flee; Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day, The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world.

The clouds of error disappear Before the rays of truth divine; The glory bursting from afar, The glory bursting from afar Wide o'er the nations soon will shine.

The Gentile fulness now comes in, And Israel's blessings are at hand. Lo, Judah's remnant, cleansed from sin, Lo, Judah's remnant, cleansed from sin, Shall in their promised Canaan stand.

Jehovah speaks! Let earth give ear, And Gentile nations turn and live. His mighty arm is making bare, His mighty arm is making bare His cov'nant people to receive.

Angels from heav'n and truth from earth Have met, and both have record borne; Thus Zion's light is bursting forth, Thus Zion's light is bursting forth To bring her ransomed children home.

—"The Morning Breaks," Hymns, no. 1

It was a gray, cloudy morning with intermittent showers. As Elder Packer's prophetic dedicatory prayer came to an end, however, members of the assembled group opened their eyes to see a brief parting of the heavy black clouds. Rays of the early-morning sun were shining magnificently on the river and on the city below, as if to proclaim: "The morning breaks on Ukraine; the shadows flee. Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled in this ancient land!" Then, after a moment, the sun was gone and heavy clouds and showers remained throughout the day.

It was also deeply symbolic that the Apostles witnessed workmen on "Independence Square" start to remove the giant statue of Lenin on that same day, 12 September. Elder Packer commented that Prince Vladimir had removed the ancient idol of Perun from Kiev at the time that Christianity was received, and the removal of the modern idol of Lenin signified that the people were ready to receive the fulness of the gospel.

That evening Elders Packer, Oaks, and Neuenschwander spoke to a capacity crowd at the five-hundred-seat auditorium of the Hall of Artists on Lvov Square. Almost all of the seventy-five members of the Church in Kiev were in attendance, and many of the four hundred nonmembers present were visibly touched by the Spirit.

Many who were there that night for the first time were baptized in the coming weeks and months. The dedication of the Republic of Ukraine and the testimony of living Apostles of Jesus Christ were the beginning point of an amazing spiritual harvest.

Beginning and Registration in Other Ukrainian Cities

In November 1991, I was given the assignment to visit several cities in Ukraine, southern Russia, and Moldova in order to investigate living conditions and the people's receptivity toward our missionaries. Elder Ivan Stratov accompanied me on the visit to four eastern Ukrainian cities and four cities of the Russian North Caucasus during the last week of November and first nine days of December. Elder Brian Bradbury accompanied me on a visit to Kishinev, Moldova, and several cities of southern Ukraine and the Crimea at the end of December and early January 1992.

We were hospitably received by both public officials and ordinary citizens in most of the cities we visited, but especially in Donetsk and Kharkov. On the night of 26 November in Donetsk, I dreamed of a future stake of Zion in that city and a Latter-day Saint meetinghouse on a beautiful green site. I also dreamed that Ricks College would perform some kind of significant mission in Donetsk.

Elder Stratov and I also visited Rostov-on-the-Don, Krasnodar, Sochi, and Novorossisk in the Russian North Caucasus and had a strong positive feeling about the future missionary potential of that area. These cities would compose the future Russia Rostov Mission on 1 July 1994.

In March 1992, we received approval for missionaries to go to Donetsk. On Wednesday morning, 18 March, four missionaries arrived by train in this hub city of the Donbas Coal Basin. Leading the group of four was Elder Gregory Christiansen; the others included Elders Robin Curtis, Gregory Rossiter, and Rory Allen. They immediately met with and were welcomed by local government officials, including the State Council for Religious Affairs, establishing a cordial relationship.

The missionaries found a number of their early converts in Donetsk among members of the world-famous Donbas Ukrainian Dancers and Choir, who had performed at Ricks College and had lived in the homes of Latter-day Saints in Rexburg, Idaho. They had also hosted their former Rexburg hosts in Donetsk during 1990 and as a result had received copies of the Book of Mormon, tracts, and LDS pictures. They were ready to receive the missionaries with open arms.

By November there was a sizable congregation of Latter-day Saints with local leaders who applied for formal registration of the Church in Donetsk. A branch in nearby Gorlovka also applied for registration at the same time. In May 1993, official registration of the Church in Donetsk and Gorlovka was approved. By this time there were four branches in Donetsk, with local officers directing all activities, and branches were functioning in nearby Makayevka as well as in Gorlovka.

The leadership of the Donetsk city government offered the Church a beautiful site for a future chapel to be erected. The Church accepted the offer. In the fall of 1993, Ricks College professors Robert Schwartz and Robert Markham, along with their families, accepted the college's invitation to donate a year of teaching English and religion at a new private university in Donetsk. This initiative generated a tremendous spirit of goodwill for the Church in Donetsk.

Elder Christopher Carpenter was called to lead a group of four elders to open Kharkov (the second largest city in Ukraine) at the end of September 1992. The others chosen were Elders Russell van der Werf, Edward Quinlan, and Kendall Simpson. The missionaries found that a number of people were already spiritually prepared, and the Church grew rapidly in that city. By 1 July 1993, there were seven local branches in Kharkov, which were assigned to the new Ukraine Donetsk Mission. Official registration of the Church in Kharkov was not granted until after the division of the mission.

On Saturday, 8 May 1993, twelve missionaries departed to open three additional Ukrainian cities: Odessa, Dnepropetrovsk, and Simferopol. Elder John Lunt led the missionaries of the Odessa group, which included Elders Gordon Roylance, Ryan Gibby, and Curtis Bingham. Elder Christopher Carpenter led the Dnepropetrovsk group, which included Elders Russell van der Werf, Timothy Lunt, and Cory Clegg. Elder Richard Davis led the Simferopol group, which included Elders Thomas Wright, Brandon Arrington, and Jesus Condori (of Peru).

In all three cities there were a number of people already spiritually prepared to receive the restored gospel, as had been the case in Donetsk and Kharkov. For example, eleven accepted the commitment to be baptized in Odessa during the missionaries' first week there. In Simferopol a university professor of theology had finished reading the Book of Mormon—and had been converted by it—just a few days before the elders arrived.

The Church in Odessa grew rapidly during 1993 and 1994 and achieved official registration in December 1993. The Church in Simferopol also steadily developed, receiving official registration by the government of Crimea in November 1993. In Dnepropetrovsk there were also many converts. Six weeks after the opening, however, the missionaries in this city were assigned to the jurisdiction of the new Ukraine Donetsk Mission.

After appealing the denial of registration in Kharkov, the Church was finally officially registered there in February 1994. With the Church registered in Kiev, Donetsk, Kharkov, Odessa, Simferopol, and Gorlovka, and pending applications in Dnepropetrovsk and Makayevka, the Latter-day Saints were entitled to apply for the registration of a national center for the Church, which was officially proposed to the government of Ukraine on 6 April 1994.

Anatoly and the Beginning in Belarus

The story of the beginning of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Belarus is a classic example of how the Lord prepares key people in advance to help establish the gospel in new lands.

In January 1993, I received word that the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve had authorized Elder Karl Borcherding of Hanover, Germany, and his wife, Hanna, to go to Minsk, Belarus, to help prepare that country for the opening of the restored gospel in the Republic of Belarus. I was assigned to take them to Minsk and to help them become well established there.

Elder and Sister Borcherding did not speak Russian or Belarussian and had never lived in Russia or Belarus. I had never visited Minsk and had no contacts there (or so I thought). They would be arriving 20 January 1993, the coldest period of the winter there.

How shall I get them established in Minsk, given such circumstances? I wondered. Then I remembered Anatoly. Anatoly had been writing to me from Minsk for more than a year. He was a convert to a Protestant evangelical group from the United States and believed he had been saved. Yet he was very curious about the Book of Mormon and the Latter-day Saints. A graduate of the Institute of Foreign Languages in Minsk, he worked in the travel industry.

Although I had a missionary who handled referrals, for some reason I had decided to deal with this one myself. I sent Anatoly a copy of the Book of Mormon and other literature. He read them carefully and asked many deep questions by return letters. One time it took me nine single-spaced, typed pages to answer all of his questions adequately.

I kept wondering why I was spending time personally on this case when there were so many other things demanding my efforts. Besides, I reasoned, he still believes he is a saved evangelical and lives where there are no missionaries serving. But a feeling inside of me kept telling me that it was important for me to continue this personal relationship. In the course of time we established close ties.

While pondering how to help the Borcherdings become established in Minsk, I suddenly remembered Anatoly. I telephoned him and asked if he would meet us on 20 January and help us look for an apartment for them. He was very willing to help and succeeded in locating a lovely apartment.

He did not speak German, and Elder Borcherding did not speak Russian, but they both spoke good English, so they could communicate effectively. Anatoly took the Borcherdings shopping regularly, acquainted them with the city transportation system, and introduced them to many friends. He also arranged visas. Every day he went out with Elder Borcherding to meet people—ordinary people on the street as well as prominent government officials—thus becoming his translator and indispensable helper. Through this means more than thirty people became interested in hearing about the Church during a period of thirty days. These people would later be taught by members of the Church fluent in Russian.

Anatoly was severely chastised by his local evangelical church for helping the Mormons. Western evangelists were paying his livelihood for helping them and threatened to fire him if he did not stop helping the Mormons. Anatoly prayed about it and received a remarkable spiritual impression from the Lord to continue to help the Mormons, even if his own church cut off his salary and membership. For this decision he was fired by the evangelists and disciplined by his church.

In early March 1993, Elder Matt Ericson, accompanied by Elders Cody Hill, Daniel Reneau, and Lyubomir Traikov (from Bulgaria), arrived in Minsk. They were there to conduct a humanitarian project but were brought into contact with many people interested in hearing about the LDS Church, including those whom the Borcherdings and Anatoly had met.

Two of the early converts became presidents of the first two branches in Minsk: Yuri, a lawyer, and Mikhail, an architect. Anatoly made the decision to be baptized in the fall and was ordained an elder in the summer of 1994. His wife, Alla, and two children were not yet ready for such a step.

The Apostolic Dedication of Belarus

On 10 May 1993, Colleen and I met Elder Russell M. Nelson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles; his wife, Dantzel; Elder Hans B. Ringger of the Seventy, president of the Europe Area; and his wife, Helen, at Minsk International Airport. That evening, at a public meeting in Minsk, Elder Nelson, Elder Ringger, and I spoke to a group of more than 450 people about the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

Elder Nelson closed his powerful sermon with an apostolic testimony of Jesus Christ, delivered with perfect pronunciation in the Russian tongue.

At the close of the meeting, many people surrounded us and asked questions for an additional hour. More than two hundred people left us their names and addresses, requesting to hear more about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Early the next day, 11 May 1993, on a beautiful, clear spring morning, Elder and Sister Nelson, Elder and Sister Ringger, Colleen and I, two couples from Kiev, and twelve others from Minsk (including the Borcherdings and Brother Anatoly) met at Yanka Kupala Park in the center of the capital city of Minsk for an apostolic blessing of dedication for Belarus.

Elder Nelson found the spot under some beautiful trees behind the museum, not far from the river. A large rock formed the center place for the service, and we gathered around it. At 7:00 a.m. these twenty-two people were alone in this beautiful park, except for the birds that were singing. Elder Nelson declared that the symbol of the birds' singing was important and was something Apostles listened for in choosing a place of dedication.

The service commenced at 7:15 a.m. with Elder Ringger giving some introductory remarks, after which I was asked to offer the invocation. Then Elder Nelson offered the dedicatory prayer. The Church News of June 12, 1993, reported the following:

In the prayer of dedication, Elder Nelson prayed: "May this be the dawning of a new day. May this be a hinge-point in history, that the full potential of this country and its heroic people may be realized."

He expressed gratitude for those who have been searching for truth and happiness, and prayed there might be "a rich harvest of souls" who can come unto Christ. Further in the prayer he said: "This land is rich with the blood of Israel. Let that choice lineage be gathered here and find refuge and strength in stakes of Zion. As thy children learn and obey thy commandments, let them prosper in this land."

He invoked blessings upon the nation's leaders, on their righteous endeavors, and upon the country as a haven of peace, a sanctuary of faith. ("Four European Nations Dedicated," p. 6)

As in Ukraine after Elder Packer's prayer of dedication, Elder Nelson's inspired prayer of dedication and apostolic testimony in the public meeting brought the dawn of a rapid development of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Minsk. Many who had attended the public meeting were baptized into the Church. A number of these shared their new faith with family members and friends. Soon there were four branches led by local leaders in Minsk.

Colleen composed the following poem in her personal journal to remember this significant occasion:

Song of Dedication

Yes, the birds were singing On the morn of that day! God provided a choir In that land far away. A symbol of gladness, Yea, the heavens rejoice! Lost children of Israel Have been granted free choice. Now the gospel is preached, Because One "turned the key." Belarus, thou art blessed, So the birds sang for thee.

—Colleen C. Biddulph, 12 May 1994

In mid-January 1994 the government of Belarus offi-cially registered the Church in Minsk. Elder Dennis B. Neuenschwander and I, together with branch presidents Ustin and Komarov, were interviewed for "prime time" Belarussian television on the day of official registration. We were able to introduce 10.5 million Belarussian viewers to the restored gospel. Even the colored illustrations in the Book of Mormon were shown by the television camera. Ironically, it was on the exact day of the terrible Los Angeles earthquake, 17 January 1994, that this bright new day dawned for the Church and gospel of Jesus Christ in Belarus.
