Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Chapter 7

"Hear Heaven's Voice"

"Hark, all ye nations! Hear heaven's voice Thru ev'ry land that all may rejoice!"

—Hymns, no. 264

Natasha and Valery were completing their postgraduate university education in Moscow. Natasha was finishing her candidate of sciences degree (Ph.D.) in preparation for her goal to become a professor of Russian and Ukrainian languages. Her husband, Valery, in preparation for the Soviet diplomatic service, was completing a similar advanced degree at the prestigious Institute of International Relations of the USSR Council of Ministers. He was preparing to become a professional economist specializing on Vietnam and Southeast Asia.

As recounted in chapter two, Natasha and Valery were among those members of the Soviet intelligentsia who began a serious search for religious values in the latter 1980s. In Moscow, Natasha was invited to attend meetings at a small branch of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. She attended once or twice and looked briefly at the Book of Mormon, but she was too involved in her academic work to undertake a serious investigation of the Church.

When her candidate of sciences degree was completed, Natasha was invited by a friend and academic colleague to go to Kiev, where there were university teaching opportu-nities available. Valery, who had already given up his objective of a diplomatic career because the very existence of the Soviet Union was in serious question, accepted work with an international private firm in Kiev. So it was that this Ukrainian couple moved to Kiev with their son, Stanislaus.

When they arrived in Kiev, Natasha learned with surprise that her longtime friend and colleague, Galina, had become a Latter-day Saint. Galina and her colleague Viktoria, a professor at Kiev University, had been invited to teach language to the Kiev missionaries each week on their preparation day. Natasha was one of the instructors whom Galina and Viktoria chose to help them teach the missionaries.

Natasha helped a group of missionaries improve their Russian conversation skills and their oral presentation of the six standard gospel discussions. In this teaching process, the missionaries helped her to understand the basic gospel principles being discussed.

Natasha and Valery Accept the Gospel

The missionaries made a deep impact on Natasha. She had never met such wonderful, spiritual young men and women. She also learned to understand more clearly the basic principles of the teachings of the Church. When one of the missionaries, Elder Matt Ericson, invited her and Valery to hear the gospel discussions, she readily accepted. She read the Book of Mormon in Russian, and Valery read it in English. Both were deeply impressed by the Spirit and received testimonies of the gospel.

Valery, Natasha, and Stanislaus were baptized in February 1992. Valery became an elder later that year, and the entire family was sealed together for eternity in the Jordan River Temple in Utah during a visit to Salt Lake City in 1993.

Valery would become a translator and interpreter for the Church, especially during General Authority visits of Apostles and members of the Seventy. He was also a secretary to the mission presidency in Kiev. In January 1994, he was appointed to the International Physical Facilities Department of the Church in the Moscow office, overseeing projects in European Russia, Siberia, Ukraine, and Belarus.

Natasha served as the mission's Young Women president, organizing the youth program throughout the fifteen branches in Kiev, as well as the first all-Ukraine youth conference for 375 participants from four cities in 1993. Returning with Valery to Moscow in 1994, she became a university professor of Russian in Moscow. Valery and Natasha were invited by Church leaders to translate all of the temple ordinances into Ukrainian, a project they completed in visits to Salt Lake City during 1993 and 1994.

Slava and Zoya Find Their Spiritual Home

Vyacheslav (Slava) is a prominent Ukrainian nuclear physicist who is a department head of a prestigious nuclear physics institute of the Ukrainian government in Kiev. His wife, Zoya, is a teacher of English at a school attended by children of Ukrainian government leaders. She is also an outstanding translator.

Like many other members of the intelligentsia, Slava and Zoya experienced the spiritual crisis accompanying the collapse of Communism in the Soviet Union and the search for new religious values. Since they are Jews by nationality, it was logical for them to begin their search by going back to the synagogues of Judaism and to the Holy Torah. As described in chapter two, their journey of spiritual discovery went from Judaism to Baha'i to Protestant evangelical Christianity, and on to Catholicism. They did not feel at home spiritually in any of those religions.

The three-year search of Slava and Zoya for their spiritual home came to glorious fruition in the fall and early winter of 1991, in quite an unexpected way. The special English language program in which Zoya taught had a "Club of International Friendship," which corresponded with children from many countries of the world.

When she became club director, Zoya noticed an unanswered letter in the files from a school in Riverton, Utah, which was dated two years earlier. She decided to answer this letter. This led to a correspondence between students in Kiev and Riverton.

One of the girls from Riverton, Utah, sent a copy of a pamphlet on Joseph Smith and the Church to her Kiev pen pal. This girl took the pamphlet to Zoya, who took it home to show her husband, Slava, and their daughter, Kira. They had never heard of Mormons and found the pamphlet very interesting.

Then one evening in October 1991, after Slava had completed his scientific work for the day, Zoya and he were returning home when they noticed a small handmade announce-ment on a bridge near their home. The notice invited the public to meetings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on Sunday at 11:00 a.m. The address was of a drama theater very close to their home. Zoya remembered the pamphlet from Utah and persuaded Slava to go with her to meetings the following Sunday.

The Kiev Left Bank Branch was just newly organized, having first been part of the Kiev Central Branch. In the intermission after sacrament service, Slava and Zoya decided to leave, but a young missionary introduced himself and asked if he and his companion might come to their home to tell them more about the Church. Slava writes: "To refuse would have been embarrassing to us, especially when we considered how Elder [John] Lunt looked at us with such warm, friendly eyes, which radiated such love and desire to help us."

Elder Lunt and Elder Brian Bradbury visited the home of Slava and Zoya a day or two later. Slava writes:

The first discussion did not make a strong impression upon us, but we decided to continue meeting with the missionaries and to attend church. The more we attended church and listened to the lessons of our missionaries, the closer we came to God, and imperceptibly the love of Christ began to fill our hearts, but we still were not ready to accept the invitation to become members of the Church.

The missionaries counseled us to come to the swimming pool and see how the ordinance of baptism is conducted. And when we observed the baptism, then I suddenly knew perfectly and precisely that we would be baptized, that this Church is true—that this is our Church, that God desired this of us, and that we ought to fulfill his will.

On December 8, 1991, my wife and I were baptized, and in February our daughter was baptized. Finally we had found happiness; our lives had changed; the goal and desire was revealed to us to follow the single, true path which the Savior has shown us.

Slava was to play a major leadership role in the Church in Kiev. First a branch president, Slava Gulko became president of the new Left Bank District in February 1993, which oversees all of the branches in that region of Kiev. The hope of Slava's Jewish grandfather, seventy years ago, that his descendant would be a spiritual leader to the people of Kiev had been fulfilled.

Slava, Zoya, and Kira Gulko were sealed for eternity in the Freiberg Germany Temple in 1993 when they led the travel group of Saints to the temple. They also led several other travel groups of Latter-day Saints to the Freiberg temple during 1993 and 1994.

Zoya Translates the Book of Mormon

Zoya Gulko was baptized at the time we were searching for a member of the Church who would have the unusual skills necessary to translate the Book of Mormon into the Ukrainian language. At that time, that book of scripture was available only in Russian.

Elder Steven Struk, director of the translation project in Kiev, and I were praying that one possessing such gifts would come into the Church, because we had learned that nonmembers would not be considered by the Translation Department in Salt Lake City.

Zoya was baptized just at this time. She was interviewed and tested and found to be a truly outstanding candidate for this assignment.

The translation of the Book of Mormon into a new language normally takes a number of years to complete. Zoya was blessed with an unusual spiritual gift to complete the initial manuscript of the Ukrainian translation in nineteen months, an unbelievable feat considering that she was required also to continue her full-time job as a teacher of English at the special school to financially support her family during the difficult period of economic hyperinflation. She also served as a district Young Women president in Kiev.

Zoya has related sacred experiences that came to her during the process of translation late into the night. She experienced the power of revelation and the gift of tongues in which words came to her in a spiritual stream, beyond her previous understanding and ability. Her testimony of the Book of Mormon as a holy scripture of God has become profoundly strong.

It is interesting to observe that in a society in which Jews have had a tragic history, the Lord chose a son and a daughter of Judah to help lay the foundations of the Church of Jesus Christ and provide his marvelous spiritual blessings for the people of Ukraine.

Leonid Finds "Something Beautiful"

The search of Leonid, who as the son of leading figures in the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences sought for an alternative path to the atheism of his upbringing, was also discussed in chapter two. His search had taken him through Eastern medicine, philosophies, and religions. In his search he says that he felt "an expectation of something beautiful" that would happen in his life.

One Sunday morning Leonid was strolling with his children when Elders John Lunt and Richard Davis, assistants to the mission president, were walking swiftly past him on their way to a meeting. Leonid describes what happened next: "Suddenly one of them turned back and came up to us. We talked to these young men. I will always thank God for this first fleeting meeting on the street with these beautiful men. They were in a hurry, but felt impressed to stop.

"They opened up to me the world of the Bible and the Book of Mormon. They helped me find faith, answered my questions, brought to me that beautiful something for which I had been searching and waiting."

Brother Leonid became an outstanding Gospel Doctrine teacher in Kiev. Then he served as a branch president. He was among the group of leaders chosen to go to Salt Lake City to complete the preparation of the Ukrainian translation tape for temple ordinances in November 1994. In the temple in Salt Lake City, he found the pinnacle of spiritual experience for which he had hungered all his life.

Sergei's Search for Modern Prophets

Sergei is a senior engineer in a major state enterprise in Kiev. As recounted earlier, he had often meditated about the Bible, asking himself and others: "If the Bible is true, why are there no prophets today? Why are there no miracles and revelations in our time? Has God's attitude changed toward us?" No one could give him satisfactory answers to these questions.

One day Sergei met two young Latter-day Saint missionaries on the street. They asked him about his beliefs concerning religion, and he repeated the questions that had concerned him for many years.

The missionaries assured him that God is the same today as he was in ancient times and that there are prophets, revelation, and miracles in our day. As evidence for their claim, they introduced him to the Book of Mormon. Sergei made an appointment with them for his family to hear more in their apartment and to receive a copy of the Book of Mormon.

After telling his wife about the appointment, Sergei had second thoughts about meeting with the elders. The word Mormon seemed like a very "foreign and frightful word," a feeling of "something dangerous," as he describes it. They looked up this strange word in an encyclopedia and read the very negative Communist presentation of Mormons and polygamy. At first they decided to cancel the appointment, but as they continued to think about it, a feeling of comfort came over them, assuring them that all would be well.

Sergei has written about meeting with the missionaries: "Our meetings became regular. We learned about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, about Joseph Smith, the Prophet, about the Book of Mormon. We learned about the plan of salvation of our Lord Jesus Christ and other important information. At that time I made a choice. I came to believe in God and in his Son Jesus Christ, and his great sacrifice for me."

Together with his wife and children, Sergei read the Book of Mormon:

I received a testimony that the Book of Mormon is true through the witness of the Holy Ghost, which feeling is described by the Apostle Paul in Galatians 5:22: "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace." I felt that love, joy, peace as I read and prayed about the Book of Mormon. I accepted the Book of Mormon as scripture very quickly.

As I read and studied, I understood that our Heavenly Father had forgiven my sins through the sacrifice of his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ. He accepted my repentance. He chose me and led me to the true church. Thanks to God, I have the full restored gospel. I know that my Heavenly Father loves me and blesses my family. At first I only believed that. Now I am sure that it is true. This assurance has changed my entire life.

Our family was baptized on the 4th of July, 1993. I am happy that my wife and my children believe in God with me. I know that this is also a blessing of our Heavenly Father. Our life became joyful and full of peace, spiritual and purposeful. I see how much we have changed.

Sergei was called as an elders quorum president in Kiev, and he later became branch president and then a counselor in the district presidency. Sergei Mutilin and his entire family were sealed together for eternity in the Freiberg Germany Temple in 1994.

Dmitry the Believer Finds a Book

A few days before Elders Richard Davis, Thomas Wright, Brandon Arrington, and Jesus Condori arrived to open a new city, an unusual event occurred. A professor at the state university named Dmitry discovered a strange book in a bookstore entitled Kniga mormona (the Book of Mormon in Russian).

A Russian born in Siberia, Dmitry was converted to Christianity while serving in the Soviet Red Army, where he read the New Testament. After completing military service, he attended the Russian Orthodox Seminary, where he was a brilliant student. Dmitry was unable to accept some of the doctrines and practices of the Russian Orthodox Church, so he was not ordained. As an unordained religious activist, he was arrested and spent three years in terrible prison camps.

After his release, Dmitry found opportunity during the more liberal Gorbachev era to teach a course at the university titled "The Bible As Literature," which was in actuality a course on biblical theology and religious philosophy. Since he was both a brilliant teacher and a believer, the principal churches in that area sent priests and ministers to be trained by him, in the absence of a theological seminary.

Then came the day in May when Dmitry discovered the Russian copy of the Book of Mormon in a local bookstore. Its impact upon him was somewhat like the experience of Parley P. Pratt. Dmitry read the book nonstop, and when he finished, he felt a deep conviction that he had indeed discovered "another testament of Jesus Christ."

A few days later he met Elder Wright and Elder Condori on the street, almost immediately after their arrival in the large city.

Dmitry suffered persecution for his conversion to the restored gospel. He was banned from teaching priests of the Russian Orthodox Church and also banned from entering any of its church buildings or facilities. The Orthodox bishop attempted to get the university rector to fire Dmitry because he had become a Latter-day Saint. Twice he was attacked by young thugs on the street, who beat him into unconsciousness and took his belongings.

Dmitry became the first branch president of the Church in his city and remains a devoted spiritual leader and teacher in the Church. Although living in great poverty, he is positive, loving, and full of faith in God.

Pyotr Finds the Latter-Day Church

Pyotr, the self-proclaimed "Mormon" physician in Minsk, Belarus, was discussed in chapter two. Pyotr's father had been taught the gospel and baptized a Latter-day Saint by an American serviceman in Western Europe during World War II. He taught his son, Pyotr, about Mormonism from a small notebook he brought back with him. All of his life, Pyotr had hungered to read the Book of Mormon and join the Church. Although he attended the Baptist Church in Minsk, Pyotr told everyone who knew him that he was a Mormon.

The advertising of Elder Russell M. Nelson's visit and of his public address in Minsk brought Pyotr into contact with visiting representatives of the Church. His first contacts and teachers were Elders James Udy and Newell Anthony Brown, who gave him his first copy of the Book of Mormon. A short time later, two humanitarian volunteers from America, Elders Daniel P. Reneau and D. Chalk Simons, taught Pyotr.

Elder Reneau remembers that Pyotr had an unusual understanding of the gospel, like that of a lifelong member of the Church. "He taught us the discussions more than we taught him. He studied the Book of Mormon constantly and had a deep understanding of it. He had read the Book of Mormon entirely four times before his baptism." Elder Reneau believes that Pyotr's broad understanding of the gospel could have come to him only through his father's oral teaching, for he possessed no Church literature before meeting the elders.

Pyotr is a faithful, enthusiastic member of the Minsk Central Branch. The Lord has answered his lifelong prayer that he could receive the gospel, read the Book of Mormon, and be baptized a Latter-day Saint. In gratitude to the Lord for this blessing, Pyotr continues to publicly proclaim the gospel and to do everything possible to serve and to minister to others in the Church. This forty-year-old physician has found, at last, the precious "pearl of great price."
