Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Chapter 8

"I Was Led by the Spirit"

"And I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do."

—1 Nephi 4:6

The time-honored method of going from door to door, seeking contacts to teach, was not used in Ukraine and Belarus during the years of our mission. In the beginning we deemed door-to-door "tracting" too invasive of privacy and foreign to the traditions of the country. We knew the Lord had prepared many choice souls to receive the gospel, people whom he would lead to us if we were visible in public places where people talk as they wait to be served and if we were outgoing, friendly, and fearless in following the promptings of his Spirit.

Referrals from members and current investigators were normally a very productive means of finding good contacts, so missionaries were encouraged to use that method. Some converts found the Church through hearing of its meetings and deciding to attend. The predominant means of locating new religious seekers, however, was street contacting using the model of 1 Nephi 4:6: "And I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do."

Whenever they were not teaching investigators, working with members, or serving in other vital and meaningful ways, missionaries were expected to go out to public places where people gathered, such as a marketplace, a bus stop, or on the crowded tram or metro. At such times they were to let the Spirit guide them as they conversed with people in a friendly, nonaggressive manner. Over and over we proved the truth of the Lord's promise: "Yea, open your mouths and spare not, and you shall be laden with sheaves upon your backs, for lo, I am with you" (D&C 33:9).

Misha's Miracle

One day at a public square, Elder Cody Hill and Elder Daniel Reneau met a man who invited them to come to his home for a religious discussion. He said his name was Misha (a nickname for Mikhail) and gave them his telephone number rather than address, asking them to call before coming. The telephone number he gave to them turned out to be that of someone else whose name was also Misha (Mikhail). This second Misha had been earnestly praying for spiritual guidance. He has written an account of his conversion experience:

In April 1993, we received a phone call in our apartment. I picked up the phone and a young man with a foreign accent began speaking. He said that he was from America, from the Mormon Church, and wanted to arrange a meeting to talk about God. He also said that we had met on a square which is near our home, and that I had given my telephone number to him.

I was very surprised because, actually, I had never met him and have never given out my telephone number to a stranger. Nevertheless, I invited him to come to our home the following evening, for I was seeking religious truth. [The phone call was on Sunday, April 25, 1993].

On Monday at the appointed time, two polite young men in white shirts and ties (Elder Hill and Elder Reneau) came to our home. The elders had recently met a young couple in our area, and we were all surprised to find that the husband, whose name was Misha, had given them his telephone number which turned out to be ours. Then I remembered that I had earnestly prayed and asked God to help me in my spiritual condition, which was very difficult. Could this be a miraculous answer to my prayer?

The elders talked with us and opened our understanding to many new truths about God and Jesus Christ. We found out about the Book of Mormon. My wife, Lena, before this time did not believe in God, just as I had once not believed. Thanks to these truths and the presence of the Holy Ghost (that I know for sure now), my wife gradually gained faith in our Father in Heaven. We were also greatly impressed by the spiritual character of the elders. On May 16, 1993, I, my wife Lena, and my older daughter Nastia were baptized. (My younger daughter wanted very badly to be baptized, but was only five years old.) That day will forever be remembered. We are so grateful to the Lord for answering my prayers and for bringing us into His Church.

Misha is now a Church leader in his city. He and his wife and their two children have since traveled to Freiberg, Germany, to receive their eternal temple blessings as a family.

Found Twice by the Spirit

Elder Matt Ericson and his companion were fasting and praying that they might be able to fulfill an assignment from their mission president to find and baptize a man suited to be the president of a new branch that would soon be formed in their area. One day they met Sergei for the first time at a bus stop. Returning from a long camping trip, Sergei was unshaven, dirty, and dressed in old clothing. His physical appearance might have deterred the missionaries from making his acquaintance, but Elder Ericson felt a strong impression to approach him and to discuss the restored gospel. Sergei gave the elders his address and invited them to visit him the next day.

Later the elders realized that the address Sergei had given them was incomplete. Unable to locate him, they reluctantly went on with their other work. Sergei waited in vain for the elders to come. He was disappointed that they had missed the appointment. When he realized that he may have given them an incorrect or incomplete address, Sergei felt a strange urgency to search for the two strangers. It seemed unlikely that in a city of several million people he could find them again, but he spent several hours trying.

Several days later the missionaries passed the same bus stop again and were frantically hailed by a well-groomed, impressive looking man who appeared to know them. He introduced himself as Sergei, the man with whom they had made the previous appointment. Given Sergei's recent haircut and shave and the fact that he was suitably dressed for his profession as an executive, the missionaries never would have recognized him.

The missionaries met with Sergei, his wife, Valya, who is a professional teacher and linguist, and their children. Soon all were baptized. Two months later Sergei was called to preside over a branch being organized in that part of the city. Valya became an outstanding seminary teacher and translator of curriculum materials for the Church.

Sergei felt a persistent impression to invite his brother, Alexei, along with Alexei's wife and children, to visit him and hear the gospel. Sergei delayed acting on the impression because he was sure Alexei had no interest in religion and also because he lived a great distance away. When Sergei did invite the family for a visit, great blessings resulted: the family accepted the gospel, were all baptized, and became the first Latter-day Saints in their entire area of the country.

Upon being introduced to Alexei, the impression came to me that he, like Sergei, would one day become a fine Church leader. When the city where Sergei's family live was finally opened, Alexei was called to be president of the first branch of the Church organized there. Both brothers and their families have since received their eternal temple blessings.

Elder Ericson and Sergei have often expressed their gratitude to the Lord for bringing them together, not once, but twice, so that an extended, elect family could accept the gospel of Jesus Christ and the Church in Ukraine could receive strong leadership for two cities.

Finding the Wrong Volodya

Elders Richard Davis and Richard Jackson were street contacting one day when they met a man who called himself Volodya. This man invited them to his apartment, gave them an address, and set a date and time to meet them.

Arriving at the apartment, the elders met a woman who they expected was Volodya's wife and told her that he had made an appointment with them. She invited them in, and they waited for Volodya. After a few minutes a neighboring family also joined them.

Then a strange thing happened. When the husband returned, it was evident that he was not the Volodya who had invited them, although his name also was Volodya. Nevertheless, the two families invited them to stay and teach the first missionary discussion. Both families were spiritual seekers and were ultimately baptized. The wrong address turned out to be the right place to find the elect.

The Lord Sends Comfort

Another Volodya lived in a different major Ukrainian city. He was a man of considerable responsibility in his profession, but his world had just collapsed. Volodya had been through the trying experience of watching his beloved wife die of cancer. At the time of her death, he had had no religion in his life. He was devastated, dazed, and confused.

Shortly after his wife's passing, Volodya was walking and sadly pondering what had happened to him when he met two young men, obviously foreigners from America, on a park path. These two young men were Elder Russell van der Werf and his companion, Elder Scott Flake.

The elders warmly greeted Volodya, and then Elder van der Werf was led by the Spirit of discernment to boldly say to him: "The Lord has sent us to find you today, to bring you a message of comfort, peace, and joy."

Volodya was touched to the core of his being and agreed to a gospel discussion on the spot. At the close of this discussion, Elder van der Werf committed him to be baptized. Volodya agreed to be baptized if he could receive the spiritual confirmation that the elders had promised him. After brief reflection, he realized that he had already received a powerful witness of the Spirit as these splendid young men boldly testified to him. He knew they were servants of God sent to help him in this dark night of his soul. He quickly accepted their invitation to baptism.

Within a few months, Volodya was the president of a new branch of the Church. In the process of serving others, Volodya has found the peace and joy that the elders had promised him.

Tatyana Feels the Spirit

Tatyana has described her first meeting with two sister missionaries: "My first missionaries were Sister Melanie Gamble and Sister Angela Cicerone. I can say precisely that I came to the Church because of their eyes. As we met on the street, I beheld in their eyes the greatness of God's love for me. They had a piece of that divine love, and they gave it as a present to me."

Tatyana could not deny the marvelous presence of the Holy Spirit that was with her as she met with the sisters. "It was not the logic of the arguments of the missionaries that affected me, not the plausibility of Joseph Smith's story, but the evident great power of their faith which permeated every word they spoke, even the shining look on their faces. The total faith of their very being testified to me that their message was true. I felt a heavenly love radiating from them to God and to me."

Life had not been easy for Tatyana, but she felt the assurance that God had led the sister missionaries to her. After her baptism, Tatyana served many others with the same love she discerned in the missionaries.

Tamara Finds Her Redeemer

Tamara is a grandmother who, like many others in the older generation, has experienced almost indescribable suffering in her life. At a moment of great despair, the Lord brought her the gift of his wonderful gospel as two missionaries were led by the Spirit to contact her in the Kiev metro. I will let her tell the story:

I always felt all alone in the world, although I had relatives, friends, and family. I turned my thoughts to God in many times of want and despair. It seemed to me that the forces of evil were all around me. I worried about my daughter, granddaughter, mother, sisters, and brothers. Their suffering tormented me.

I prayed, asking God to save my family, my relatives, and friends. There were many serious problems: economic, medical, and spiritual. Then came that wonderful day when I met the missionaries in the metro [subway]. There I met my dear Elder [Brian] Jarman and Elder [Benjamin] Lutes. I invited them to my home.

Their visit was like a beam of light in the darkness. It was the light of the gospel. I tried very hard to understand what my Heavenly Father was telling me through these dear servants of God. I learned for the first time that I have a Redeemer, a Savior—Jesus Christ.

My dear teachers described to me how our Savior suffered, how he redeemed the sins of us all. I wept as I contemplated his sufferings. The sufferings of my life seemed no longer significant in comparison with the sufferings of our Savior for me. I rejoiced in his love for me and that he knows what I have gone through in my life.

The missionaries helped me find God, our Heavenly Father, in prayer. Now I feel him and his Only Begotten Son always near me. I know he answers my prayers for my family, my friends, and my missionaries who baptized me and my granddaughter on September 5, 1992.

I obtained hope and joy—the hope to be with my Heavenly Father forever. I try to keep all his commandments. Every day I pray for him to give me wisdom, patience, and love. He has blessed me greatly—temporally and spiritually. I ask him to give me the strength to endure to the end.

A Family's Simultaneous Conversion in Two Cities

One day in a city of our mission an inebriated man at a bus stop wanted to talk with Elder Anthony Brown. This often happened when drunken men and women saw young elders and sisters, and it was rarely productive, so Elder Brown tried to avoid the man. Still the man persisted, and something prompted Elder Brown to talk with him.

Reluctantly Elder Brown made an appointment to meet the man and his family at their apartment. When the elders arrived, this person was drunk again, but he introduced his family and his wife's sister, who was visiting from Riga, Latvia.

The man was not interested in hearing the gospel, but his wife and family and the visiting aunt quickly accepted the teachings of the Church. Then the aunt explained that she had returned to the city to divorce her husband, who remained in Riga, because of the physical abuse she was suffering from his problem with alcohol.

Her acceptance of the gospel made her reconsider her decision to obtain a divorce. She called her husband in Riga and told him of her desire to be baptized into the LDS Church, and of her desire to return and try to work out the problems of their marriage.

Her husband astounded her by relating that he had met the Mormon elders on the street in Riga after her departure. He had believed their message and read the Book of Mormon. And most astounding of all, he had not had a drink since the start of his discussions with the missionaries in Riga. He had been praying that the Lord would soften her heart to forgive him. She did.

The Lord miraculously reunited this couple by bringing each of them to the missionaries, each simultaneously in separate cities. This couple was baptized together and began a new life of reconciliation.

Red Army Officer Finds the Gospel

Vasily was the Soviet military officer in the general staff in Moscow who bravely defied the orders of the junta during the attempted coup in August 1991 (see chapter five). Vasily was born in 1956 of mixed Russian and Ukrainian peasant parentage in Kazakhstan during the time of Nikita Khrushchev's campaign to open up a new agricultural zone in the virgin lands of that republic. His parents were part of the "Virgin Lands Campaign," which was an attempt to open a whole new agricultural region. His parents were agricultural workers, but they moved back to Ukraine in 1957, where their son grew to manhood and finished high school in the little village of Piryatin.

Vasily was a model member of the Komsomol (the Young Communist League), which was the youth auxiliary of the Communist Party. He was admitted to the Kiev Military Academy in 1973, graduating in 1978. This was an officer training school for the Soviet Red Army. In 1978 he also was admitted to the Communist Party. This was considered an honor as well as a necessary "entrance ticket" to the leadership echelon of the military, as well as to other professions in the Soviet Union.

Vasily married, and two daughters were born to him and his wife, Lidia, in the years that followed: Tatyana in 1977 and Darya in 1979. Lidia graduated from the Kiev Pedagogical Institute of Foreign Languages and was especially accomplished in the English language. Vasily attained a high rank as a military officer and was a specialist in communications in the command center in Moscow at the time of the attempted political coup.

Although he was a member of the Communist Party, Vasily, as well as Lidia, began to feel the same spiritual vacuum that many others were feeling during the 1980s. Vasily explains: "All my life in the totalitarian system has prepared me and my family to accept the gospel. I tried to find out the truth, although I was sure that the USSR was the best country in the world. In 1986-1987, I began to think about God, and I bought a New Testament. I read it, but I could not understand it well. Nevertheless, I understood that it was impossible to do a righteous deed without feeling God's love."

After the coup had failed and the independence of Ukraine had been proclaimed, Vasily and his family returned to Kiev for posting by the new Ukrainian Armed Forces. Vasily and Lidia had already received a letter from Tanya, a friend in Kiev, in which she described her conversion to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Vasily writes: "We remembered a negative hero in one of Conan Doyle's novels, who was a Mormon. The choice of churches of our friend Tanya seemed strange to us."

When Vasily and Lidia and their family returned to Kiev, Tanya invited them to attend church with her. Vasily describes this experience: "When we visited this first meeting, I felt a strong conviction at once that the restored gospel is true. . . . I was surprised to see the open, beautiful faces of the people there. We got acquainted with the missionaries, whose names were Elder (Brian) Jarman and Elder [Benjamin] Lutes. We had two discussions with them. They gave us the Book of Mormon. . . . My wife and I understood that accepting this gospel would be the only way to save our children."

Vasily was assigned to be a commander in the Odessa military district, far from the closest branch of the Church and the missionaries. Vasily writes: "We read and accepted the Book of Mormon and prayed to our Heavenly Father with only one request—that we could have a military assignment in Kiev where we could be taught and could attend church. One week later this prayer was answered, as I was suddenly transferred to the general staff of the military forces of Ukraine in Kiev in the Ministry of Defense."

On November 13 they returned to Kiev and attended the LDS Church. Sister Merinda Hill and Sister Georgianna Standiford completed teaching the gospel discussions to this family, and on 3 January 1993, all four members were baptized.

Vasily was called to be a branch president within a few months. His Young Men and Young Women programs were particularly outstanding, a model for the whole mission. He was then called to major leadership responsibilities at the district and mission levels.

Lidia has served as a youth and women's leader and as a member of the Ukrainian language translation project in Kiev. The children, Tanya and Darya, have been youth leaders.

On 26 April 1994, all four members of Vasily and Lidia's family were sealed in the Freiberg Germany Temple. Vasily organized and led this temple trip, as well as several succeeding temple trips. In September 1994, a third little girl was born under the temple covenant to Vasily and Lidia. After fasting and prayer, Vasily retired from his position in the Ukraine military so that he would be more available to serve the Lord. He was among the leadership group chosen to go to the Salt Lake Temple in November 1994 to help prepare the Ukrainian translation tape for temple ordinances.

Vasily closes his written account of his conversion with these words:

Before my baptism, I thought that the strongest one is always right. I am physically strong, and I had a high position in the Army. I thought that I could stand up for myself. I loved to defend my subordinates from the anger of the head. . . .

The gospel has already changed and constantly changes and improves my life. Moreover, I know that it will be so forever. I must only endure to the end. I pray to my Heavenly Father that he will help me on this way back to him. He always helps me. I have had many life situations when our Heavenly Father helped me specifically. He showed me the way—the right way—after prayer. Through fasting and prayer I have seen seriously ill patients recover and be healed, through the anointing of the priesthood. All my life I have tried to honestly serve my people. Every day I read the scriptures. Through daily prayer and daily scripture study I receive personal inspiration and answers for the decisions I must make in my life.

These are a few of the many experiences I have recorded that show how the Holy Spirit connects those seekers who are ready with the missionaries who are spiritually prepared to teach them the gospel of Jesus Christ. The Lord is the Good Shepherd who knows and gathers his sheep. The scriptures tell us: "And he gathereth his children from the four quarters of the earth; and he numbereth his sheep, and they know him; and there shall be one fold and one shepherd; and he shall feed his sheep, and in him they shall find pasture" (1 Nephi 22:25).

What a beautiful pasture it is.
