Howard L. Biddulph, Morning Breaks: Stories of Conversion and Faith in the Former Soviet Union ( 1996)

Chapter 9

"Mine Angels Shall Go Up before You"

"But I say unto you: Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land"

—D&C 103:19-20

Proclaiming the gospel is a divine call to labor in a vineyard with the Lord and his angels, who are already working there even before the coming of the first missionaries. The Lord has promised us through a modern prophet:

"Therefore, let not your hearts faint, for I say not unto you as I said unto your fathers: Mine angel shall go up before you, but not my presence.

"But I say unto you: Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land" (D&C 103:19-20).

Just as Amulek in Ammonihah was prepared by an angel for the coming of Alma (see Alma 8:16-20; 10:7-10), the Lord in our day often sends his spiritual emissaries beforehand to prepare the way before the coming of his earthly emissaries. This was clearly evident through sacred experiences reported by Latter-day Saints in each of the nine cities we opened for proselyting in Ukraine and Belarus. The Lord was already there ahead of us, preparing the way and specific people for our coming, as the following accounts demonstrate.

Vera's Dream

Vera was one of the early converts in Kiev. Since the time she was a young girl, Vera periodically had a special dream. In the dream she was promised that the true way to God would one day be shown to her and that it would bring her great happiness. At times of great tribulation for her, the dream would come again, assuring her of the Lord's love and the future blessings she would receive if her faith remained strong.

As a young girl during World War II, Vera was separated from her family and held in a work camp in Germany. After the war she was reunited with her mother in Ukraine. In very destitute conditions, Vera nursed her beloved mother until a lingering, painful death of this loved one left Vera alone again.

Vera married, and a daughter was born. Then she cared for her husband in his illness and watched him die, leaving her alone again, this time with a young child to care for. As she grew old, Vera also suffered serious health problems that took her to the brink of death. Yet she was always comforted by the recurring dream that promised a future way of happiness.

Shortly before a very serious operation, in which her life hung in the balance, this aged widow again had her special dream. She was assured that she would survive the operation and be restored to health. Shown the beautiful faces of two fair-haired young men who would soon teach her the true path to God, Vera was promised great happiness and peace if she would accept their message. These were unique, unforgettable faces she saw, unlike any young men she had ever seen in Kiev or Ukraine. She assumed they would be foreigners.

After her recovery, Vera was shopping in downtown Kiev when she recognized with unspeakable joy the faces of two young men dressed in suits and ties—the very faces she had seen in her dream! Like aged Anna in the temple at Jerusalem (see Luke 2:36-38), she had waited throughout her life for the messengers of God.

Elders Aaron Love and Rory Allen were assigned to the area of Kiev where Vera lived, and their own apartment was very close to Vera's home. As a result of meeting them, she received the gospel with joy and was baptized.

In spite of her age, Vera has become a great gospel scholar and a teacher of the Book of Mormon and the Bible. One of my choicest experiences was to attend an Easter Sunday service in her branch and to hear her give one of the truly great sermons I have heard in my lifetime on the Savior Jesus Christ, his suffering and death, his atonement for sin, and his great resurrection. On that sacred occasion, Vera blended movingly the testimonies of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, and Nephi, as well as her own gentle, loving witness of these events.

Vera lived and saved her widow's mite for the time when she could travel with other members of the Church to the temple of God in Freiberg, Germany, to receive her ordinances and to be sealed to her husband and deceased family. Many years before, she had been sent to that area of Germany as a fearful young girl by the German troops that had occupied her country in World War II. Now, with joy, Vera returned to the same area where she had received her first dream of the gospel, this time to partake of all the ordinances of eternal life. She had lived true to her name: Vera, "the woman of faith."

Alla's Dream

Alla lived in the city of Donetsk. She had a dream in which she saw a bridge over a deep chasm. A young man beckoned her to follow him across the bridge to a beautiful land on the other side, where she would reside in the presence of God. She could never forget this sacred dream that was unlike any dream she had ever experienced, nor could she forget the very singular, "non-Slavic face" she beheld.

In late 1992, shortly after this dream, Alla was invited by a friend to attend one of the early meetings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the central library of Donetsk. When she arrived at the meeting, she was greeted at the door by Elder James Harris, whose face she had seen in the dream. Alla did not tell him about this experience until after she had been baptized.

Anna's Premonition

Anna lives in the Borshchagovka District of Kiev with her husband, Anatoly, and daughter, Yulia. One night she had a dream in which she saw two beautiful, but unusual, faces of young men. The next day she was shocked to see two young men in suits at the nearby market who had the unusual faces she had seen in the dream.

What can it mean? she asked herself. She talked with these young men and found out that they were Mormon missionaries. She wanted to invite them to her home but hesitated because of what her husband might think of her. How could she explain her interest in two young, attractive, foreign men? Reluctantly she walked away.

The next day Anatoly told her he had invited two young missionaries for dinner and a gospel discussion. Can it be the same young men she had seen in the market? Anna asked herself. When Elder Aaron Love and Elder Rory Allen arrived, she beheld with joy and amazement that they were indeed the faces in her dream, the same two young men she had met in the market.

Anna, Anatoly, and Yulia quickly accepted the message of the restored gospel and were soon baptized. Anna became the branch Relief Society president and was later called to be the district Relief Society president, serving with great love, compassion, and skill. Anatoly soon was called as a counselor to the branch president. Then, when a new branch was created, Anatoly was called as branch president. Yulia is a fine piano student at the Kiev Conservatory of Music and serves in many music responsibilities in the branch and district. She has also accepted the call as district Young Single Adult representative.

Anna, Anatoly, and Yulia invited Colleen and me to a farewell dinner at their apartment a few days before our departure from the mission. They spent the evening speaking to us of the joy they had found in the gospel and in the temple, of their gratitude to the Lord and to the missionaries who prepared them for baptism nearly three years before. They continue to bear witness that the Lord prepared them for his emissaries in the unusual dream that Anna experienced.

Angels Prepare the Harvest

In each of the nine cities that we opened in Ukraine and Belarus, we saw indications that the Lord's spiritual emissaries had already been there before us, preparing specific people for the coming of the missionaries. For example, as related earlier, the four missionaries who opened Kharkov baptized in their first few weeks a number of converts who had considerable leadership abilities. I took occasion during my first monthly visit to Kharkov to interview a number of these wonderful new converts. I was amazed and humbled to hear so many of them tell me sacred experiences—events that had helped prepare them to recognize and receive the restored gospel—that had happened to them just before the arrival of the missionaries.

The same was true for members in other cities we visited. In Odessa, as in Kharkov, a large number of choice people, many of whom would be future leaders, were baptized during the first two months. Again, as I interviewed new converts, they volunteered to share the same kind of sacred personal experiences as those discussed above. Similarly remarkable spiritual experiences occurred in Minsk. The pattern of events became so predictable that as each set of missionaries was sent to open a new city, I felt I could promise them that angels were already there. I encouraged them to live close to the Spirit so that the Lord could bring to them those whom he had prepared.

When the Lord's servants are clean, seek to know his will, and learn to recognize and obey his promptings, fearing not to act as he has inspired them to act, he is able to work great miracles through their efforts.

From what I have seen, I am certain that the Lord makes the same promise to missionaries opening new cities in our day that he made to the Apostle Paul and later to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee: for I have much people in this city" (Acts 18:10; see also D&C 111:2-11).
