Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ ( 1992)

Chapter One

THE GREAT DILEMMA

For human beings the greatest problem in all the universe, the greatest contradiction, dilemma, or dichotomy there is consists of two simple facts. The first of these two facts is clearly stated in Doctrine and Covenants 1:31: "For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance."

This seems a harsh scripture, for it clearly states that God cannot tolerate sin or sinfulness in any degree. He can't wink at it, or ignore it, or turn and look the other way. He won't sweep it under the rug or say, "Well, it's just a little sin. It'll be all right." God's standard, the celestial standard, is absolute, and it allows no exceptions. There is no wiggle room.

Many people seem to have the idea that the Judgment will somehow involve weighing or balancing, with their good deeds on one side of the scales and their bad deeds on the other. If their good deeds outweigh their bad, or if their hearts are basically good and outweigh their sins, then they can be admitted into the presence of God. This notion is false.

As Doctrine and Covenants 1:31 and other scriptures illustrate, God cannot, will not, allow moral or ethical imperfection in any degree whatsoever to dwell in his presence. He cannot tolerate sin "with the least degree of allowance." It is not a question of whether our good deeds outweigh our sins. If there is even one sin on our record, we are finished. The celestial standard is complete innocence, pure and simple, and nothing less than complete innocence will be tolerated in the kingdom of God. Now whatever you do, don't stop reading here. Though it can be depressing to realize how strict God's standards are, there is incredibly good news to follow.

The other horn of the dilemma, the other fact that makes this the greatest of all human problems, is simple enough—I sin every day, and so do you. None of us is innocent in the celestial sense. We fail to be perfect on a more or less regular basis. Our actions are inconsistent with the behavior required for being worthy of the divine presence in the kingdom of God. One of the many scriptures illustrating this can be found in Romans 3:23: "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God."

In other words, all human beings, even the best among us, have committed sins or have displayed imperfections that are incompatible with the celestial standard and that God cannot tolerate. Here as elsewhere, Paul implies that there are only two categories: For him either you are perfect or you are a sinner in some degree. There is no middle ground. After all, one little sin was sufficient to get Adam and Eve kicked out of the Garden and out of God's presence. While they were totally innocent, they could walk and talk with him—one transgression, and they were gone.

Now from these two facts—God's absolute demand for perfection and our absolute inability to come up with it—one conclusion is inescapable: we cannot be allowed to dwell in the presence of God, sinful and imperfect beings as we are. This contradiction between God's demands and our inability to carry them out represents the most serious problem with the direst consequences in all the universe.

Sometimes we assume that everyone else is doing better than we are. We think that other people are not sinners, that they keep all the commandments all of the time, and we loathe ourselves because we cannot do the same thing. As a result, many of us, often the best among us, despair at what we see as an unbridgeable gap between what God demands and what we do. Thus even the great fisherman, Peter the Rock, said when first confronted by the Master's power, "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord." (Luke 5:8.)

Once he saw the power of Jesus Christ and knew that He was genuinely sent from God, Peter could come to only one conclusion—"I'm not worthy. You shouldn't be here with me. If you knew how rotten I am, you'd realize it's hopeless. I'm not like you—I'm sinful. So don't waste your time here on me; go find someone righteous and religious, someone who can be saved. One as holy as you deserves a much better disciple than a poor wretch like me." No one knew better than Peter the vast chasm between the demands of God and the ability of unaided humans to meet those demands. And before he learned the good news, even the great fisherman apparently could see no hope, no way out of the Great Dilemma.

Perhaps I can further illustrate our situation with an analogy taken from my own family experience. I have five lovely daughters, but only one son. I'm pretty hard on Michael, my son, because I love him and because I want him to grow up better than his father did. One day when Michael was five or six years old, he did something that I thought was particularly vile, so I swatted him, yelled at him, and sent him to his room, saying, "And don't you dare come out of your room until I come and get you!"

Then I forgot all about him. Hours passed. I remember that I washed the cars and mowed the lawn, and I was about halfway through a football game on TV when I heard Michael's door open down the long hallway off the living room. "Oh no," I said in self-reproach as I remembered Michael. Leaping to my feet, I ran to the hallway. There at the other end of the hall was my little son. His eyes were swollen, his face was red, and tears were on his cheeks. He was a little nervous and hesitant, for he had been told to stay in his room until I came to get him, but he looked up at me from the other end of the hall and said, "Daddy, isn't there any way we can ever be friends again?"

Well, he broke my heart. I ran to him and hugged him and assured him that no little boy had ever been loved by a father more than he was loved by me.

Spiritually, we are all in the same boat that Michael was in. We all know what it feels like to be "sent to our rooms" spiritually, that is, to be alienated from our Heavenly Father, to be cut off and alone. We experience the pain of the Great Dilemma here in mortality. And knowing better than anyone else our own dreadful inadequacy, sometimes like Peter all we can think to do is to wave the Lord on to someone else more worthy than our sinful selves. This is not a gesture of denial or a rejection of the Savior; rather, it is an expression of our hopelessness.

We have all done things that shame us, and we have felt the horrid weight of guilt and remorse and self-reproach. There are sins that maim us spiritually; sins that may not kill us outright but will fester and will not heal; sins that make us feel as though we've drunk raw sewage or contracted some loathsome disease, as if we can wash but can never get clean. In the grip of such sins and in the midst of guilt and despair, in our terrible aloneness, cut off from God, we raise our eyes to heaven and cry out, "Oh, Father, isn't there any way we can ever be friends again?"
