Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ ( 1992)

Chapter Two

GOOD NEWS

The answer of all the prophets and all the scriptures to the question of the Great Dilemma is a resounding "YES! Imperfect people can be reconciled to a perfect God and be allowed to dwell in his presence." And even as he answers our question, and by the very means with which he answers it, God assures us that no son or daughter has ever been loved by a mortal father more than we are loved by him. In fact the solution to the Great Dilemma, to the alienation of imperfect humans from their perfect God, is precisely what all the scriptures bear witness of in one way or another. And that solution is called the atonement of Jesus Christ.

Atonement means taking two things that have become separated, estranged, or incompatible, like a perfect God and an imperfect me or you, and bringing them together again, thus making the two be "at one." The word itself derives historically from two smaller words and a suffix at-one-ment (to make at one), and the Greek word for atone is often translated "to reconcile." Thus, to the two harsh realities mentioned above and recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 1:31 and Romans 3:23, Jesus Christ adds a third reality—the Atonement, the reconciliation, the "good news" of the gospel [^1]—that though separated from God, there is a way we can become one with him again.

I am particularly fond of the way the Lord says this in Isaiah 1:18: "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." I would like to expand upon this scripture just a little bit to make sure that the significance of it doesn't get past us. What the Lord is saying here is this: "It doesn't matter what you did. Whatever it was, no matter how horrible or vile, is not the issue. The issue here is that whatever your sin was or is, I can erase it, I can clean you up and make you innocent, pure, and worthy, and I can do it today; I can do it now."

BELIEVING CHRIST

Unfortunately, there are many members of the Church who simply do not believe this. Though they claim to have testimonies of Christ and of his gospel, they reject the witness of the scriptures and of the prophets about the good news of Christ's atonement. Often these people naively hold on to mutually contradictory propositions without even realizing the nature of the contradiction. For example, they may believe that the Church is true, that Jesus is the Christ, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, while at the same time refusing to accept the possibility of their own complete forgiveness and eventual exaltation in the kingdom of God. They believe in Christ, but they do not believe Christ. He says, "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. I can make you pure and worthy and celestial," and they answer back, "No, you can't. The gospel only works for other people; it won't work for me."

Yet the "good news" of the gospel is good news to me not because it promises that other people who are better than I am can be saved, but because it promises that I can be saved—wretched, inadequate, and imperfect me. And until I accept that possibility, until I believe Christ when he says he can bring me into his kingdom and set me on a throne, I have not really accepted the good news of the gospel—I have only accepted the messenger while rejecting his wonderful message.

Faith is the first principle of the gospel, but this does not mean just believing the historical claims of the gospel. Do you believe that the Church is true, that Joseph Smith was a prophet, and that the gospel has been restored in the latter days? Good, but that's not enough. The first Article of Faith specifies that we must have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. We often think that having faith in Christ means believing in his identity as the Son of God and the Savior of the world. But believing in Jesus' identity as the Christ is only the first half of it. The other half is believing in his ability, in his power to cleanse and to save—to make unworthy sons and daughters worthy.

Not only must we believe that he is who he says he is, we must also believe that he can do what he says he can do. We must not only believe in Christ, we must also believe Christ when he says he can clean us up and make us celestial. He says that through his atoning blood, all mankind may be saved (see A of F 3)—and "all mankind" must logically include you and me. So until we accept the real possibility of our own exaltation in the kingdom of God, we do not yet have faith in Christ; we do not yet believe.

As a former bishop and as a counselor and teacher in the Church, I have heard many variations on the same theme of doubt. One individual might say, "Oh, bishop, I can't expect the same blessings as the faithful Saints. I can't expect to be exalted in the kingdom of God because I sinned horribly. You see, I did this, or I did that. Of course I'll come to Church and hope for the best, but I can't possibly be exalted after what I did."

Another might say, "You don't understand. I punched my ticket wrong. When I was young, I made choices that took me down a different path, and now, after all those years, I just can't get there from here." Someone else once said, "Oh no, I don't expect to be exalted. I'm nobody. I'm just an average member, just an attender. I've always had little jobs in the Church. I've never been a leader, and I don't have any talents. I'll certainly never be the bishop [or the Relief Society president]. I just don't have very much to contribute, so I don't expect to receive very much in the resurrection. I just hope I make the bottom level of the celestial kingdom, but I know I won't be exalted."

My favorite example of this kind of thinking was a man who once said to me, "Look, bishop, I'm just not celestial material." I guess I finally lost my patience and responded by saying, "So what's your point? Of course you're not celestial material. Neither am I, neither is any of us. That's why we need the atonement of Christ, which can make us celestial. John why don't you just admit your real problem—that you don't have any faith in Christ?" Well, he got a little angry at that, for he had been a Protestant before he became a Latter-day Saint, and both as a Protestant and as a Latter-day Saint, he had believed in Jesus Christ. He shot back with, "How dare you say that to me? I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God." "Yes," I replied, "you believe in Christ; you just don't believe Christ. He says he can make you celestial material, and you have the audacity to sit there and say, 'No, he can't.' You believe all right—you believe Christ makes promises he can't keep."

Each of these four cases represents a variation on the same dismal theme. All of them boil down to this: "I do not believe Christ can do what he claims. I have no faith in his ability to exalt me." If you were to ask these people what their spiritual problems were, they would insist on X, Y, or Z—some unique or special problem encountered down the road some distance on their spiritual journey. But their actual problem is not X, Y, or Z, nor is it unique, nor is it down the road any distance at all. Their real problem is with A number 1—the very first step. For all four of these objections and many other versions that could have been cited are simply ways of camouflaging the same basic problem—lack of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

These people simply won't believe that the gospel can work for them. And without obeying the first principle of the gospel, without having genuine faith in Christ, these individuals cannot enjoy the power and the blessings either of faith in Christ or of the principles that follow faith—repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Even though they may consider themselves experienced and mature members of the Church, they have not yet been spiritually born.

If we believe only in Christ without believing Christ, then we are like people sitting in cold, dark houses surrounded by unused lamps and heaters, people who believe in electricity but who never throw the switch to turn on the power. People like this often pretend to themselves and to others that merely believing in electricity makes them warm and gives them light, but they still shiver in the dark unless they turn on the power. Though the appliances may all work and the wiring may be in good order, until we accept the power itself, beyond merely believing in the theory of power, we cannot enjoy the warmth and the light. This is why genuine faith in Christ—active acceptance of his power and not just passive belief in his identity—is and must be the very first principle of the gospel. No matter how much of the gospel one learns or even believes as a theory, until we accept the reality of our own salvation, we have not yet turned on the power.

THE DEMAND FOR PERFECTION

Often the reason some people can't fully accept the blessings of the gospel is because the weight of the demand for perfection has driven them to despair. They mistakenly feel that in order for the Atonement to work in their lives, they must first become perfect through their own efforts. But anyone who could meet this requirement would not need the Atonement at all, for such a person would already be reconciled to God, having achieved the celestial standard of perfection on his or her own without needing Christ and his atonement—and this is not possible.

Let me emphasize again, the good news is not that perfect people can be reconciled to God, but that imperfect people can be. Whenever I hear someone say that they are going to perfect themselves, I cringe. I want to ask, "Do you really think that exaltation is a matter of reaching down into your guts and pulling out the energy and determination you need to live a perfect life? If so, you don't want a savior, you want to do it all yourself."

Now it is true that in order to receive a celestial glory, we must become perfect. And we are quite conscientious about telling each other how perfect we must be. In fact, sometimes no matter how well we do in any area of our lives, some well-intentioned Saint seems to be right there to point out that we aren't perfect and that we must do better next time. Many of us tell ourselves this same thing time after time, no matter how well we may actually do, and never allow ourselves even the smallest taste of deserved personal satisfaction.

THE SHORTCUT TO PERFECTION

Yes, we are very good at telling each other and ourselves how perfect we must be to inherit the kingdom. It's just that too often we forget to tell each other how this perfection is to be gained. You see, there is a trick to it—a shortcut. And if you don't know the trick, the shortcut to perfection, you can burn yourself out trying to become perfect on your own. [^2] The great secret is this: Jesus Christ will share his perfection, his sinlessness, his righteousness, his merits with us. In his mercy he offers us the use of his perfection, in the absence of our own, to satisfy the demands of justice.

In the short run we are considered perfect, accepted as perfect, by becoming one with a perfect Christ. In the long run, this makes it possible for us actually to become perfect in our own right at some future time, but that time is long after the Judgment and long after we have already inherited the kingdom of God through the merit, mercy, and perfection of Jesus Christ. Thus the most important goal in mortality is becoming one with Christ through the gospel covenant and gaining access through that union to his perfection, rather than remaining separate and aloof while trying (fruitlessly!) to generate our own perfection and thereby save ourselves.

Let me illustrate. A number of years ago our family lived in Williamsport, Pennsylvania. Things were pretty good there. We owned our own little home in a nice neighborhood, and we liked our neighbors. I had a good job at a local college and was doing well in my career. Our family seemed happy enough. We had family home evening and family prayers regularly, and Janet and I said our prayers together every night. We held temple recommends and attended the temple as often as possible. I was in the bishopric in the local ward, and Janet was the Relief Society president.

Janet had a particularly exciting year that year. Besides being Relief Society president, she graduated from college for the second time (in accounting), she passed the CPA exam and took a job with a local firm, and she gave birth to our fourth child (Michael)—all in her spare time, of course. Actually, Janet was under a lot of pressure that year, but like many husbands, I didn't notice or appreciate how much pressure she was under until something blew. And blow it did.

One day the lights just went out. It was as though Janet had died to spiritual things; she had burned out. She became very passive in her attitude toward the Church. When her Relief Society counselors called her, she told them that they could do whatever they wanted to, that she had asked to be released from her calling. One of the worst aspects of this sudden change was that Janet wouldn't talk about it; she wouldn't tell me what was wrong.

Finally, after almost two weeks, I made her mad with my nagging one night as we lay in bed, and she said, "All right. Do you want to know what's wrong? I'll tell you what's wrong—I can't do it anymore. I can't lift it. My load is just too heavy. I can't do all the things I'm supposed to. I can't get up at 5:30, and bake bread, and sew clothes, and help the kids with their homework, and do my own homework, and make their lunches, and do the housework, and do my Relief Society stuff, and have scripture study, and do my genealogy, and write my congressman, and go to PTA meetings, and get our year's supply organized, and go to my stake meetings, and write the missionaries . . . " She just started naming, one after the other, all the things she couldn't do or couldn't do perfectly—all the individual bricks that had been laid on her back in the name of perfection until they had crushed the light out of her.

"I try not to yell at the kids," she continued, "but I can't seem to help it; I get mad, and I yell. So then I try not to get mad, but I eventually do. I try not to have hard feelings toward this person and that person, but I do. I'm just not very Christlike. No matter how hard I try to love everyone, I fail. I don't have the talent Sister X has, and I'm just not as sweet as Sister Y. Steve, I'm just not perfect—I'm never going to be perfect, and I just can't pretend anymore that I am. I've finally admitted to myself that I can't make it to the celestial kingdom, so why should I break my back trying?"

Well, that was the beginning of one of the longest nights of our life together. I asked Janet, "Do you have a testimony?" She responded, "Of course I do—that's what's so terrible. I know the gospel is true, I just can't live up to it." I asked her if she had kept her baptismal covenants, and she replied, "No. I've tried and I've tried, but I can't keep all the commandments all the time." I asked her if she had kept the covenants she had made in the temple, and again she said, "I try, but no matter how hard I try, I don't seem to be able to do all that's asked of me."

Now I need to make it clear at this point that the reason I proposed marriage to Janet many years ago was because she is the finest, sweetest, most genuinely loving and selfless person I have ever met. So what she was telling me just didn't add up. So we went back and forth for some time with her cataloging all her faults, inadequacies, and imperfections, and with me knowing she was a better person than most and trying to find out what was really wrong. Finally it occurred to me what the problem was, and frankly, I was astounded. Here I was supposed to be a "doctor" in the field of religion, and I couldn't see Mt. Everest right in front of my nose. What I realized finally was that Janet did not completely understand the core of the gospel—the atonement of Christ. She knew the demands, but not the good news.

Who would have thought that after all the meetings and lessons, after all the talks and testimonies and family home evenings, somehow the heart of the gospel had escaped her? She knew and believed everything except the most important part. You see, Janet was trying to save herself. She was trying to do it all with Jesus Christ as merely an advisor. Janet knew why Jesus can be called a coach, a cheerleader, an advisor, a teacher, the elder brother, the head of the Church, and even God. She understood all of that, but she didn't understand why he is called the Savior.

BEING SAVED

But do Latter-day Saints believe in "being saved"? If I ask my classes on campus that question with just the right Southern drawl in my voice, I can usually get about a third of them to shake their heads and say, "No. We don't believe in 'being saved.' That's those other guys, the ones on TV." What a tragedy! Of course the Latter-day Saints believe in being saved. They do now, and they always have. How can Jesus be called the Savior if he never saves anybody?

That's like having a lifeguard who won't get out of his chair or who won't get wet—"Well, look at that. There's another one going under out there. Gee, that's too bad!" Such a lifeguard may even shout out helpful advice like, "Try the backstroke!" But if he won't get wet, what good is he? And what good is a Savior who doesn't save anybody? It is the whole message of the Book of Mormon as it is of the Bible, that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world. Yes, the Latter-day Saints believe in being saved. But Janet, like so many others, was trying to save herself, and she couldn't do it. In fact, no one can, not even the best among us.

The Brother of Jared. For example, look at Ether 3:2 in the Book of Mormon. The speaker is the brother of Jared, one of the greatest prophets who ever lived. His faith was so great that, as is recorded in this chapter, he was able to pierce the veil and see God. But look at how this good and faithful man approached God. "Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee." Imagine that! Here was one of the great prophets of all time, and he began his prayer with an apology for his weakness and his unworthiness. Certainly he was under no illusions about being perfect.

He went on to say, "Because of the fall our natures have become evil continually." All this means is that as a result of the fall of Adam, human beings are subject to the natural conditions of mortality. As long as we are in the flesh, we will have to wrestle with the flesh, with our carnal natures, and occasionally the flesh will win. Such a defeat is always wrong, and we will be held accountable, but it is going to happen from time to time.

We can expect this struggle to go on as long as we live. Each of us has experienced this opposition of the carnal self in one way or another. For example, from time to time I will tell my carnal self, "Flesh, today we are going to diet!" To which my flesh inevitably responds with something like, "In your dreams, Bozo," and then sets up the steady chant, "Hot fudge! Hot fudge! Hot fudge!" This opposition of the flesh, the carnal self, is not something that we can overcome once and for all while in mortality. As long as we are in mortality, our carnal nature will be prone to evil continually, to paraphrase the brother of Jared.

My personal belief is that in the resurrection the opposition of the flesh will finally be overcome. In mortality, the spirit and the body are two separate entities forced to coexist in the same person. The mortal connection between them is both recent and temporary, hence they wrestle and fidget with each other. But in the resurrection, body and spirit become one thing. They will be inseparably united, welded together, and will speak with one voice—the voice of the unified self, of the soul in the strict sense. (See D&C 88:15.) But until then, we must wrestle with a separate, carnal self. And from time to time, even the best among us, like the brother of Jared, will lose a struggle.

But this is not the most important part of what the brother of Jared has to say in Ether 3:2. The most important part comes at the end of the verse: "Nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desires." It doesn't really matter in the long run that the brother of Jared is unworthy from the celestial point of view. In that respect he is no different from all other human beings. The point is that God has commanded us, unworthy though we may be, to call upon him anyway, because he has prepared a way for us to receive what we desire despite our imperfection. Notice that he says, "according to our desires" and not strictly "according to our merits" or "according to our works," or according to any other combination some of us might expect. (See D&C 137:9.)

What matters is that through the atonement of Jesus Christ we can receive, despite our unworthiness, what we desire, what we long for—but only if it is what we really long for. So what do you want? What do you really want? In Matthew 5:6 the Lord says: "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled." We regularly misinterpret this scripture to mean something like "Blessed are the righteous." But that is not what it means at all. When are we hungry? When do we thirst? After Thanksgiving dinner with all the trimmings? No, we are hungry when we haven't eaten; we are thirsty when we haven't drunk, when we don't have the object of our desire.

This beatitude refers to people like you and me who want to do what is right, who long for, who hunger and thirst after righteousness—the pure righteousness of God, the perfect righteousness and absolute innocence of the celestial kingdom. Blessed are they who desire with all their hearts to be righteous as Christ is righteous, to be perfect as he is perfect, who long for it and seek it, and who would give anything for it, though they do not have it. What is their reward? They shall, through the atonement of Christ, receive it according to their fondest desires! In the words of the beatitude, "they shall be filled."

The Example of Nephi. Let's take a look at another prophetic example from the Book of Mormon. In 2 Nephi 4:17-19, Nephi wrote: "O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities. I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me. And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins." Wait a minute. Iniquities? Temptations? Sins? There must be some mistake here. This scripture must be Laman or Lemuel talking, the wicked sons; surely this can't be Nephi. Nephi was the righteous son.

No, of course there is no mistake. This is Nephi, another of the greatest prophets who ever lived. And this isn't even the teenaged Nephi. The scripture comes from 2 Nephi when the family was already in the New World. This is the mature Nephi speaking, the Nephi of experience and wisdom, allowing us to see into his very heart. And Nephi, like the brother of Jared, or like the Apostle Paul (see 1 Tim. 1:15), was under no illusions about his own perfection. Nephi knew and regretted that he sometimes lost his battle with the flesh, that he was easily tempted, that he sinned.

But once again, the fact that Nephi was imperfect, that he failed to qualify on the basis of his own efforts and merits for the kingdom of God, that he just plain messed up sometimes, is not the point. Every human being, with the exception of Jesus Christ alone, has failed to keep all the commandments all the time. We may fail by differing degrees, but we all fail. That is why we all need help, why we all need a Savior, and why needing help and needing a Savior are no disgrace. This is the real focus, the real point, of what Nephi said here, "Nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted. . . . He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh." (2 Ne. 4:19, 21.)

Even though Nephi was discouraged and depressed by his inability to live perfectly, he trusted the Savior to get him to the kingdom anyway. He trusted the Savior and was confident in the Savior's love. Then to combine all three verses and paraphrase, Nephi was saying, "No, I'm not perfect. Yes, my faults bother me, and yes, I wish I did a better job. Nevertheless, I have faith in Jesus Christ, I trust him. He says he can get me into his kingdom despite my imperfections, and I believe him. I know he loves me, and I trust him to continue saving me from all my enemies."

Unfortunately, unlike Nephi, many of us just don't trust the Savior. We believe in him, but we don't trust him. We get so frightened and intimidated, so horrified, by our own imperfections that we don't see how he can possibly save us from them, and we lose faith. But if these great prophets had a healthy sense of their own sins and shortcomings, and yet could still confidently maintain that they had a place in the kingdom of God, should we not learn from their examples of trust and confidence—their examples of faith?

Besides fear of one's own imperfection, there are other reasons why some people cannot trust the Savior. Many people fear that if they commit themselves to him and try to live the gospel loyally and faithfully, they will miss something important that the world has to offer. Often they fear that a total commitment to Christ and the Church would mean being exploited or being left unfulfilled emotionally, intellectually, or physically. There are those who want the Church in their lives but are afraid of a full embrace. The bottom line for all such is the same—even though they may believe in him, they do not trust him. They do not yet have genuine faith in Christ.

HOW PERFECTION COMES

Part of the good news of the gospel is the knowledge that finally perfection comes, to those who desire it, through the atonement of Christ instead of solely through their own efforts. When we become one with Christ in the gospel covenant, we gain access to his perfection. It's as though two people with separate bank accounts got married and formed a joint account. When Janet and I got married, my checking account was overdrawn, but Janet had money in hers. After the wedding, we went to the bank and merged our accounts to create a single, joint account. As far as the bank was concerned, I was no longer just Stephen Robinson, and she was no longer just Janet Bowen. Now we were Stephen and Janet Robinson. A new partnership had been created that included the assets and liabilities of both its component parts. And since Janet had more assets than I had liabilities, the new account had a positive balance. It was like a miracle! Just by entering into a marriage covenant and becoming one with Janet, I was on firm financial ground for the first time in months.

This makes an excellent analogy for what happens when we enter into the gospel covenant. The Savior, who has infinite assets, proposes a merger with the individual, who has finite liabilities. I use the word "proposes" by design, for the relationship proposed is often referred to in scripture as a marriage, and it is certainly as intimate and bonding as a marriage. This is why Christ is often called the Bridegroom (e.g., Matt. 25:1-13; John 3:29) and why the Church (or Israel) is often referred to as the Bride (e.g., Hosea 2:19; Rev. 21:2, D&C 109:74).

As husband and wife become one with each other through the covenant of marriage, so the Savior and the saved become one with each other through the covenant of the gospel. (Cf. 1 Cor. 6:15-17.) Just as a bride renounces all competing claims upon her loyalties and normally takes her husband's last name, so those who enter this covenant with Christ renounce all competing loyalties, put him first, and take his name upon them. To this union, we bring our righteous desires and our loyalty. He brings his perfection. In the covenant union, what is mine becomes his, and what is his becomes mine. Thus my sins become his for payment, and his righteousness becomes mine for justification.

When we become one with Jesus Christ, spiritually we form a partnership with a joint account, and his assets and our liabilities flow into each other. Since he has more assets than we have liabilities (he has an infinite ocean of assets), the new account has a positive balance as soon as it is formed, and the partnership is justified, even though its junior partners (you and me) could not make it on their own. This is what the Apostle Paul refers to as being "in Christ" (1 Cor. 1:1) and what Moroni calls being "perfect in Christ" (Moro. 10:32).

Taken together, Christ and I make up a new creature. The old creature, the imperfect me, ceases to exist, and a glorious new creature, a perfect partnership, takes its place. Taken together as a single entity, the two of us, Christ and I, are perfect. I do not mean (this is absolutely crucial!) that we can become perfect later on. I mean that from the moment the partnership is formed in good faith, from the moment we have sincere faith in Christ, sincerely repent of our sins, and receive baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost—from this moment the partnership is celestial. The merits of the Senior Partner make it so. True, this is not individual perfection, which will indeed come later (much later), rather it is perfection-in-Christ (see Moro. 10:32-33), through which we receive the benefits of our partner's merits. Nevertheless, from this moment the kingdom is ours, provided that we maintain the partnership by abiding in the gospel covenant. (See 3 Ne. 27:16, 19-21)

At this point someone will object that I still have faults and limitations, and I admit that if I am judged separately and alone, this is true. But in the covenant relationship, I am not judged separately and alone but as one with Christ. Simply consider the mathematics of it: If Christ is infinite and unlimited, but I am finite and limited, and we become one, what do Christ and I together add up to? What is the sum of an infinite, positive quantity and a limited, negative quantity (infinity + -x)? Why, infinity, of course! And the math is the same whether I (the finite part) am a ten or a five or a one, whether I'm the prophet or a stake president or any other struggling member. Infinity plus any amount, positive or negative, equals infinity.

What matters is not how much we bring to the equation, but only that we can make the equation by entering into a covenant relationship with an infinite Christ, however great or small we may think ourselves to be. Any two people who are joined together and have become one in a covenant unity are perfect as long as one of them is Jesus Christ.

In Doctrine and Covenants 76:68-69, Joseph Smith described the inhabitants of the celestial kingdom in these terms: "These are they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all. These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood." (Italics added.) Those who inherit the celestial kingdom are just men and women, that is, men and women who want justice, who hunger and thirst after righteousness. [^3] They are good neighbors, and they do the best they can. This makes them just—good people. These good people are then made perfect through the perfect atonement of a perfect Christ.

You see, you can make yourself just in one sense of the word. Your own efforts will suffice to make you a good person, even a righteous person in relative human terms. One certainly doesn't need the gospel to be a good person in terms of personal life-style (indeed, one can even be hostile to the gospel and still be comparatively good). You can, by your own efforts, become an honorable person and thereby qualify on your own merits for an approximately terrestrial glory. (Cf. D&C 76:75.)

But you can't make yourself perfect. You can't make yourself sinless and worthy of the presence of God the Father. You can't make yourself celestial, no matter how hard you try, because you have already sinned, and sinlessness requires not only perfect performance in the future, but also perfect performance in the past. Otherwise, you are not sinless, you are just a sinner who hasn't sinned recently. Many an obsessive student has learned the sad truth that once he or she gets just one B, no number of A's thereafter will restore a perfect record, a 4.0 grade-point average. Innocence requires forgiveness and cleansing. It requires that the record be expunged and rewritten, that all the sinful former deeds and actions cease to be counted—and all these things come only through the atonement of Christ. You can make yourself just and terrestrial by your own good works and best efforts, but only Christ can make you perfect and celestial.

The Corporate Analogy. Some of my students who are business majors prefer the following analogy. If two companies, one totally bankrupt and the other incredibly profitable, should merge to create a single, new corporation, what happens to the debts of the weaker company? They are paid out of the profits of the stronger, and the corporation, the combination of the two, is judged to be financially sound. As long as there is more being produced by the one than is being lost through the other, the corporation is in the black. It is profitable. It is financially justified.

The same is true in the spiritual parallel. When we enter into the covenant of the gospel and become one with Christ, we create a new corporate entity, a partnership, that is immediately profitable and immediately justified through the infinite merits of the Savior (the only really profitable enterprise). And as long as we don't dissolve the partnership, we are justified by his merits in that unique relationship. As an individual, I may have no hope, but as a junior partner in a joint venture with Christ, I have every assurance of success.

The Athletic Analogy. Some of my students are more comfortable with examples or illustrations taken from athletics than from business or finance, so I sometimes like to compare the covenant relationship to team sports. In team sports, it doesn't matter which of the players makes the points. When one individual scores, the whole team scores. If the quarterback throws a touchdown ball to the tight end, then it doesn't matter that the guards never touched the ball, or even that the defense was sitting on the bench. It doesn't matter that some on the team may have missed their blocks or run the wrong routes. It doesn't even matter that the second- or third-string hadn't yet been in the game. When one member of the team scores, the whole team scores. In terms of who wins, it doesn't matter whether we are on the offense or the defense, in the backfield or line, or on the first-string, second-string, or special teams. The entire team wins, not just the individual who makes the winning score.

In making the gospel covenant, we become part of a team whose captain and quarterback is Jesus Christ, a cosmic Heisman Trophy winner who throws nothing but touchdowns. If we are on his team, we will go undefeated. Even if I miss my block now and then, even if he asks me just to sit on the bench most of the time, as long as he's the captain, we're going to win. But I've got to be on his team, not my own and not somebody else's.

Alternatively, the gospel covenant could be compared to a long-distance race. Normally, we think of only one winner in a race, but in the gospel race, all who finish win. In addition, the differences in their finishing times are irrelevant. Some people will have good times and some will not, but the only losers are those who give up and quit before they reach the goal. In the gospel race, there are no losers, only quitters. Those who run across the finish line in minutes, those who walk across it in hours, or those who crawl across it in days all win the prize. For they all endured to the end, according to their talents and abilities, looking to the Savior. Paul used this analogy, writing, "Let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith." (Heb. 12:1-2.) Too many of us expend our precious energy worrying about our relative times instead of keeping our eyes on the goal, putting one foot in front of the other, and enduring to the end.

THE PARABLE OF THE BICYCLE

As Janet and I discussed these things on that dark night years ago, nothing really seemed to be getting through to her. Then I remembered something that had happened in our family just a few months before and that we now refer to at our house as the parable of the bicycle.

One afternoon after work as I sat reading the newspaper, our oldest daughter, Sarah, who was then seven years old, came up to me and said, "Daddy, can I get a bike? I'm the only kid in our neighborhood who doesn't have a bike." I mumbled some kind of general and nonspecific assent, but Sarah lifted up the paper and looked me in the eye. "How, and when?" she asked.

Now it would not have been easy for us financially to buy Sarah a bicycle at that particular time, so I tried to stall her. "I'll tell you what, Sarah," I said. "You save all your pennies, and pretty soon you'll have enough for a bike."

"OK," she said, and she went away—I was off the hook. A few weeks went by, and I was once again sitting in my chair after work, reading the newspaper. This time I was aware of Sarah doing some chore for her mother and being paid for it. Then she went into her bedroom, and I heard a sound like "clink, clink."

"Sarah, what are you doing?" I asked. She came out of her bedroom with a little jar in her hand. It had once been a maraschino cherry jar, but she had cleaned it up and cut a slot in the lid. On the bottom of the jar were a bunch of coins. Sarah showed me the jar and said, "You promised that if I saved all my pennies, pretty soon I'd have enough to get a bike. And Daddy, I've saved every single one!"

Well, she's my daughter, and I love her. I hadn't actually lied to her. If she saved all of her pennies, eventually she would have enough for a bike. But by then, she would probably want a car. In the meantime, sweet little Sarah was doing everything in her power to follow my instructions, but her needs were still not being met. I was overwhelmed. "OK, Sarah," I said, "let's go downtown and look at bikes."

We went to every store in Williamsport. Finally, in one of the big discount stores, we found it: the Perfect Bicycle (probably the one she knew in the premortal life). From halfway across the store, she knew it was The One. She ran and jumped up on the bike and said, "Dad, this is it. This is just the one I want." She was thrilled.

Then she noticed the price tag hanging down between the handlebars, and with a smile, she reached down and turned it over. At first she just stared at it; then the smile disappeared. Her face clouded up, and she started to cry. "Oh Daddy," she said in despair, "I'll never have enough for a bicycle." It was her first bitter dose of adult reality.

The bike, as I recall, cost over one hundred dollars. It was hopelessly beyond her means. But because Sarah is my daughter and I love her, I have an interest in her happiness. So I asked, "Sarah, how much money do you have?"

"Sixty-one cents," she answered forlornly.

"Then I'll tell you what, dear. Let's try a different arrangement. You give me everything you've got, the whole sixty-one cents, and a hug and a kiss, and this bike is yours."

Well, she's never been stupid. She gave me a big hug and a kiss and handed over the sixty-one cents. Then I had to drive home very slowly because she wouldn't get off the bike. She rode it home on the sidewalk (it was only a few blocks), and I drove along beside her. And as I drove, it occurred to me that this was a parable for the atonement of Christ.

You see, we all want something desperately, but it's not a bicycle. We want the kingdom of God. We want to go home to our heavenly parents worthy and clean. But the horrible price—perfect performance—is hopelessly beyond our means. At some point in our spiritual progress, we realize what the full price of admission into that kingdom is, and we also realize that we cannot pay it. And then we despair. That's where Janet was that night as we talked, in despair at the vast difference between perfect performance and what she felt she could do.

But only at this point, when we finally realize our inability to perfect and save ourselves, when we finally realize our truly desperate situation here in mortality and our need to be saved from it by some outside intervention—only then can we fully appreciate the One who comes to save.

At that point, the Savior steps in and says, "So you've done all you can do, but it's not enough. Well, don't despair. I'll tell you what, let's try a different arrangement. How much do you have? How much can fairly be expected of you? You give me exactly that much (the whole sixty-one cents) and do all you can do, and I will provide the rest for now. You give me all you've got and a hug and a kiss (that is, make this a personal relationship), and the kingdom is yours! Perfection will still be our ultimate goal, but until you can get it on your own, I'll let you use mine. What do you say? You do everything you can do, and I'll do what you can't yet do. Between the two of us, we'll have it all covered. You will be one hundred percent justified."

As Janet and I discussed these things that night, for some reason this particular illustration reached her. When she considered the Atonement and the gospel covenant in this way, she saw how it worked, and a remarkable transformation took place. She just bloomed. I remember her saying through her tears something like this, "I've always had a testimony of the Savior and believed that he is the Son of God. I have always believed that he suffered and died for me. But now I know that he can save me, that he can save me from myself, from my sins, from my weakness, from my lack of talent."

Since that time, Janet's experience has helped others both in and out of the Church. Experience has taught us that she is not alone, that there are many who want to serve God and keep his commandments, who hunger and thirst after righteousness, but who, because of the very loftiness and nobility of their desires, despair at the reality of their performance. To all of them we declare, "Christ is the answer. He is the bridge from here to there. He is the solution to the Great Dilemma."

"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." (Matt. 7:7-8.)

This is good news indeed.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Greek word diatheke, which is translated ''testament'' in these passages, also means ''covenant.'' The New Testament is at the same time the New Covenant.
[^2] In actuality this new covenant, what the Lord called "mine everlasting covenant, even the fullness of my gospel" (D&C 66:2), had been offered to many in the past, to Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and others.
[^3] Bruce R. McConkie, ''The Seven Deadly Heresies,'' in Devotional Speeches of the Year (Provo: BYU Press, 1980) pp. 74-80.
