Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ ( 1992)

Chapter Three

THE COVENANT

A covenant is a contract, an agreement with terms and obligations binding upon both parties. In modern times we validate a contract and make it binding and legal by having both parties sign it. In ancient times covenants were validated and made binding by shedding the blood of a sacrificial animal. Hence, the Hebrew idiom for making a covenant is "to cut a covenant." The blood of the sacrificial victim was called "the blood of the covenant," and when it was shed, the terms of the contract were considered to be in force and binding upon both contracting parties.

An example that illustrates this is provided in the Old Testament when God made the covenant of Sinai with his people through Moses. There the contract was finalized by sacrificing oxen, and after the people had agreed to the terms of the covenant, the blood of the covenant sacrifices was sprinkled upon them. (See Ex. 24:3-8.)

By definition, a covenant is a mutual obligation. Therefore it is not possible to have a unilateral covenant, a covenant that involves or binds only one party. A one-sided obligation is simply a debt, or slavery, rather than a covenant relationship. An oath can be one-sided, but a covenant must contain mutual obligation—"if you will do A, I will do B." In the Old Testament period, the covenant between God and his people always had specific terms, and as long as the chosen people kept their part of the contract, God kept his part. However, the reverse was also true, for when the people broke the covenant, God was no longer bound to it either. For example, in 2 Kings 18:12, God did not keep his covenant obligation to save Israel from her enemies because Israel had already broken her contract by disobeying the commandments agreed upon in Exodus 24:3-8. God is bound by his own word to keep the terms of his covenants as long as we keep our part of the bargain. (See D&C 82:10; 84:39-40.)

In the Old Testament the Lord told Israel that there would someday be a new covenant—a new relationship between God and his chosen people—superior to that offered through the law of Moses. (See Jer. 31:31-33.) That promise was fulfilled when the covenant of the gospel superseded the covenant of Sinai at the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. Like the old covenant, this new and everlasting covenant also has a sacrificial victim—Jesus Christ himself, "the Lamb of God" (John 1:29) and "the Lamb that was slain" (Rev. 5:6, 9, 12). The blood of Jesus Christ, shed in Gethsemane and upon the cross, is the blood of the new covenant that, as it was shed, rendered the agreement valid and binding. (See Luke 22:20; 1 Cor. 11:25.) [^1]

Just as Moses put the blood of the old covenant upon the chosen people in Exodus 24:8 to signify their acceptance of the contract, so those who accept the new covenant must similarly take the sacrificial blood of Christ upon them. When we take Christ's blood upon us, when we are washed in "the blood of the Lamb" (Rev. 7:14), we are bound to the new covenant in much the same way the children of Israel were bound to the old. When the blood of Christ was shed, the new contract between God and human beings, the gospel covenant, became valid and binding for all those who have agreed to its terms.

JUSTIFICATION

When human beings keep their covenants, when they abide by the conditions of their agreements with God, they are said to be justified. To be justified means to be declared innocent, to be acquitted of all charges of misconduct, to stand guiltless before the law. Justified has a strong courtroom or judgment nuance to it and emphasizes the "not guilty" verdict. To be justified, then, is to be declared by God to be not guilty, to be free from any taint of sin and to be acquitted of all our obligations toward him. Thus, being justified is logically equivalent to being declared worthy of the kingdom and presence of God.

Justification is a noble aspiration and a necessary condition of exaltation in the kingdom of God. Both the old covenant of the law of Moses and the new covenant of the gospel were designed to justify the individual who entered into and kept his or her covenant. However, the covenant of Moses used the law of justice as its basis for accomplishing this (justification by law), while the gospel covenant uses the law of mercy (justification by faith).

JUSTIFICATION BY LAW

Theoretically, one way of being justified, of receiving a "not guilty" verdict from God, is to keep all the commandments all the time—never to commit a sin and therefore never to be guilty. This is called justification by (keeping) the law or justification by works. Any system that defines righteousness exclusively as a status gained and deserved by personally keeping a specific set of rules is a system of justification by works or by law. In such a system an individual is thought to earn his or her own way into the kingdom of God by not sinning in the first place. This happy solution to the problem of sin eliminates the need for forgiveness, repentance, or atonement. Consequently, however, there is also no need for a savior. The Apostle Paul in his New Testament writings characterized the old covenant of Moses as a system of justification by law or by works.

The terms of the old contract, the law of Moses were essentially that if the children of Israel "kept the commandments," that is, observed all 613 commands and prohibitions of the law of Moses God would save them from their enemies and grant them the promised land and a posterity. If both sides kept their part of the bargain, Israel would be God's chosen people, and he would be their God. This covenant was based on strict obedience and on the law of justice.

In practice the rabbis knew that no one keeps all the rules all the time, but they trusted in the mercy of God to somehow atone for mistakes. However, technically there was no scriptural basis for such an expectation. As Deuteronomy 27:26 makes very clear, if you keep the law one hundred percent, you are righteous, but if you break just one of its provisions, you are a sinner, a cursed transgressor of the law. (See also James 2:10.) Still, under the old covenant of the law of Moses individuals theoretically could by their own efforts and merits make themselves worthy by keeping all the rules all the time.

Technically, there was nothing wrong with the old covenant and its law. It was the word of God. It was just and fair. If the people had just kept their end of the agreement, they would have been justified by the law. After all, anyone who does absolutely everything God commands is, by even the strictest definition, just.

Unfortunately, it turned out that nobody could do it. Just as telling my daughter Sarah to save her pennies for a bicycle may have been plausible in theory but didn't really meet her needs in the real world, so justification by law, though it may be valid in theory, fails in practice to address our real human needs in our actual predicament. Because of our human weaknesses and our fallen natures, the terms of the law of Moses the old covenant, are simply beyond our ability and therefore don't justify us. Theoretically they could, but in actuality they don't. Justification by obedience to law, or justification by works, is an impossibility because all human beings but one have been disobedient at some time or other. And we can't claim to be justified by obedience if we are occasionally disobedient.

As Paul points out, trying to keep the commandments is a long way from actually keeping them. According to him, anyone stupid enough to trust his own ability to keep all the rules makes the atonement of Christ ineffectual in his own life. (See Gal. 5:4.) Moreover, anyone who wants to trust entirely in his own righteousness needs to be reminded that righteousness through law requires perfect performance: "For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them. But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident: for, The just shall live by faith. And the law is not of faith: but, The man that doeth them shall live in them. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law." (Gal. 3:10-13;

Paul points out that any claim to righteousness based on one's own efforts to keep the commandments requires a perfect record. One slip and you are no longer perfect, you have become a sinner—and in this sense we are all sinners. "For we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin; as it is written, There is none righteous, no, not one. . . . Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin." Rom. 3:9-10, 20.)

In other words, since everyone has broken the law, no one can claim to be righteous by virtue of having kept the law. To make matters worse, the law itself pronounces the curse on anyone who is not perfect in keeping all the commandments. (See Deut. 27:26.) Yet because of our fallen natures, it was frankly impossible for human beings to keep all the terms of the old covenant. Therefore, at least from the perspective of Paul in the first century, God in his mercy has provided a new covenant, an agreement with terms we can keep. [^2] Jesus Christ is the one who redeems us from the curse of the law—from the demand for perfect performance—by offering a new means of justification, not by law (keeping all the rules all the time), but by faith in Christ. Although it seems that many naively attempt justification by works, or self-justification, such an attempt constitutes a false trail. Both the Bible and the Book of Mormon insist that justification cannot be gained in this way:

Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of [in] Jesus Christ, . . . that we might be justified by the faith of [in] Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. (Gal. 2:16.)

And men are instructed sufficiently that they know good from evil. And the law is given unto men. And by the law no flesh is justified; or, by the law men are cut off. . . . There is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah. (2 Ne. 2:5-8.)

To summarize then—we can't justify ourselves on our own. We can't earn our way into the celestial kingdom by keeping all the commandments. We could in theory, but we can't in practice—because neither you nor I nor anybody else has kept all the commandments. This is so incredibly self-evident and simple that some people can't see it. Think about it. We have already broken some commandment somewhere, so we cannot claim righteousness on the grounds that we keep the commandments. We are already disqualified! Can anyone besides the Savior keep all the commandments all the time? If our only hope of inheriting the celestial kingdom lies in keeping all the rules, obeying all the commandments, and living all the principles perfectly, then you and I blew our chances long ago. It is true that the gospel provides repentance, forgiveness, and atonement, but these are remedies for disobedience rather than rewards for obedience.

Many members of the Church confuse the long-term goal of individual perfection with the short-term necessity of perfection-in-Christ, mistakenly concluding that they must perfect themselves by their own efforts before they have hope of receiving the kingdom of God. Elder Bruce R. McConkie referred to this idea as one of the deadly heresies of the modern Church. [^3] If it were possible to perfect ourselves, to make ourselves worthy of the kingdom of God by our own efforts, we wouldn't need Jesus Christ at all: "I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness come by [keeping] the law, then Christ is dead in vain." (Gal. 2:21.) If we could be justified by our own efforts, then we wouldn't need a savior at all, and Christ's infinite sacrifice would have been all for nothing.

JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH IN CHRIST

The only other way of being justified, of being declared not guilty before God, is to admit our own imperfections, admit we can't be perfect on our own or save ourselves by our own efforts, and have faith in Christ our Savior. We must accept his offer of help by entering into a completely new covenant in which his efforts are added to our own and make up for our deficiencies. This is called justification by faith in Christ.

In the new covenant of faith, perfect innocence is still required, but it is required of the team or partnership of Christ-and-me, rather than of me alone. Because Christ and I are one in the gospel covenant, God accepts our combined total worthiness, and together Christ and I are perfectly worthy. As a result, in Christ I am clean and worthy today. My individual perfect performance remains a long-term personal goal and will be the eventual outcome of the covenant relationship, but it is not a prerequisite to being justified in the short run by faith in Christ. "We know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. And we know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true." (D&C 20:29-30.)

In the New Testament the two means of justification, by law and by faith, are referred to as separate yokes or burdens. The obligation of the law with its demand for perfect obedience was compared to a heavy "yoke of bondage" (Gal. 5:1; see Acts 15:10), while the obligations of the gospel covenant with its repentance, forgiveness, and atonement are called "easy" and "light": "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matt. 11:28-30.)

There is no heavier yoke than the demand for perfection—the curse of the law. And many of the Saints still struggle under its load. But the good news is that in Christ we are set free of that crushing burden. He bore that particular burden for us, and his perfect performance extended and applied to us frees us from a similar requirement at this time. In the gospel covenant, we exchange the burden of sin for the obligation to love him and each other and to do the very best we can.

KEEPING THE COMMANDMENTS

But are we not required then to keep the commandments? The answer is yes—and no. When I ask my students if it is necessary to keep the commandments to enter into the celestial kingdom, they all answer with absolute certainty that it is. They know that this is true because they have heard Church leaders and teachers tell them so all of their lives. But when I ask them if they've ever broken a commandment, or if they are not now living any commandments one hundred percent, most of them answer in the affirmative. They don't usually see the major problem implied by these two answers.

Latter-day Saints habitually use the phrase "keeping the commandments" differently from its technical and historical meaning outside the Church. This is not wrong, but it is different, and for this reason "keeping the commandments" is sometimes an ambiguous and troublesome phrase for the Latter-day Saints, particularly when they talk to non-Latter-day Saints. We generally say "keeping the commandments" when what we really mean is "trying real hard to keep the commandments and succeeding most of the time." Defined in this way, the phrase describes the attempts at obedience that the new covenant requires as our token of "good faith." Defined in this way, "keeping the commandments" is both possible and necessary; that is, trying to keep the commandments, doing the best we can at it, is a requirement of the gospel covenant, even though succeeding right now in keeping all of the commandments all of the time is not. This is why the gospel covenant offers repentance and atonement in addition to commandments.

Technically, however, this customary LDS usage is incorrect. If we insist on fine points, "keeping the commandments" means not breaking them—not any of them, not ever. It means keeping them perfectly, and in reality no one does this. Technically, you can't claim to keep the commandments in this sense so long as you break any of them at all. This is what James means when he says in James 2:10: "For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the law."

The ambiguity between the traditional meaning and the customary LDS usage of "keeping the commandments" has caused Latter-day Saints and other Christians to talk past each other on occasion and led some who don't understand our theological vocabulary to accuse us of believing in salvation by works. It has also caused some in the Church to conclude incorrectly that perfect performance is a requirement of the gospel covenant, even though the real bottom line is being committed to the proper goals and doing all we can to achieve them. In fact, the whole purpose of the atonement of Christ is to provide a way whereby those who have not kept, do not keep, and probably will not keep all the commandments all the time can still be exalted in the celestial kingdom of God—where they will continue to make progress in eternity until they are perfected—provided that they genuinely hunger and thirst after righteousness.

In the New Testament, when Paul talks about keeping the commandments or being justified by works, he means obeying all the commandments all the time. Therefore he rightly concludes that no one can "keep the commandments" in this sense, that our failure to keep the commandments perfectly condemns us, and that we must look somewhere else for a means of salvation. Strictly speaking, then, it doesn't matter which commandments you keep and which ones you break; if you don't keep them all, you are a transgressor and guilty rather than righteous or just. When the terms are defined in this way, clearly whoever would claim to be righteous on the basis of "keeping the commandments" must keep all of the commandments all of the time. Good luck.

THE TERMS OF THE NEW COVENANT

Where the terms of the old contract, the Mosaic law, were perfect obedience to rules in exchange for justification before God, salvation from enemies, and an inheritance in the promised land, the terms of the new contract are (1) faith in the Lord Jesus Christ—an ongoing belief in and commitment to the Savior, (2) repentance—an ongoing process of repudiating our mistakes and trying again, and (3) baptism—a symbolic ordinance in which the actual removal of guilt takes place. When we have done all this, we are worthy to (4) receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Receiving this gift verifies that the covenant is accepted, that we have been cleansed of our past sins, and that we are therefore worthy of the companionship of this third member of the Godhead. (See 3 Ne. 27:19-21.) Those who keep the new covenant also receive justification before God, salvation from enemies (our real enemies—sin and death), and an inheritance in a promised land (the kingdom of God). Thus the new covenant provides for us, on terms we can meet, all the blessings promised by, but unattainable under, the old covenant.

So this is one way of understanding the gospel covenant, the Savior's proposition—his proposal to his beloved. The covenant is an agreement, a partnership agreement, between ourselves and our Savior. We must believe in Christ, and we must believe in justification by faith in Christ. We must be committed to both. Knowing that we cannot do everything that the law demanded from us, in the gospel covenant we agree to do all that we can do. We agree to give our Savior our best effort, to give him everything we have. We agree that perfection is our ultimate goal and that we will work with him toward that goal. Thus the idea of "keeping the commandments" is still a vital part of the arrangement, but "keeping the commandments perfectly" isn't, at least not for now. In return for this wonderful concession, we also agree to repent whenever and however we fail to keep the commandments perfectly and to try again, and again, and again, if necessary, and never to give up repenting and trying to be like him.

The Savior in turn agrees to cover our mistakes while we are learning and making progress. Although our private, individual perfection comes later, long after this life is over, our partnership perfection, our perfection-in-Christ, is effective immediately. From the moment we enter into the covenant with him, our mistakes are covered—we are perfected in him provided only that we continue in the covenant relationship, that we "endure to the end." As we are rendered innocent, clean, and worthy by faith, repentance, and baptism, we are able to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, which God gives to us as "earnest money" (see Eph. 1:14; 2 Cor. 1:22; 5:5), a sort of guarantee and down payment on the wonderful blessings we will inherit. In the gift of the Holy Ghost, Christ also provides his junior partners with a compass for better spiritual navigation, with the comfort of a testimony, and with the assurance that they have indeed been justified through his covenant.

Like tithing, the terms of this covenant are in one sense the same for everyone, yet in another sense different for each according to individual ability. The terms of the law of tithing are universal—one tenth of our increase annually. (See D&C 119:4.) Yet this same formula works out to a different dollar amount for each individual. The same is true of the gospel covenant. The Savior requires from each of us a specific percentage: all that we have, or one hundred percent. Yet each individual's one hundred percent will be a different quantity from everyone else's, depending on the spiritual knowledge and maturity of the individual. What a marvelous flexibility—he never requires more than I am able to give, and what he does require of me is always appropriate to my knowledge and circumstances.

This is why I mustn't be discouraged that I haven't made as much progress as Brother X or Sister Y. My obligation is to give all I have, not all someone else has, to be as good as I can be, not as good as someone else is. In Doctrine and Covenants 10:4 the Lord even warns against running faster than we are able: "Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength and means provided." Have faith in Christ; do the best you can; don't try to do more than you can.

The apostles and prophets are justified through faith in Christ on exactly the same terms as I am, and when I reach their level of growth and maturity in the gospel, their level of performance will be required of me—but not until then. So I should not despair just because I don't seem to be doing as well as some others are doing, just as I should not expect to pay the same quantity in tithing as some others pay. What God requires in both cases is fair and appropriate for each individual.

However, the converse is also true. Just as I shouldn't get depressed because some do better than I do, even so I shouldn't look down on those who don't do as well as I do. For the terms of the contract are the same for them as for me: "Give me all you have, however great or small a quantity that may be, and I will do the rest while you learn how." No matter that we have sixty-one cents, or a dollar and a half, or two cents—the bargain is the same: "Give me all you have, and I will do the rest." Since we are all short of what we need, though by differing amounts, we are all in the same boat and in need of the same salvation. Therefore, the Savior's covenant offer is the same to all.

ATTITUDE

Obviously then, the crucial consideration for determining whether or not we have a valid covenant is not necessarily our relative performance or even our "goodness" as we humans judge goodness, but rather our attitude—the desires of our heart. The scriptures themselves make this clear: "Wherefore, redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth. Behold he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered." (2 Ne. 2:6-7.)

Attitude—the condition of our hearts—is everything. No matter how proud we may be of our relative ability to keep the commandments, until our attitude is right, until our hearts are broken and our spirits are contrite, our relative goodness is of little benefit. However impressive any individual's relative performance might be, without the Savior that performance is insufficient for salvation; it falls short of the celestial perfection required for the presence of God.

On the other hand, once our attitude is right—that is, once our hearts are broken and our spirits are contrite—our relative weakness is of just as little importance, provided we enter into and keep the covenant. When the cost of the bicycle is over one hundred dollars, what possible difference can it make in the long run that I lacked one hundred but you lacked only ninety-nine? We are both beggars at the mercy of God. Therefore, I can feel no superiority over the least struggling member. I can only feel empathy for someone who shares my own situation before God.

THE SACRAMENT

Because conversion and repentance are not once-and-for-all events, and because we cannot keep all the commandments all the time, the covenant must be renewed and reaffirmed on a regular basis. Fallen beings like ourselves need to be reminded of the covenant we made and the commitment we expressed at baptism. We need frequent opportunities for course corrections. In many denominations, it would be thought odd that the sacrament of the Lord's Supper is offered every week. Yet Latter-day Saints know that imperfect beings must regularly reaffirm their personal goal of perfection, being justified in the meantime by the atonement of Christ.

Accordingly, each week we come before the Lord as we prepare for the sacrament and say essentially, "Heavenly Father, I wasn't perfect again this week, but I repent of my sins and reaffirm my commitment to keep all the commandments. I promise to go back and try again with all my heart, might, mind, and strength. I still want and need the cleansing that comes through faith, repentance, and baptism. Please extend my contract, my covenant of baptism, and grant me the continued blessings of the Atonement and the companionship of the Holy Ghost."

Doctrine and Covenants 20:77 may be the scripture most familiar to Latter-day Saints. This prayer is offered every time the Saints renew their covenant relationship with God: "O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father . . . "

As we renew the gospel covenant by partaking of the sacrament, we naturally must do it in remembrance of the Son who made the covenant possible. Then with our Savior and his sacrifice in mind, we bear witness of certain things. To witness means to testify, to swear to, or to affirm. Hence, "and witness unto thee" introduces the specific affirmations, the legal fine print, of the prayer: " . . . and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them." (Italics added.)

Why are the three words "are willing to" necessary here? Are they important? Would it make a difference if the prayer left these out and just read: " . . . and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them"? Yes, it would make a difference. It would make a difference because I cannot do this latter thing. I can't witness, affirm, or swear that I do always remember him and keep his commandments. I would be lying, and I know it—I want to do the right thing, but sometimes I don't. This is precisely the problem that makes the atonement of Christ and the gospel covenant necessary for me in the first place—I can't keep all the commandments all the time no matter how hard I try. It follows that I can't honestly witness to God that I will keep all the commandments when I know that, in some degree at least, I probably won't.

However, I can with absolute honesty witness that I am willing to. I can swear that this is the desire of my heart. I can affirm that I hunger and thirst after these things, that I will do all I can to be obedient. Thus even by the technical terms of the covenant renewal prayer, God lets me know that the honest commitment of my heart and my best efforts are sufficient for the covenant to be renewed, and that the covenant of faith is sufficient, through the grace of Christ, to justify me before God.

THE ACCEPTABILITY OF COMMITTED HEARTS

Above all else, God wants our hearts. Imperfect performance can be corrected, sins can be remitted, mistakes can be erased—but God can do nothing with an unwilling and rebellious heart until it repents. Weakness can be saved; rebellion cannot. "Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind." (D&C 64:34.)

Another scripture that indicates how our sincere willingness and honest desire are acceptable to God in the absence of perfect performance is Doctrine and Covenants 46:9. This scripture deals with the gifts of the Spirit enjoyed by the Saints: "They are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, . . . " The gifts of the Spirit are for those who love God and keep all his commandments? Oh, no—not all the commandments! I'll never qualify! But wait, there's a comma! " . . . and him that seeketh so to do." (Italics added.) Thank God for what comes after the comma! Even those of us who aren't perfect may enjoy the gifts and blessings of the Spirit, as long as we are seeking to keep the commandments to the best of our ability.

Similarly, it is recorded in the Pearl of Great Price how the Holy Ghost confirmed to Adam "that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will." (Moses 5:9.) Notice that it doesn't say, "Even as many as are perfect." The point is clear: Adam is not perfect; Adam is imperfect and fallen (like you and me). That's why he needed a Savior (like you and me). The promise is to as many as will (using "will" in the older sense of "to be willing")—thus, to all those who really want redemption from their imperfection. Another of the great promises of the new covenant is that all those who really want and work for the kingdom of God with all their strength, however great or little their strength may be, will inherit that kingdom.

And that is good news.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Calvin P. Rudd, "Salvation of Children," in Encyclopedia of Mormonism, ed. Daniel H. Ludlow, 5 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992), 1:269.
[^2] The Greek word charis, translated here as ''thank,'' is the standard New Testament word for ''grace.''
[^3] ''I Stand All Amazed,'' Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 193.
