Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ ( 1992)

Chapter Five

MISUNDERSTANDING GRACE

The doctrine of grace is susceptible to misunderstanding or distortion in several ways. Perhaps the most serious distortion is to argue that since in the covenant relationship Christ makes up what I lack, I don't need to work as hard anymore. I can relax and let Jesus do everything for me; I can just coast along with a token effort, clinging tenaciously to my favorite sins, and still expect to be "saved by grace."

In the early Christian Church, the Apostle Paul was confronted by those who thought grace would be a license and a shield for sin: "What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness." (Rom. 6:15-16.)

The false doctrine of salvation by grace without commitment or loyalty violates the terms of the gospel covenant by asking Jesus to do for me what I could very well do for myself—but don't want to. Anyone can pretend to be doing their best and pretend to be justified by faith in Christ and to enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost, while in truth they remain obstinately committed to their sins. No one but God knows they are lying. I wish I could offer an objective test for distinguishing between the honest in heart who strive to do what they can and the pretenders who expect to be carried when they could walk, but I don't know how to do it. I am content that God knows the difference.

Certainly those who say, "I'm doing the best I can," but then willfully break the commandments need to learn the difference between wanting righteousness and wishing they wanted righteousness. Though God may accept righteous intentions and desires in place of perfect performance, he takes no wooden nickels. He will not accept in place of righteous intentions and desires mere wishes that we had some. The latter is not a commitment. It is not faithful. It does not meet the obligations of the gospel covenant—and it receives no promise. For in these cases the individuals don't really hunger and thirst after righteousness but after sin, and they expect Jesus to tolerate it or even to subsidize it. These have broken their covenant. Doctrine and Covenants 50:7-8 says, "Verily I say unto you, there are hypocrites among you, who have deceived some. . . . But the hypocrites shall be detected and shall be cut off, either in life or in death, even as I will."

Individuals who commit the moral and doctrinal error of refusing to do what they could very well do seek to be saved in their sins rather than from their sins. But that can never happen. There is a vast difference between viewing my sins as enemies from which I'm trying with difficulty to escape and viewing my sins as comfortable old friends I'm reluctant to leave behind. There is a difference between being unable to conquer all my sins right now, in which case the covenant promises me hope, and being unwilling even to try, in which case I am left to face justice alone. The covenant offers grace and forgiveness through ongoing repentance both to those who try and succeed and to those who try but fail yet try again. However, there is no forgiveness for those who will not try, or who try once or twice without success and then give up.

"EASY" GRACE

On one occasion I was lecturing on a related subject in a small town in Nevada. I explained that perfection was not required of us all at once but that we are obligated to do all we can while the Savior has promised to do the rest. After the lecture someone came up to me and said, "Dr. Robinson, do you know what this means? It means I don't have to can peaches this year!" At this there was a general round of laughter, but when it subsided, I quickly responded, "Oh no, my friend, you have misunderstood me. That's not what it means at all. If you really believe that God expects you to can peaches (and that's an arguable proposition), then you must can all the peaches you're able to can. All this doctrine means is that you don't need to feel guilty or worry about the peaches you can't can."

This is not a doctrine of "easy" grace. There is no virtue one might have possessed before entering the covenant that one may then discard or renounce upon entering the covenant—without violating the covenant. The gospel covenant is not an excuse to work beneath our abilities. The covenant requires more than merely wishing we were better; we've got to actually do what is within our power. Although personal perfection is not required of us right now, our best attempt at it is. The good news is that God will not require of us more than the best we can do, but the bad news is he will not accept less than that either.

Moreover, there is really no such thing as "easy" grace because the partnership with Christ isn't easy—it calls for the best and the highest within us. He requires our loyalty, our service to God with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. He demands ongoing repentance and continual recommitment. And he offers no proof and no guarantee beyond the private witness of the Spirit that he can do what he promises. Rather, he asks us to trust him, to accept his word on faith.

The Lord's present law of temporal salvation (the welfare program) works on essentially the same terms as its spiritual counterpart. Individuals in need of temporal help are required to contribute all they can toward the desired goal. They are required to expend all their own resources, however great or small these may be. Then the Lord through the Church and its members adds whatever else may be necessary. When properly administered, the temporal arrangement is a partnership that meets an individual's honest needs while still demanding his or her best efforts. Moreover, the arrangement assumes progress will be made, and it aims eventually at making the individual self-sufficient.

The principle of spiritual welfare is no different. As we demonstrate our good faith by doing all that we can and consecrating all our own resources to the common purpose, the grace of God and the atonement of Christ are sufficient to meet all our other needs, but the covenant still demands our best efforts, assumes progress will be made, and aims at eventually making us self-sufficient as far as righteousness is concerned.

GOSPEL SUPERLATIVES

A second common distortion of the doctrine of grace, less sinister perhaps than "easy" grace but I think more widespread in the Church, is the view that the Savior extends his grace to us only after we've done all we possibly can do. It would follow then that since no one ever really does all they possibly, theoretically could have done, no one can ever really be worthy of grace either. The false logic runs like this:

This kind of thinking is merely the old demand for total perfection trying to sneak in the back door of the Church in a gospel disguise, and it mocks the atonement of Christ by insisting that we must perfect and save ourselves before the Savior can save us, that we must first cure ourselves before we deserve to call a doctor. Such logic would make it impossible for Christ to save anyone, ever. Unfortunately, sometimes even the scripturally literate will limit their concept of grace in this way without realizing that, in the long run, it turns the doctrine of grace into salvation by works. Just as mercy isn't mercy if we deserve it, so grace isn't grace if we earn it.

There are a great many superlatives used in the scriptures and the Church to exhort the Saints and describe their obligations: all our heart, our greatest desire, our best effort, after all we can do, always, every, never, and so on. We must remember that applied to mortals these terms are aspirational—that is, they define our desires and set our goals—that in each case the circumstances of the individual determine what "all," "the best," or "the greatest" mean, and that "never," "every," or "always" are goals to be reached with the help of Christ and through his atonement.

"AFTER ALL WE CAN DO"

In my opinion some of the blame for our misapplication of gospel superlatives and other similarly obsessive reasoning comes from a misunderstanding of 2 Nephi 25:23: "For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (Italics added.)

At first glance at this scripture, we might think that grace is offered to us only chronologically after we have completed doing all we can do, but this is demonstrably false, for we have already received many manifestations of God's grace before we even come to this point. By his grace, we live and breathe. By grace, we are spiritually begotten children of heavenly parents and enjoy divine prospects. By grace, a plan was prepared and a savior designated for humanity when Adam and Eve fell. By grace, the good news of this gospel comes to us and informs us of our eternal options. By grace, we have the agency to accept the gospel when we hear it. By the grace that comes through faith in Christ, we start the repentance process; and by grace, we are justified and made part of God's kingdom even while that process is still incomplete. The grace of God has been involved in our spiritual progress from the beginning and will be involved in our progress until the end.

It therefore belittles God's grace to think of it as only a cherry on top added at the last moment as a mere finishing touch to what we have already accomplished on our own without any help from God. Instead the reverse would be a truer proposition: our efforts are the cherry on top added to all that God has already done for us.

Actually, I understand the preposition "after" in 2 Nephi 25:23 to be a preposition of separation rather than a preposition of time. It denotes logical separateness rather than temporal sequence. We are saved by grace "apart from all we can do," or "all we can do notwithstanding," or even "regardless of all we can do." Another acceptable paraphrase of the sense of the verse might read, "We are still saved by grace, after all is said and done."

In addition, even the phrase "all we can do" is susceptible to a sinister interpretation as meaning every single good deed we could conceivably have ever done. This is nonsense. If grace could operate only in such cases, no one could ever be saved, not even the best among us. It is precisely because we don't always do everything we could have done that we need a savior in the first place, so obviously we can't make doing everything we could have done a condition for receiving grace and being saved! I believe the emphasis in 2 Nephi 25:23 is meant to fall on the word we ("all we can do," as opposed to all he can do). Moreover, "all we can do" here should probably be understood in the sense of "everything we can do," or even "whatever we can do."

Thus, the correct sense of 2 Nephi 25:23 would be that we are ultimately saved by grace apart from whatever we manage to do. Grace is not merely a decorative touch or a finishing bit of trim to top off our own efforts—it is God's participation in the process of our salvation from its beginning to its end. Though I must be intimately involved in the process of my salvation, in the long run the success of that venture is utterly dependent upon the grace of Christ.

BUT WHEN HAVE I DONE ENOUGH?

I have a friend who always asks at about this point, "But when have I done enough? How can I know that I've made it?" This misunderstands the doctrine of grace by asking the wrong question. The right question is "When is my offering acceptable to the Lord? When are my efforts accepted for the time being?" You see, the answer to the former question, "When have I done enough?" is never in this life. Since the goal is perfection, the Lord can never unconditionally approve an imperfect performance. No matter how much we do in mortality, no matter how well we perform, the demand to do better, the pressure to improve and to make progress, will never go away. We have not yet arrived.

In this life we are all unprofitable servants, or to use a more modern term, we are all bad investments. (See, for example, Luke 17:10; Mosiah 2:21.) From the Savior's perspective, even the most righteous among us cost more to save and maintain than we can produce in return. So if we're looking for the Lord to say, "OK, you've done enough. Your obligation is fulfilled. You've made it, now relax," we're going to be disappointed. We need to accept the fact that we will never in this life, even through our most valiant efforts, reach the break-even point. We are all unprofitable servants being carried along on the Savior's back by his good will—by his grace.

However, the Lord does say to us, "Given your present circumstances and your present level of maturity, you're doing a decent job. Of course it's not perfect, but your efforts are acceptable for the time being. I am pleased with what you've done." We may not be profitable servants yet in the ultimate sense, but we can still be good and faithful ones in this limited sense. So if we are doing what can reasonably be expected of a loyal disciple in our present circumstances, then we can have faith that our offering is accepted through the grace of God. Of course we're unprofitable—all of us. Yet within the shelter of the covenant, our honest attempts are acceptable for the time being.

In fact, there is a way we can know that our efforts are acceptable, that our covenant is recognized and valid before God. If we experience the gifts of the Spirit or the influence of the Holy Ghost, we can know that we are in the covenant relationship, for the gifts and companionship of the Holy Ghost are given to none else. This is one reason why the gift of the Holy Ghost is given—as a token and assurance of our covenant status and as a down payment to us on the blessings and glory to come if we are faithful. Paul refers to the Holy Ghost as "the earnest of our inheritance" (Eph. 1:14), a reference to "earnest money," which, though only a token payment, makes a deal binding when it changes hands. Thus the "earnest [money] of the Spirit in our hearts" (2 Cor. 1:22; 5:5) assures us of the validity and efficacy of our deal, our covenant, with God.

Do you feel the influence of the Holy Ghost in your life? Do you enjoy the gifts of the Spirit? Then you can know that God accepts your faith, repentance, and baptism and has agreed that "[you] may always have his Spirit to be with [you]." (D&C 20:77.) This is perhaps one reason why the Holy Ghost is called the Comforter, because if we enjoy that gift, we can know that our efforts are acceptable—for now—and that we are justified before God by our faith in Christ. And that is comfort indeed.

GIVING HIM EVERYTHING

So what does it mean to give him everything? Some of us simply have more ability, more talents, than others. Yet according to the parable, those with only one talent or only two talents are not expected to earn five. Only the one with five talents is expected to earn five.

Let me illustrate with an example. Many years ago I came into contact with a woman who was, initially at least, one of the roughest persons I have ever known. Abused as a child, she had run away from home and had lived on the streets for years. As a young woman, she traveled around the country with a motorcycle gang. In late middle age, her beauty gone, she spent most of her time in a pub, where some missionaries met her when they went in to get change for a pay phone outside. When she was baptized, many of the members worried that her conversion wouldn't last, and there were good reasons to suspect it might not.

For a long time after her baptism, this sister still swore like a trooper, even in Church, and never quite lived the Word of Wisdom one hundred percent. On one occasion during her first year in the Church, she lost her temper during a Relief Society meeting and punched out one of the other sisters. Her ex-husband is an alcoholic, and her children have all spent time in jail.

Now the question before us is whether someone like this can seriously expect to be saved. What hope does a person like this, with all her faults and weaknesses, really have? With her background and problems, why bother coming to Church at all?

"Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." God does not lie. Whoever will come, may come. All are invited; none is excluded. Though this sister had further to travel than most, the same covenant was offered to her: "Do all you can. I will do the rest while you learn how." And she was as faithful as she could be under her circumstances. She never said, "No, I won't," or "Get off my back," or "Why talk to me? Talk to him, he started it." She always said, "I know; I'm sorry. I'll try to do better." Then she would try to do better. Often she would fail, but little by little over the years, she improved a great deal. First she gave up coffee, tea, and alcohol. Then she stopped swearing. Later she overcame smoking and got her temper somewhat under control. Finally, after she'd been in the Church many years, she was ready to go to the temple. Can such a person really expect to inherit the kingdom of God? Of course.

But now the harder question. At what point did this sister become a candidate for the kingdom? Was it when she finally gave up cigarettes, or when she got her language and temper under control? Or was it when she finally qualified for a temple recommend? No. It was none of these, though they were all important landmarks in her progress. She was justified through her faith in Jesus Christ on the day that she repented of her sins, was baptized, and received the gift of the Holy Ghost, for she entered into that covenant in good faith and in all sincerity. She believed in Christ, and she believed Christ. Like the widow with her mite, she gave all she had and held nothing back. It may not have been much, but it was everything.

Every week she took the sacrament, having repented of her mistakes and resolving again to eliminate them. Some things took years to overcome. Other things perhaps haven't been overcome yet, but she still tries, and she won't give up. And as long as she won't give up but endures to the end in the gospel harness, pulling toward the kingdom, her reward is sure. God knows our circumstances, and he judges us accordingly. He knows who is standing in a hole and who is standing on a chair, and he does not just measure height—he measures growth.

Each of us operates at a different level of performance within the covenant boundaries. The percentages vary both from person to person and, even for the same person, over a period of time. In my case, my efforts might take me twenty percent of the way to perfection. The Savior covers the other eighty percent. In your case, your efforts might take you fifty percent—or two percent—of the way. The Savior still covers the difference. But in every case the sum of the joint effort is the same—anyone's best efforts, however great or small, plus the atonement of Christ will equal 100 percent of what is needed to enter God's kingdom.

FALSE PERFECTION

Then what does it mean to be perfect? And why are we commanded in the scriptures to be perfect? (See Matt. 5:48; 3 Ne. 12:48.) Actually, I dislike the word perfect because it is often misused. I frequently wince when I hear it in talks or lessons, because more often than not it is used with its philosophical meaning of "unimprovable," and this is almost never its scriptural meaning. Latter-day Saints believe in eternal progress. No one can ever be "unimprovable" in the ultimate sense. Rather, to be perfect in this life is to enter into the covenant of the gospel and receive perfection-in-Christ. [^1]

So far in this book I have myself used the word perfect to mean without error, fault, or blemish, but even this is different than the usual scriptural sense. In the New Testament the Greek word translated "perfect" is teleios. It means ripe, mature, ready, complete, whole, and so forth. An apple on the tree might be called teleios when it was ripe and ready to be picked, but that doesn't mean it was an unimprovable apple. It might still have a worm in it.

Here is another of the great secrets: To be perfect means to be doing the best you can do under the circumstances you are in. As Brigham Young once explained:

We all occupy diversified stations in the world, and in the kingdom of God. Those who do right, and seek the glory of the Father in heaven, whether their knowledge be little or much, or whether they can do little, or much, if they do the very best they know how, they are perfect. . . . "Be ye as perfect as ye can," for that is all we can do, though it is written, "Be ye perfect as your Father who is in heaven is perfect." To be as perfect as we possibly can, according to our knowledge, is to be just as perfect as our Father in heaven is. He cannot be any more perfect than He knows how, any more than we. When we are doing as well as we know how in the sphere and station which we occupy here, we are justified. [^2]

Brigham Young can say that doing the best we know how is being perfect because it fulfills our part of the covenant, and as we do this, Jesus Christ fulfills his part of the covenant and makes us perfect through his merit and mercy. The perfection we receive in this manner is perfection-in-Christ. This is also the perfection that allows us to enter the celestial kingdom. The other perfection, the actual, personal, "I-never-make-a-mistake" kind of perfection comes even later than that—much later.

It is reported that someone once challenged the work of Mother Teresa, the holy woman who ministers to the poorest outcasts in Calcutta, India, on the grounds that she could never succeed at what she was trying to do. No matter how hard she worked, her antagonist insisted, there would be more of the poor and sick tomorrow than there were today, and all her efforts could never even make a dent in the problem. Since she could never hope to succeed, why did she waste her efforts in a losing cause? Mother Teresa's answer was a classic. "God does not require that I succeed," she replied, "only that I do what I can." And that is the gospel truth.

THEN WHY THE DEMAND FOR MORE?

Unfortunately, people are frequently asked in the Church to do more than they really can do. I remember one Sunday in priesthood meeting in Durham, North Carolina, when the elders were asked to donate just one Saturday that month to each of six worthy but separate projects. Now this occurred in a month with only four Saturdays in it. In short, filling all six assignments was not physically possible for anyone, but when this was pointed out, none of the obligations were repealed. Each individual was just left to do "the best he could."

Several years ago, as I read Matthew 11:28-30, about Jesus' yoke being easy and his burden being light, to a New Testament class, a female student at the back of the class interrupted me with a loud, "Ha!" When I invited her to explain what she meant by her outburst, she said, "His yoke is easy? His burden is light? Anyone in this church who believes that is either a recent convert or brain-dead."

Now this sister was a divorced mother of several children who was back in school trying to get a better life for herself and her family. She continued, "I used to try to do and be everything that the Church wanted, but I finally had to give up. They always wanted more than I had. I can't help that I'm broke, or a single parent with two jobs trying to go to school full-time. I can't do what the other Saints can, and they always want more out of me—more time, more talent, more money, more commitment—and I just don't have more to give. The demands of the Church exceed my supply."

Why does the Church sometimes seem to demand more of me than I think I can do? Why is there always so much pressure for me to be and to do and to give more? Well, first of all we've got to remember that perfection is the goal, a real goal, and we should be working for it with all our best efforts. We just need to remember at the same time that our salvation is not hanging in the balance.

For example, when I was in high school, I used to work out in the weight room. In those days of free weights, a spotter always stood next to the bench to grab the bar when I got in trouble. But invariably there was a little ritual exchange, familiar to all who have worked out in a gym, that went like this. After doing all the repetitions with the barbell that I was able to, being on the brink of collapse, I would say to the spotter, "Take it!" But the spotter would always say, "No, do one more!" Usually by reaching way down deep, I could in fact manage one more rep, after which I would say, "OK, take it!" Again the spotter would reply, "No, do one more." Now understand that no matter how many times I did "just one more" by whatever superhuman effort, when that one was done, the spotter would still say, "Just one more!" This would continue until my muscles actually gave out, and then the spotter would grab the bar.

Now when this would happen, I was not so naive as to say, "I'm humiliated, embarrassed, and offended. You wanted one more rep, and I couldn't do it. You ask too much of me; you always want more than I can give. I can't cope with your demands. I'm going home, and I'm never coming back." I didn't feel this way because in a gym both the spotters and the lifters understand that the real power is gained on the last repetition, on the thin edge between what one can do and what one can't. By coaxing me into working at the limits of my abilities, the spotter helped me develop the power I was seeking. There was never embarrassment that I couldn't do that last rep, and no one seriously expected it, but I did get the satisfaction of knowing that I had worked out to the limits of my strength and that it was making me stronger.

I believe the same principle can be applied to the seemingly heavy demands of the Church. One purpose of the Church is to perfect the Saints. Since we make the most progress by working at the limits of our abilities, then no matter how much we do or how well we do it, the Lord—like the spotter in the gym—will always ask for more, will always seek improvement, will always push us toward perfection. Since our very real goal is perfection, the demands of the Spotter can be turned up to infinity and will exceed the abilities of any individual. We just need to remember that our salvation is not hanging in the balance, for that issue is already settled if we are keeping our covenants. We shouldn't get embarrassed when we reach our limits or take offense when we can't do all that is asked of us. Rather, we must learn to take satisfaction in performing at the limits of our ability (for that is where the real power is gained) and let God worry about the rest. When pressed by the demands of perfection, we must remind ourselves that our best efforts will be accepted as payment in full—at least for now.

The "easiness" of the Savior's yoke does not mean we can expect to be excused from the hard tasks of life or be immune to its hard realities. (Ask Job or the Mormon pioneers about that.) Rather his yoke is easy (a) because it makes what was formerly impossible possible and (b) because he grants compensatory blessings and grace to help us through the hard times. The yoke of the law of Moses could not even be lifted, but the yoke of Christ can be lifted and carried because its weight is individually adapted to our abilities and strength. In this sense "easy" does not mean "totally without effort," rather it means "totally within our power." But even beyond this, those who assume his yoke in humble obedience and consecrate their efforts to him soon learn that an unseen hand lightens the load in the rough spots and leaves blessings out of all proportion to the required sacrifices.

INDIVIDUAL PERFECTION

But will I ever be perfect in the sense of being without error, fault, or blemish? I mean me separately and individually, apart from my covenant perfection-in-Christ? I think the answer is yes. For example, I envision a scene about a million years from now, after we've been in the celestial kingdom a very, very long time. I will approach the Savior and say something like, "OK, I finally did it. I have overcome eating fruit out of season (or whatever). Now what comes next?" And he will look at me and say, "Hey—that was it! Congratulations! That was the last one. You have finally learned to keep all the commandments all of the time!" And I suppose we'll invite in the neighborhood and have a little "Steve-finally-made-it" party.

But that's a million years from now, and long after the resurrection of the just. In the meantime, my only hope is that Christ will carry me on his shoulders. Between now and then, my only hope of perfection is the perfection-in-Christ that he shares with those in the gospel covenant, for that very perfection-in-Christ and nothing else is what will allow me into the celestial kingdom at the day of judgment.

THE COMFORT OF KNOWING

Many years ago Janet and I had a friend who did not understand how grace worked and who would frequently say something like this: "Well, I figure my life is about half over, and I'm about halfway to the celestial kingdom, so I'm right on schedule." One day I asked her, "Judy, what would happen if you died tomorrow, where would you end up in eternity?" Apparently the thought had never occurred to her. She thought for a moment, then said, "Well, let's see, halfway to the celestial kingdom is . . . midterrestrial! That's not good enough, is it?"

No, it's not good enough. It's also not the gospel. We need to know that in this covenant relationship we have with the Savior, if we should die tomorrow, we have hope of the celestial kingdom. And that hope is one of the promised blessings of the covenant relationship: "Let us cheerfully do all things that lie in our power; and then may we stand still, with the utmost assurance, to see the salvation of God, and for his arm to be revealed." (D&C 123:17;italics added. See also D&C 106:8; Eph. 3:12.) When we have done what lies in our power, we may have and should have the "utmost assurance" of the salvation of God. Part of the comfort given by the Holy Ghost is knowing that even though I am imperfect, if I die in the covenant, I will still inherit the kingdom of God. In fact, since everyone dies while they are still imperfect, it couldn't be any other way.

Some of the best news of all is that Christ promises us that our mistakes will not be held against us if we will just maintain the covenant relationship throughout our lives. He who cannot lie promises that we will receive the kingdom of God: "Whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world." (3 Ne. 27:16.) Nephi vouches for this too. He heard the Father's voice saying, "Yea, the words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved." (2 Ne. 31:15.)

Can the Father and the Son lie? Of course not. Then if we have faith in Christ and repent of our sins, if we are baptized and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, if we remain willing and keep our covenants, then how can we doubt that we shall, through the atonement of Christ, inherit the kingdom of God? With such promises as these, who dares to doubt the truth of it?

When the prophet Enos heard the voice of Christ tell him, "Thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed," he responded, "I, Enos knew that God could not lie; wherefore, my guilt was swept away." (Enos 1:5-6.) Often those who wrestle with spiritual things want to "feel" the results before they will believe that anything has happened. This is backward. They want to feel a confirmation, the blessings of belief, before they will believe. Notice that Enos did not subjectively "feel" his guilt leave and then believe. Quite the opposite. He knew his guilt was gone because Christ told him it was gone, and he believed Christ.

Moreover, "enduring to the end" does not mean "enduring in perfection." Rather it means enduring in the covenant of faith and repentance. Thus we see that faith in Christ, repentance, and the cleansing of the Atonement cannot be one-time events in our lives. Although they may begin on a particular occasion, faith, repentance, and forgiveness are part of a continual process of rejecting our mistakes, reaffirming our desires and our goal, and realigning our lives to Christ whenever and wherever we are off track.

TRUST ME

When our twin daughters were small, Janet and I took the family to a public swimming pool for family home evening. Our intention was to teach the girls how to swim. After we got situated, I picked up Rebekah and started walking into the shallow end of the pool. As we walked into the water, I was thinking, "Gee, what a swell dad I am. This is a great family home evening." But as she felt the water rising around her, her thoughts were, "My dad is going to drown me. I'm going to die." Now the water was only three-and-a-half feet deep, but Rebekah was only three feet deep. She was so terrified of what was, in her mind, deep water, that she started to kick and scratch and scream. In her panic, she was absolutely unteachable.

Finally, I had to grab her and wrap my arms around her, then just hold her and say, "Becky, calm down! I'm your dad, and I love you. I'm not going to let anything happen to you. You're perfectly safe. Now relax and trust me!" And bless her heart, she stopped fighting, she relaxed, and she trusted me. Then, and only then, could I put my hands under her and hold her out of the water. I said, "Okay, now kick your legs. Very good. Now kick harder." And so she began to learn how to swim.

This is very much like what is happening to some of us in our spiritual lives. Some of us are so paralyzed by fear of our sins that we can't learn how to overcome them. Sometimes we're so worried about whether we're going to live or die, or whether we've made it to the kingdom, that we cannot make any real spiritual progress. Our lack of faith in Christ makes us worry about our spiritual status and doubt God's promises. I know people who agonize daily, "Was I good enough today? Did my righteous deeds outweigh my sins? Did I make the cut-off? Am I in the kingdom, or not?" As in Becky's experience with swimming, their fear gets in the way of learning and progressing. Spiritual panic cripples them.

At times like this, when the rising panic begins to paralyze us, we must believe Christ. We must hear his voice, "Stephen, calm down! I'm your Father, and I love you. I'm not going to let anything happen to you. I've got you! You're perfectly safe. Now relax and trust me, and I'll teach you what you need to do." Then he supports us in his arms and says, "OK, now pay your tithing. Pretty good. Now pay a full tithing." And so we begin to learn perfection. "Thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety." (Alma 34:16.) "In the arms of safety"—my favorite phrase from the Book of Mormon. In the gospel covenant, we are encircled in the arms of safety—His arms. "You're OK. You're going to make it. Trust me."

And that is good news.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Enos 1:7.
[^2] The term docetism comes from the Greek verb dokeo, which means ''to seem'' or ''to appear.''
