Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ ( 1992)

Chapter Six

"LORD, HOW IS IT DONE?" [^1]

Up to now we have looked at the Atonement from the perspective of those who are benefited by it. We have examined the practical issues of what the Atonement means for us and how our lives can be changed. Now we must look at the Atonement from the perspective of the One who atones, of the Savior rather than of the saved. How is it that Christ can draw upon this vast ocean of merit and mercy in my behalf? What gives him the power to save? Exactly who was he, what did he do for me, why did he do it, and what did it cost him?

THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST

First of all, Jesus was God, not only the Son of God or the Elder Brother, but God in his own right. Before he became flesh and blood, he was known and worshiped as Jehovah; the Lord God Almighty; the God of Abraham Isaac, and Jacob the God of Israel. The Apostle Paul explains that Jesus Christ is the creator of all things and that he is the power that holds all things together in their created state: "For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all things consist." (Col. 1:16.) The Apostle John says much the same thing, though emphasizing that Jesus Christ is the source of life and light: "All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men." (John 1:3-4.)

The Book of Mormon prophets further testify of the divinity of Jesus Christ. For example, Nephi declares: "The God of our fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by him, yea, the God of Abraham and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and to be buried in a sepulchre, according to the words of Zenos." (1 Ne. 19:10.)

During the events associated with the Atonement, God—in the person of God the Son, Jesus Christ—took moral responsibility for all the negatives—the suffering, pain, and death—that are a necessary part of the plan of God. This plan, defended and championed by Jesus before the world was, asks us to live in an imperfect, fallen world. At times it asks us to suffer; it asks some of us to suffer horribly. It is therefore only fair that the God who administers such a plan and who asks us to live by it should himself be willing to suffer under its provisions more than any of us. And this he did in the events of Gethsemane and Calvary. There Jesus Christ confirmed his right to ask us to suffer for him by his willingness to suffer, bleed, and die for us. In the gospel of Jesus Christ, there are no "fall guys." Nobody gets stuck with the short end of the stick for what God proposes, for he who proposed the plan is the one who suffers the most under it. This gives him the moral right to say, "It is a good plan; it's the right thing."

Occasionally some critics have suggested that Christianity is just another religion of human sacrifice. There might be something to the claim if Jesus Christ were not God, if he were only another human being. After all, if the Atonement is merely a case of God demanding the blood of a human victim in order to be reconciled to humanity and forgive us, how is this any different in principle from grabbing some poor virgin and throwing her into a volcano to save the village, or from burning children on an altar to Moloch to win his good favor? The profound difference is that in these latter cases the intent is that human beings suffer to reconcile God to humanity, while in Christianity God himself—Jesus Christ—suffers and dies to reconcile humanity to himself and to his Father. We're not trying to reach God and touch his heart with our sacrifices, rather God is trying to reach us and touch our hearts with his infinite sacrifice. The sacrificial Lamb of God who died on Calvary was God.

THE HUMANITY OF CHRIST

But according to the scriptures, Jesus was not only divine, he was also fully and genuinely human: "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth." (John 1:14.) "Wherefore in all things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted." (Heb. 2:17-18; italics added.)

A remarkable doctrine is taught here. The same Jesus Christ who is God the Son is also one of us. He was human in every respect ("in all things")—right down to being tempted like other human beings. And because he personally has been tempted, Christ can understand what temptation is. From his own personal experience of the human condition, he understands what we are dealing with here, and he can empathize with us and help us overcome temptation just as he overcame it.

But can Jesus Christ, the divine son of God, really have been tempted? Let me put the question more pointedly: Did Jesus Christ have a carnal nature and suffer carnal urges? Did he ever feel his flesh say "yes!" and have to say "no!" to it? Did he ever experience the enticement, the carnal appeal, of sin?

Many Christians want to answer, "No, Christ was too holy to experience real temptations," but I believe the correct answer, the scriptural answer, is yes. Jesus was human like the rest of us. Part of what the Book of Mormon calls the great condescension of God was Christ's willingness to come into a mortal body that would subject him to physical temptations. (See 1 Ne. 11:13-32.) Jesus' holiness and perfect obedience were the result of consistently ignoring, rather than of never encountering, the enticements of a carnal nature. The righteousness of Jesus is that he experienced the same temptations, the same carnal urges, the same distractions and opposition of the flesh and of the mind that we do in mortality, yet he instantly rejected them in every case: "He suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them." (D&C 20:22.)

Think about it. If Christ were not like us in being subject to temptation, if he were some different kind of being with qualitatively different experiences, how could he possibly set an example that we could follow? How could his person or his performance then be relevant to human beings? It doesn't matter how patiently a bird might show me how to fly, or a fish might show me how to breathe underwater. I don't have wings, and I don't have gills. These cannot teach me by example because we are not the same kind of being. Similarly, if Jesus Christ was not genuinely human, or if his righteousness and obedience were due to some special gift that I do not share with him, then he cannot teach me by example to be like he is.

In ancient times there was a heresy known as docetism, which taught that Jesus wasn't really human, that he only appeared or seemed to be human. [^2] Influenced by hellenistic thinking, docetists insisted that being human was utterly incompatible with being divine. Feeling it necessary to choose between Jesus' humanity and his divinity, they concluded that Jesus was divine and not human; despite the witness of the scriptures, they declared that his humanity was merely an illusion.

Whenever someone proposes that Jesus' experience in mortality was different in kind from that common to the rest of humanity, or that his righteousness and perfection were based on factors unavailable to the rest of us, this is, to a degree, a modern form of docetism. The mortal Jesus Christ was the best of us—but he was one of us, and being tempted is part of being human. His flesh was human flesh, and his experience was human experience. Hence the author of Hebrews insists that "[Christ] himself hath suffered being tempted." (2:18.)

Moreover, being tempted, even being tempted greatly or over a long period of time, is not in itself a sin. We seldom choose what we will be tempted by, or how strong or how frequent our temptations will be. Still, as long as we resist them, we remain innocent. Thus, for the scripture to maintain that he "hath suffered being tempted" does not insult the Savior or detract from his moral perfection.

Do not misunderstand me. I am not suggesting here that Jesus in any way indulged in unclean thoughts, for that would be sin, and he indulged nothing sinful. I do not believe that he "struggled" or "wrestled" with temptations. My only point is that he was as vulnerable to suggestions and impulses coming into his mind from his mortal nature, a nature inherited from his mortal mother, as any of us. He simply paid no attention to those suggestions, and he immediately put them out of his mind. The ability of the flesh to suggest, to entice, was the same for him as it is for us, but unlike the rest of us, he never responded to it. He didn't ponder, deliberate, or entertain the sinful options even as theoretical possibilities—"he gave no heed unto them."

"We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." (Heb. 4:15; Because he "was in all points tempted like as we are," our Savior understands our situation, knows from his own personal experience what we struggle against, and can sympathize with us and have compassion on us. Thus, when I am tempted, I don't have to appeal to some distant entity who has never been in my shoes. I can take my problems to a high priest, Jesus, who can "be touched with the feeling of my infirmities"—because he has been where I am. I can share my problems with a compassionate God who knows from experience what I am talking about and understands from experience what I am going through. There may be certain aspects of his nature that the rest of us do not fully share, but there is no aspect of our human nature that he does not share. And that is good news.

VICARIOUS SUFFERING

Still, some are haunted by the final three words in Hebrews 4:15, "yet without sin." After all, human beings aren't just tempted to sin—they actually do it. Since I have on occasion given in to my temptations and Jesus never did, since I am guilty and he never was, how can he understand the sinner? How can our Savior claim to be fully human and to understand human beings if he has never experienced human sin and guilt? How can a perfect, sinless being comprehend my private agony of unworthiness? Does he know what it's like to look in a mirror and despise what he sees looking back at him? Does he know what it is to wander through the ashes of a life destroyed by one's own choices? Human beings are inevitably the arsonists of their own happiness. What can sweet, sinless Jesus possibly know about the dark side of being human?

According to the scriptures, he knows more of the dark side than any of us. In fact, he knows more about pain, grief, loneliness, contradiction, shame, rejection, betrayal, anguish, depression, and guilt than all of us combined. For in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the hill of Calvary, Jesus took upon himself the sins and the pains of all the world. "Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed." (Isa. 53:4-5.)

I would like to draw attention to a few aspects of the Savior's vicarious suffering that often escape notice, but that are important for understanding our relationship with him. First, Jesus Christ did not just assume the punishment for our sins—he took the guilt as well. The sin, the experience itself with all of its negative consequences and ramifications, and not just the penalty for sin, became his. This is a crucial distinction. In the Atonement, Jesus does not just suffer our punishment for us, he becomes the guilty party in our place—he becomes guilty for us and experiences our guilt: "For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." (2 Cor. 5:21.)

In Christ there is a real transfer of guilt for innocence. Through the oneness of our covenant relationship, my guilt becomes Jesus' guilt, which he experienced and for which he suffered. At the same time, his innocence and perfection become mine, and I am rendered clean and worthy. In Christ our sins cease to be ours, and as far as the justice of God is concerned, we never committed them. Through the Atonement, we are not merely forgiven—we are rendered innocent once again.

If Jesus had assumed only the punishment for our sins but not the sins themselves, then when the penalty was paid, we would merely be "guilty but forgiven," instead of being sanctified through the Atonement, being perfect-in-Christ, and being innocent and worthy of the kingdom of God and the presence of the Father. Part of the good news of Christ's atonement is that it renders us sinless, innocent, perfect, and celestial, which could not happen if we stubbornly insisted on suffering for our own sins. In that case, while our sins might eventually be paid for, they would remain ours, like canceled checks. Without the atonement of Christ that removes guilt as well as pays its penalty, we can never receive the innocence necessary to dwell in the presence of God. (Cf. D&C 1:31; 19:4-19.)

In experiencing both our punishment and our guilt, Jesus learned vicariously through the Atonement what it would have felt like to commit the sins he never committed. Thus, in a sense it would be correct to say that while Jesus committed no sins, he has been guilty of them all and knows intimately and personally their awful weight. Through us, by bearing our guilt, the sinless One experienced the full horror of human sinfulness, not merely the sins of one life, but of all lives—the sins of the world. Thus through his vicarious atonement, Jesus knows more than anyone about the dark side of being human. Even in that he is preeminent among us.

At one point in his vicarious agony, Jesus cried out, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matt. 27:46.) Is it possible that the Heavenly Father had really forsaken him? Could God have abandoned him in this most sacred and terrible hour? Yes, indeed. For Christ had become guilty of the sins of the world, guilty in our place. What happens to the rest of us when we are guilty of sin? The Spirit of God withdraws from us, the heavens turn to brass, and we are left alone to stew in our guilt until we repent. In Gethsemane the best among us vicariously became the worst among us and suffered the very depths of hell. And as one who was guilty, the Savior experienced for the first time in his life the loss of the Spirit of God and of communion with his Father.

There was for him no support, no help—neither from his friends who slept through his agony, nor from the Spirit of God, which departed from him. No one has ever been as alone as Christ in the Garden. This is the significance of Isaiah 63:3: "I have trodden the winepress alone." (See also D&C 76:107.)

In Hebrew the word Geth [gath] means "press," and semane [shemen] means "oil" or "richness." Gethsemane therefore means "the press of oil" or the "press of richness." This refers to the huge presses for olives or grapes that were used to squeeze the oil or wine out of the pulp and that would be appropriately found in an olive grove like Gethsemane. Olives or grapes were put into the presses and squeezed until their juices flowed out of them.

What an appropriate name for the Garden where Jesus took upon himself the infinite weight of the sins and sorrows of the world and was pressed with that tremendous load until the blood flowed through his skin. (See Luke 22:44; D&C 19:18.) Just as olives and grapes are squeezed in the press, so Jesus, the true vine (see John 15:1), was squeezed in Gethsemane, "the press," until his richness, his juice, his oil, his blood, was shed for humanity. No wonder that the wine of the Last Supper and of the Christian sacrament is such a fitting symbol for the blood of Christ—they are obtained by the same process.

BELOW ALL THINGS

Still, however we may try to understand the Gethsemane experience, we are doomed to underestimate it. On one occasion when Joseph Smith complained to the Lord about his own trials and suffering, the Lord responded by saying, "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8.) Christ is described in several other places in scripture as having descended below all things: "He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth." (D&C 88:6; see also Eph. 4:8-10.)

In Gethsemane and on Calvary, in his horrible suffering and death, the Savior descended below all things, just as in his resurrection he ascended above all things. Between those two events, Jesus Christ compassed either personally or vicariously the whole range of possible human experiences and circumstances from the worst to the best. He has been lower than the lowest of us and higher than the highest, so "that he comprehended all things." Both spatially as the light of creation and experientially as the Atoning One, Christ fills all things and is in and through all things. He has been everywhere.

Thus when we are tempted to think that our sins have put us beyond the understanding or reach of God, we are simply mistaken, and we grossly underestimate the scope of the Atonement. However low we may fall, our Redeemer has already been there, and he went there for the sole purpose of finding and bringing us lost sheep back. I have occasionally heard people say things like, "How can I come back to Church, or pray, or approach God after what I've done. I've sunk too low; I've put myself beyond his reach. I'm too vile to save." To this the Savior responds essentially, "I know where you are; I've been where you are—and worse than that. I know what you're feeling, for I have felt it. I remember my own pain when I went through it, and my heart aches for you. But I want you back. I'll even carry you back, if you'll let me." No matter how lost we get, Jesus Christ, the way back, the door home, is always at our elbow.

AN INFINITE ATONEMENT

The suffering of Jesus Christ in the Garden and on the cross exceeded the combined suffering of all human beings. The suffering of Jesus was not just tough pain and a bad death, it was not just the most painful of all human experiences and deaths. The suffering of Christ was cumulative; it was in fact infinite. When Christ descended below all things, he crossed the line from the finite, that which can be measured, to the infinite. And as his suffering was infinite, so now is his glory infinite, and infinite also is his power to save. "Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement—save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption." (2 Ne. 9:7.) "Therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world." (Alma 34:12; see also 2 Ne. 25:16; Alma 34:10, D&C 19:10-19.)

Human nature makes us want to quantify, to measure the atonement of Christ, but his ordeal is off any scale; it is beyond our comprehension. Jesus bore not just the sins of the world, but the sorrows, pains, and sicknesses of the world as well: "He shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind, and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:11-12.)

How many people have suffered how much pain in our world just for today? How many people in how many hospitals right now all over the world are crying out for another shot to ease the pain? Just today? Yet the suffering of Jesus Christ in the Garden and on the cross exceeded the combined suffering of all human beings from our first parents to the Last Day, for this world and for all worlds created by his power.

All the negative aspects of human existence brought about by the Fall, Jesus Christ absorbed into himself. He experienced vicariously in Gethsemane all the private griefs and heartaches, all the physical pains and handicaps, all the emotional burdens and depressions of the human family. He knows the loneliness of those who don't fit in or who aren't handsome or pretty. He knows what it's like to choose up teams and be the last one chosen. He knows the anguish of parents whose children go wrong. He knows the private hell of the abused child or spouse. He knows all these things personally and intimately because he lived them in the Gethsemane experience. Having personally lived a perfect life, he then chose to experience our imperfect lives. In that infinite Gethsemane experience, the meridian of time, the center of eternity, he lived a billion billion lifetimes of sin, pain, disease, and sorrow.

God uses no magic wand to simply wave bad things into nonexistence. The sins that he remits, he remits by making them his own and suffering them. The pain and heartaches that he relieves, he relieves by suffering them himself. These things can be shared and absorbed, but they cannot be simply wished or waved away. They must be suffered. Thus we owe him not only for our spiritual cleansing from sin, but for our physical, mental, and emotional healings as well, for he has borne these infirmities for us also. All that the Fall put wrong, the Savior in his atonement puts right. It is all part of his infinite sacrifice—of his infinite gift.

For this reason, to be able to bear an infinite weight of agony, Jesus needed to have an infinite, divine Father. From Mary he inherited the ability to die, but from his Father he inherited the ability to live if he so chose. Therefore his life could not be taken without his consent—he had power over death. (See John 10:17-18.) If you or I had gone into the press of Gethsemane and shouldered that load of sin and pain, it would have squashed us like bugs, snuffed us out instantly. But because he was the Son of God and had power over death, his life could not be taken until he laid it down of his own will.

In the Garden and on the cross he said, in essence, "I will suffer this agony; I will sustain it; I will endure this for their sakes and hold on to it until they are saved." As Elder Neal A. Maxwell has said, "The cumulative weight of all mortal sins—past, present, and future—pressed upon that perfect, sinless, and sensitive Soul! All our infirmities and sicknesses were somehow, too, a part of the awful arithmetic of the Atonement. . . . His suffering—as it were, enormity multiplied by infinity—evoked His later soul-cry on the cross, and it was a cry of forsakenness." [^3]

Did his infinite agony tempt him to lay down his life and end his suffering before the price was fully paid? Was his greatest temptation to abandon his weaker brothers and sisters and seek relief from an infinity of pain by dying prematurely? Perhaps. All he had to do was let go, and the pain would stop, but you and I would be lost. And so second by second, hour by hour, he embraced his agony; he could not rest, but he would not die, not until it was finished, not until we were saved with him. Thus, when the Victor comes to earth again clothed in power and glory, the angels will declare his infinite and eternal victory: "It is finished; it is finished! The Lamb of God hath overcome and trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God." (D&C 88:106.)

The divine victim has answered the demands of justice in the Garden of the Press and on Calvary, and he did it alone, and he did it for you and me. This gives him the right to claim those who enter into his covenant, to bring each one of us under his wing and say, "I've paid for this one; this one is mine"—"Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified; wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." (D&C 45:4-5.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Enos 1:7.
[^2] The term docetism comes from the Greek verb dokeo, which means ''to seem'' or ''to appear.''
[^3] Neal A. Maxwell, ''Willing to Submit,'' Ensign, May 1985, p. 73.
