Have you ever had a pair of shoes that suddenly started to hurt your toes, or a pair of pants that seemed to get shorter and tighter every time you put them on? Your shoes and clothes weren’t really getting smaller. You were getting bigger and taller! You are growing very quickly now; your body is changing every day.

The important choices you make now can help you have a strong, healthy body that can resist disease. A strong, healthy body is a blessing to you now and in the future. You can make important choices to exercise, to get enough rest, and to keep your body clean. You can also choose to avoid alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs. These choices will bless you and your body now and in the future.

Like your body, your spirit is changing. It is growing in knowledge, understanding, and testimony. Just like your body, your spirit needs food. Reading the scriptures feeds your spirit. Attending your Sunday meetings, partaking of the sacrament, praying every day, and following the promptings of the Holy Ghost will help you keep your spirit strong and growing. Making choices to feed your spirit will help you avoid sin and sorrow and will bring you blessings now and for the rest of your life.

Mount page 9 on heavy paper or lightweight cardboard; then carefully cut out each figure on the heavy black lines. Form rings by gluing the ends of each strip together. Place the rings inside each other, with ring # 1 on the inside and ring #3 on the outside (see illustration). Place this reminder about making important choices where you will see it often.

1.  Explain that habits are formed by doing something over and over and that our habits become the pattern for our lives. Habits can be good or bad. Explain that the children can develop righteous habits, such as praying, studying the scriptures, thinking of the Savior, obeying the commandments, paying tithing, being honest, and helping make home a happy place. Have each child write a righteous habit she or he would like to begin forming.

2.  Sing “I Hope They Call Me on a Mission” (Children’s Songbook, 169). Ask the children to tell you some ways they can prepare now to serve a mission. Have each child write a short note to a missionary serving from your ward or branch, or invite missionaries serving in your area to talk to the children about the joys of being on a mission.

3.  Set a place setting on a small table at the front of the room. Place a garbage can next to the table. Explain that the children can make important choices now about the good foods and other items they might take into their bodies and the harmful substances they will avoid. Using pictures from magazines, let them choose which items should be placed on the table and which should be thrown into the garbage can. Tell them that their choice to eat good things and avoid harmful things will help their bodies grow healthy and strong. Have them locate and read D&C 89.

4.  Invite the bishop or branch president to discuss the questions he asks during a baptismal interview. Have him tell how these questions are similar to the questions asked during a priesthood ordination interview and a temple recommend interview. Ask him to explain how preparing to make and keep baptismal covenants can also help us prepare to make other covenants in the future.
