Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

KINGS VS. PROPHETS

The ancient Israelites had one dreadful enemy. It was not the Hittites, nor the Phoenicians, nor even the Philistines. It was their own overpowering and misguided yearning to be like other nations.

Their neighbors in Palestine had two major attractions. One was that they had kings to govern them, with all the pomp and ceremony of the royal courts. The other was their sensual idolatrous religion. Many in Israel wanted both.

The only government the Twelve Tribes had known since leaving Egypt, where they were slaves to Pharaoh, was rule by revelation through a living prophet.

First it was Moses who led them by divine direction. Through him God brought them out of Egypt and gave them guidance during their forty years' travel in the wilderness. It was the Lord who fed them there, miraculously, and provided them with both shelter and raiment. It was the Almighty who gave them the Ten Commandments and the law of Moses for their standard of conduct.

Moses, as the Lord's spokesman, was their governor, their guide, their arbiter, their great teacher and protector. But above all else, he was a prophet.

When Moses passed on, Joshua was named to lead the tribes in the same pattern of government. Chosen of heaven by revelation from God, he also became a prophet.

With his appointment, the Almighty promised this new leader: "As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee." (Josh. 1:5.)

But then the Lord added a caution, indicating that complete obedience must be the basis of Joshua's success. So the divine word continued: "Be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest." (Josh. 1:7.)

The people accepted the leadership of Joshua on that basis. They willingly recognized the divine principle by which he was made their governor, and pledged to him: "According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses." (Josh. 1:17.)

Then and there they accepted this high principle of government by revelation and solemnly promised to be loyal to their new prophet-leader. They fully expected that as Moses had led them by the power of God, so would Joshua; they prayed, "Only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses."

When Joshua's life neared its end, he gathered the people together and reminded them of their covenant, pleading with them to serve their heavenly Benefactor who had brought them out of Egyptian slavery and into the Promised Land, which in those days did "flow with milk and honey." The land was fertile and highly productive, and would continue so only if Israel obeyed the Lord.

The aging prophet knew that many had forgotten the Almighty and had turned to the false gods of their neighbors. So he remonstrated with them: "If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, then he will turn and do you hurt, and consume you." (Josh. 24:20.)

He continued with his exhortation: "If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood [the river Jordan, which was at flood stage when the tribes crossed it as they came into Canaan], or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Josh. 24:15.)

This is one of the best remembered passages in the Bible.

For a time the people responded, turned from their evil ways, and pledged: "The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey. So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem." (Josh. 24:24-25.)

Thus firmly was the principle of government by prophecy reconfirmed among the Twelve Tribes.

But after the death of Joshua the people soon forgot their promises and began to stray into the forbidden paths against which they had been so sharply warned.

Two great challenges faced them. One was their tempting neighbors. Israel envied both their kings and their loose way of life. The other was that no strong successor had been provided for them after Joshua's death. For a time the tribal leaders took over, but they were local in their influence and proved inadequate to defend Israel against her hostile neighbors.

During this period "judges" were raised up by the Lord to "fill the gap." Of these judges the Bible Companion explains:

"The word `judge' is a misnomer; it gives a false picture of his function. A truer description is given by the word `deliverer.' The judges had no legal status, and only occasionally were they called upon to give legal decisions. Their main purpose was to `save' Israel by organizing a revolt against the oppressors." (William Neal, ed. [New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960], p. 348.)

As a crisis developed, a "deliverer" would arise in Israel, sometimes being self-appointed. Generally there was no united effort behind him, so that success, if any, was limited.

This was a period of confusion for Israel, with no strong prophet-figure at their head and with much temptation from their neighbor nations, who flaunted before them the pomp of their kings as well as the seduction of their idolatrous religions.
