Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE REIGN OF THE JUDGES

When Joshua died and Israel was left without a central government, her priests still labored in the tabernacle, elders discussed religious matters, and occasionally a prophet served the people.

But there was no basic authority recognized by all the tribes, no overall direction for the nation. As the writer of the book of Judges comments at various times: "In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes." (Judg. 21:25.)

The tribes still fought against the Canaanites, but they also fought among themselves, with thousands of their own brethren being killed on both sides. For example, in one battle between the tribe of Benjamin and others in Israel, "the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two thousand men." (Judg. 20:21.)

In another battle "the Lord smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand and an hundred men: all these drew the sword." (Judg. 20:35.)

The combined strength of Benjamin and the rest of Israel was given as four hundred thousand "men that drew sword: all these were men of war." (Judg. 20:17.)

A feud developed between the people of Ephraim and the tribe of Jephthah. Obtaining help from Gilead, Jephthah attacked his brethren "and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand." (Judg. 12:6.)

The Israelites continued their wars against the Canaanites but the Lord never allowed them to wipe out their enemies entirely or to overcome them. He intended to use Canaan as a chastening influence upon his people.

"Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire." (Judg. 1:8.) It was later lost again. It will be remembered that Joshua never did capture that city, although he fought successfully against its king in another battle.

Other cities now fell in these tribal campaigns. "And the Lord was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had chariots of iron." (Judg. 1:19.)

The record then indicates that all of the tribes occasionally fought the Canaanites, but at no time was the enemy destroyed or conquered. The Lord had said: "I will not drive them out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare unto you." (Judg. 2:3.)

And why would the Lord do this? Because of the apostate and unclean practices of the Israelites!

A new generation had grown up since the days of Joshua, and they "knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel. And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim: And they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the Lord to anger. And they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth.

"And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.

"Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them: and they were greatly distressed." (Judg. 2:10-15.)

But the Lord has infinite patience. He had pledged to Moses and Joshua that he would bring his people into the land of milk and honey, which Palestine was at that time, and had promised them great prosperity, even with peace, if they would serve him. In spite of their apostate ways, he still endeavored to keep his promise to Abraham by saving this stubborn people from themselves.

The Lord determined upon a new form of government. Whether he had in mind an approach to some kind of democratic rule is not clear, but from among the people he "raised up judges" as deliverers and leaders in their battles, but also to provide some semblance of centralized authority.

Some of these judges reigned for as long as forty years, and under their rule peace prevailed at times. Some of the judges were fighters, too, great leaders in the battles of the Israelites, and in many instances they won significant victories.

"And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the Lord; but they did not so. And when the Lord raised them up judges, then the Lord was with the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies."

But when a judge died, and apparently before his successor was named, "they returned, and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way."

The anger of the Lord "was hot against Israel; and he said, Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations which Joshua left when he died: That through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the Lord to walk therein, as their fathers did keep it, or not. Therefore the Lord left those nations, without driving them out hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua." (Judg. 2:16-23.)

To crown their evil deeds, Israelites now intermarried with the Canaanites, which again further angered the Lord.

"And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites: And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and served their gods.

"And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgat the Lord their God, and served Baalim and the groves.

"Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Chushan-rishathaim eight years.

"And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.

"And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war: and the Lord delivered Chushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against Chushan-rishathaim.

"And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died." (Judg. 3:5-11.)

This became a pattern in Israel for many years: sin and idolatry, followed by distress and repentance. Then the Lord would come to their aid, until once again they would go astray. It seemed like an endless cycle.

This was a sad period for the people of promise. But from time to time the Lord continued to raise up strong men—and one mighty woman—to deliver them and to govern them.

One of these men was Gideon, that valiant defender of their lands and faithful servant of God. Another was Samson, who fought with superhuman physical strength, yet was a weakling in the hands of a clever woman. Samson judged Israel "in the days of the Philistines twenty years." (Judg. 15:20.)

Their great female deliverer was Deborah, a prophetess. She was a mother in Israel, the wife of Lapidoth, "and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment."

With the aid of a faithful lieutenant named Barak she fearlessly defeated an enemy army that had nine hundred chariots made of iron "from Herosheth of the Gentiles." Following her victory Deborah sang a hymn to the Lord, which included these words: "let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might." Under her rule, the scripture says, "the land had rest forty years." (Judg. 4, 5.)

After decades of vacillating between the Lord and the heathen gods, and after years of uncertain rule on the part of the judges, the people became more and more rebellious.

In the midst of this unrest, Samuel was born. He became both a prophet and a judge, but by this time the people paid little heed to either prophets or judges, and became steeped in idolatry. They wanted to be like their neighboring nations, with kings instead of either prophets or judges and with freedom to worship any gods they pleased. It was a tragic turning point in the history of ancient Israel. It was the opening wedge of their ultimate apostasy.

The surrounding nations boasted of their kings. The pomp of the royal courts was in striking contrast to the simplicity of the lives and homes of the Lord's prophets. The heathen glamour, both in their kingly courts and in their pagan temples, intrigued Israel despite the displeasure of Jehovah.

When they ignored the Lord and worshipped false gods, they lost their battles with the Canaanites because the Lord would not deliver them in their sins. They saw that their enemies were led by warrior kings in battle, and they began to feel that kings were an essential ingredient of victory.

The people came to Samuel, now both prophet and judge, and demanded a king for themselves. They wanted to end the rule of the judges.

The Lord spoke to Samuel in no uncertain terms, warning both him and the people against this change of affairs.

"And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked of him a king.

"And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his chariots.

"And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots.

"And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.

"And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.

"And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants.

"And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

"He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.

"And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have chosen you; and the Lord will not hear you in that day." (1 Sam. 8:10-18.)

His warnings were to no avail. "The people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us; That we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles." (1 Sam. 8:19-20.)

This attitude of rebellion was heightened by the deadly influence of the heathen religions that many now adopted. One form of apostasy led to another, and Israel served "the strange gods of Ashtaroth and Baalim," which was a severe affront to the Lord.

So the Israelites now had reached the point where they were willing to discard their prophet leader and adopt the worldliness that surrounded them.

Samuel was deeply grieved, but the Lord said to him: "They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them." (1 Sam. 8:7.)

"Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed them in the ears of the Lord. And the Lord said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make them a king." (1 Sam. 8:21-22.)

The Lord would not compel anyone, not even these recalcitrant Israelites. He would not upset his principle of free agency for any reason. When the people turned against him in the face of his repeated persuasion, the Lord simply let them go.

As they came out of Egypt in Moses' day, Israel was promised that she could become the greatest nation on earth if she would serve the Lord. (Deut. 28:1.) But now the people rejected this opportunity. To become like their neighbors was more desirable. Their choice ultimately led them into captivity and despair.
