Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE MISUSE OF POWER

The experience of Israel with kings who ruled over them in Palestine was in sharp contrast to the reign of the great kings of ancient America. This, of course, was because the righteous kings described in the Book of Mormon were prophet-kings, governors like Moses and Joshua, although neither of these two great personalities was made a king. That was not the Lord's way for Palestine.

One of the greatest of the prophet-kings of America was Benjamin, who partook of nothing like the pomp of the Palestinian rulers. He lived a common life, even worked with his hands to sustain himself and his family.

Like him was his son Mosiah. Mosiah, however, recognized the dangers in kingship, even as did Samuel, and strongly warned his people against the evils that a wicked king could bring upon them. Said he:

"Now I say unto you, that because all men are not just it is not expedient that ye should have a king or kings to rule over you.

"For behold, how much iniquity doth one wicked king cause to be committed, yea, and what great destruction!

"Yea, remember king Noah, his wickedness and his abominations, and also the wickedness and abominations of his people. Behold what great destruction did come upon them; and also because of their iniquities they were brought into bondage.

"And were it not for the interposition of their all-wise Creator, and this because of their sincere repentance, they must unavoidably remain in bondage until now.

"But behold, he did deliver them because they did humble themselves before him; and because they cried mightily unto him he did deliver them out of bondage; and thus doth the Lord work with his power in all cases among the children of men, extending the arm of mercy towards them that put their trust in him.

"And behold, now I say unto you, ye cannot dethrone an iniquitous king save it be through much contention, and the shedding of much blood.

"For behold, he has his friends in iniquity, and he keepeth his guards about him; and he teareth up the laws of those who have reigned in righteousness before him; and he trampleth under his feet the commandments of God;

"And he enacteth laws, and sendeth them forth among his people, yea, laws after the manner of his own wickedness; and whosoever doth not obey his laws he causeth to be destroyed; and whosoever doth rebel against him he will send his armies against them to war, and if he can he will destroy them; and thus an unrighteous king doth pervert the ways of all righteousness.

"And now behold I say unto you, it is not expedient that such abominations should come upon you.

"Therefore, choose you by the voice of this people, judges, that ye may be judged according to the laws which have been given you by our fathers, which are correct, and which were given them by the hand of the Lord.

"Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right; therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law—to do your business by the voice of the people.

"And if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you; yea, then is the time he will visit you with great destruction even as he has hitherto visited this land.

"And now if ye have judges, and they do not judge you according to the law which has been given, ye can cause that they may be judged of a higher judge.

"If your higher judges do not judge righteous judgments, ye shall cause that a small number of your lower judges should be gathered together, and they shall judge your higher judges, according to the voice of the people.

"And I command you to do these things in the fear of the Lord; and I command you to do these things, and that ye have no king; and if these people commit sins and iniquities they shall be answered upon their own heads.

"For behold I say unto you, the sins of many people have been caused by the iniquities of their kings; therefore their iniquities are answered upon the heads of their kings.

"And now I desire that this inequality should be no more in this land, especially among this my people; but I desire that this land be a land of liberty, and every man may enjoy his rights and privileges alike, so long as the Lord sees fit that we may live and inherit the land, yea, even as long as any of our posterity remains upon the face of the land. . . .

"And now it came to pass, after king Mosiah had sent these things forth among the people they were convinced of the truth of his words.

"Therefore they relinquished their desires for a king, and became exceedingly anxious that every man should have an equal chance throughout all the land; yea, and every man expressed a willingness to answer for his own sins.

"Therefore, it came to pass that they assembled themselves together in bodies throughout the land, to cast in their voices concerning who should be their judges, to judge them according to the law which had been given them; and they were exceedingly rejoiced because of the liberty which had been granted unto them." (Mosiah 29:16-32, 37-39.)

So freedom was established in America. Kings were abolished and the government rested with the voice of the people.

But in Palestine, in the days of Samuel, the Israelites went the opposite way. They demanded a king against the will of the Lord and despite all the divine warnings to the contrary. The king they chose, and others to follow, led them into war, destruction, and eventual subjection to their enemies.
