Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SAUL IS CHOSEN KING

Although the people rejected the counsel of the Lord in demanding a king, the Almighty nevertheless endeavored to make the best of the situation.

Since the people had demanded a new ruler, the Lord determined to give them the best man available for such a high place, and to enable him by special blessings to conduct a proper reign. He would give the king "a new heart," bless him with his Holy Spirit, and even confer the gift of prophecy upon him. What more could God do?

Saul, the son of Kish, of the tiny tribe of Benjamin, was selected by the Lord for this position. The scripture says that he was a "choice young man, and a goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he." (1 Sam. 9:1-2.)

Saul had the desirable physique, too, for he stood head and shoulders above all other men. He was not a giant in the sense that Goliath was, for Goliath stood over ten feet high. But Saul was much taller than any other man in Israel.

At this time the tribes were under the domination of the Philistines. Because they had no central government and even fought among themselves, they had no united strength to resist the incursions of the enemy.

When the Lord spoke to Samuel about elevating Saul, he made it clear that the objective of the new king must be to "save my people out of the hand of the Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me." (1 Sam. 9:16.)

The infinite patience of the Lord in dealing with Israel in the face of their constant disobedience can only excite wonder and amazement. But he is God, and he had made covenants with Abraham, Moses, and Joshua to preserve his people. The Lord gave them constant opportunities to repent, and this was one of them.

Saul had a humble beginning. One day the asses of Kish, Saul's father, were lost. "And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go seek the asses." (1 Sam. 9:3.)

This Saul did, but although he and the servant searched the land from Mount Ephraim to Shalim, they could not find the animals. When they arrived at the land of Zuph, they decided to return home without them. Then it occurred to Saul that Samuel, the seer of the Lord, lived nearby. He decided to ask Samuel to tell him by inspiration where to find the animals. When they arrived in the city, Samuel came out to meet them.

"Now the Lord had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came, saying,

"Tomorrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me.

"And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said unto him, Behold the man whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.

"Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is.

"And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer."

Samuel invited Saul into his house and had his cook prepare a sumptious feast for the occasion. Thirty friends also were invited in. Addressing his guest of honor, Samuel said, referring to their desire for a king, "On whom is all the desire of Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?"

Saul was very humble about the matter and said, "Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?"

Samuel brought Saul and his servant into his parlor "and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden, which were about thirty persons." (1 Sam. 9:15-22.)

This is an interesting passage. For one thing, in his own home Samuel gave a feast in honor of Saul's appointment as king, and invited thirty people to attend. But also it is shown that Samuel lived in a city, he had a large house with a parlor that would accommodate thirty guests, and he had a cook.

Those who indicate that all the prophets were desert nomads living in tents are not acquainted with the facts. Samuel, of course, was both prophet and judge. In this latter position he may have been given certain emoluments that raised his standard of living above the ordinary.

"And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.

"And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left! set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for thee since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with Samuel that day."

Samuel "communed with Saul upon the top of the house," the record says, indicating that his confidential talk with him was completely private. Then they arose and "went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.

"And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on,) but stand thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God." (1 Sam. 9:23-27.)

After the servant had gone on ahead, Samuel took a vial of oil and poured it on Saul's head, kissed him, and said, "Is it not because the Lord hath anointed thee to be captain over his inheritance?" Then he gave Saul a series of signs by which he could know that his being anointed king was the Lord's will, saying:

"When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?

"Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:

"And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread; which thou shalt receive of their hands.

"After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy:

"And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.

"And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do as occasion serve thee; for God is with thee." (1 Sam. 10:1-7.)

So every assurance was given the new king that the Lord would be with him, for God desired Saul to be successful in centralizing the government, uniting Israel, and freeing his chosen people from the enslaving hand of the Philistines.

Every opportunity for greatness was thus given to Saul, and a most important task was assigned to him. To help him to achieve this great work the Lord gave him "another heart," blessed him with his Spirit to inspire and guide him, and even conferred on him the gift of prophecy. It remained for Saul to measure up to his opportunity and "carry the torch of Israel." He possessed every requisite to become a great prophet-king if he would but truly obey the Lord.

The time now arrived for Samuel to announce Saul's appointment before all the people, so he called the tribes together at Mizpeh for this purpose. Before revealing Saul's selection, however, Samuel again upbraided the people for their departure from the ways of the Lord and told them in strong terms that by setting up this kingdom, they rejected the Lord, their king. Said he:

"Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of them that oppressed you:

"And ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your tribulations; and ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before the Lord by your tribes, and by your thousands."

He was ready to introduce the new king to the assembled multitude now, but when he looked for him, Saul could not be found. Samuel asked the Lord what had become of him, and the reply came back: "Behold he hath hid himself among the stuff."

Saul seemed amazingly timid at this point. But even so, after they had "fetched him thence" he stood before the tribes. He "was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward."

"And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the people?" Evidently he was not known to many, but his appearance was impressive for "all the people shouted, and said, God save the king." Large physical stature apparently meant a good deal to them.

New hope came to enslaved Israel now. With the Lord ready to assist Saul in every righteous effort, and with Saul appearing to be obedient, the future seemed bright.

After the ceremonies, the Lord touched the hearts of the "band of men" who accompanied Saul to his home in Gibeah. Whether they constituted a bodyguard for the new king is not mentioned, but the record does show that "the children of Belial" protested against Saul at the ceremony, hated him, and asked, "How shall this man save us?" They despised him "and brought him no presents," but Saul very wisely "held his peace." (1 Sam. 10:9-27.)

The expression "children of Belial" usually means "worthless, lawless fellows," according to Bible commentaries. The name Belial is also related to Satan and is applied elsewhere in scripture to "all that is bad."

These "children of Belial" who refused to sustain Saul evidently were merely a noisy minority like some we still have today, who are always against "the establishment."
