Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SAMUEL'S LAST WARNING

Although he had set up a king in Israel, Samuel continued to have misgivings. He knew that a wicked king could lead the nation astray.

How would Saul prove out under the honor and glory of his office? Would his humility continue? Would he remain faithful so that he could actually become the deliverer of Israel as the Lord had in mind? Or would Saul fail?

Samuel was well aware, too, of the unstable nature of the people, and realized that if they did not return wholeheartedly to the Lord, disaster could befall them, Saul or no Saul.

Shortly after appointing their king, Samuel called the tribes together and appealed to them once again to be loyal to the Lord, who was the source of their blessings. He had seen them vacillate in the past, going alternately from worship of the true God to adoration of the false deities of their wicked neighbors. And when affliction came upon them and the heathen gods failed to deliver them, he had seen them come weeping back to the Lord in all their immaturity. What of the future? Would Israel cease to be so childish and assume her true responsibility?

He was concerned over the rejection of the government through judges, but he knew the reason why. Most of the judges were inadequate and some corrupted the office, much to the disgust and distrust even of this vacillating people.

Samuel had appointed his own sons to the office of judge, and they were a great embarrassment to him. The elders of Israel came to Samuel complaining about them and said, "Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways." The sons had "turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment." Using this as a new reason for their demands, the elders said, "Now make us a king to judge us like all the nations." (1 Sam. 8:3,5

Samuel felt as if his own administration as judge was being questioned, and therefore he made an immediate defense of himself. He said: "I am old . . . and I have walked before you from my childhood unto this day. Behold, here I am: witness against me before the Lord, and before his annointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you. And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.

"And he said unto them, The Lord is witness against you, and his anointed [the king] is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered, He is witness."

Having thus established the integrity of his own administration, he now preached to them about the necessity of their being honest and obedient to the Lord under Saul's rule. He told of the instances in the past when the Lord had "delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelled safe.

"And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over us: when the Lord your God was your king.

"Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have desired! and, behold, the Lord hath set a king over you. If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and obey his voice, and not rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye and also the king that reigneth over you continue following the Lord your God:

"But if ye will not obey the voice of the Lord, but rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was against your fathers."

He then reminded them of the Lord's love for them and his desire to bless them, and continued: "For the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name's sake: because it hath pleased the Lord to make you his people. Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right way:

"Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.

"But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your king." (1 Sam. 12.)
