Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SAUL'S FIRST VICTORY

Saul's administration began in a spirit of humility and obedience to the Lord. It held great promise.

The new king evidently was still at his father's home, herding the flocks and earning his own way without taxing the people. The Lord was with him, and Saul realized it.

One day as he was bringing a herd of livestock out of the field, he was met by some messengers from the town of Jabesh who told him that the Ammonites had encamped against their city, intending to destroy it and possibly take the populace captive.

The men of Jabesh in fear had said to the Ammonites, "Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee." Nahash, the Ammonite leader, replied, "On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel."

The elders of Jabesh pleaded for time and hurriedly sent messengers to their new king, asking for protection. When Saul heard "the tidings of the men of Jabesh," the Spirit of God came upon him "and his anger was kindled greatly.

"And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the Lord fell on the people, and they came out with one consent.

"And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.

"And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say unto the men of Jabesh-gilead, Tomorrow, by that time the sun be hot, ye shall have help. And the messengers came and shewed it to the men of Jabesh; and they were glad."

The men from Jabesh now returned to their dealings with the Ammonites and said, "Tomorrow we will come out unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you," as though they were capitulating to the demands of Nahash.

Saul quickly organized his troops into three divisions, and early in the morning they came against the Ammonites from three sides at once, completely routing the enemy forces and scattering them so that no two were left together.

This victory had an electrifying effect upon the Israelites, who now saw that indeed Saul could lead an army to victory, and that he could truly be their deliverer. They said, "Who is he that said, Shall Saul reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death."

But Saul wisely recognized that the victory came because of the Lord's intervention, and not from any military skill of his own nor from the strength of the people themselves. He was perfectly humble about the whole matter. Therefore he said: "There shall not a man be put to death this day: for to day the Lord hath wrought salvation in Israel."

Seeing that the attitude of the people was now so favorable toward Saul, although previously he was virtually an unknown to them, Samuel decided to have them reconfirm Saul's appointment. He said, "Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.

"And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the Lord in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace offerings before the Lord; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly." (1 Sam. 11.)

Saul was now firmly established on the throne, not alone by the decree of Samuel, but by the full acceptance of the people themselves.
