Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SAUL'S FIRST MISTAKE

Within two years of the beginning of Saul's reign he made his first serious blunder. It came in a spirit of impatience, but also revealed a growing egotism in the new king's heart.

Some of the Israelites attacked a Philistine garrison in an outpost at Geba. When word reached the headquarters of the Philistines, they were enraged and decided at once on revenge. They amassed an army of thirty thousand chariots and six thousand horsemen and foot soldiers "as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they came up, and pitched in Michmash."

Although Saul had 330,000 fighting men, they were not mobilized and were in no way ready for combat. They were what we today speak of as "citizen soldiers": farmers and tradesmen, family men living in their own homes. So when this formidable force of Philistines arrived, ready for war, the Israelites were frightened and "hid themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits."

Saul was in Gilgal, and some of the people came to him "trembling." He would not go out to battle without the aid of the Lord, so he asked Samuel to come and offer burnt offerings on the sacred altar as part of his appeal to the heavens.

Samuel replied that he could not come for seven days. Saul impatiently waited for the prophet, and when the seventh day came, with no sign of Samuel, the king determined to act without him.

It was not within the rights of the king to officiate in the ordinances of the Lord. That was for the ordained priests and prophets. Whether he felt that the "king can do no wrong" or whether he thought his authority to rule over Israel was all encompassing is not indicated in the scripture. But he foolishly determined to offer the sacrifice himself.

"And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.

"And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him, that he might salute him.

"And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not within the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered themselves together at Michmash; Therefore said I, The Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made supplication unto the Lord: I forced myself therefore, and offered a burnt offering.

"And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not kept the commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee: for now would the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.

"But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the Lord hath commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the Lord commanded thee."

What a rebuke that was! And what a lesson for the new king!

"Now thy kingdom shall not continue: The Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the Lord hath commanded him to be captain over his people." So Saul would be replaced! The Lord rejected him then and there.

And the reason: "Because thou hast not kept that which the Lord commanded thee." (1 Sam. 13:1-14.)

Here was a great lesson of what the Lord expects by way of obedience to his commandments. There was no room for vacilating on Saul's part. There was no "gray area" between the white and black of obedience and disobedience. Saul either obeyed the word of God or he did not. And in this unfortunate case, he did not.

The kingdom, therefore, was to go to another man. Saul was to lose it—but not at that moment. What the Lord said was advance warning of what was to come. Saul continued to rule, even though he had raised up a barrier against himself.

Regardless of Saul, the Lord still recognized the people as his own; he was not willing that the idolatrous Philistines should destroy them, nor would he make the people suffer for Saul's disobedience. The Twelve Tribes were still the Lord's charge.

Jonathan, the son of Saul, was a valiant warrior for Israel. When he saw the large Philistine army ready to attack and realized that his people were not mobilized for the battle, he determined on some private intrigue of his own.

As a ruse, he and his armor bearer went to an outpost of the Philistine army, pretending to be friendly. "And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the Lord hath delivered them into the hand of Israel."

The two men attacked the guards at the outpost and killed them. Twenty Philistines fell in this attack. Then the Lord sent a sharp earthquake so "there was trembling in the host [of Philistines], in the field, and among all the people . . . and the earth quaked. . . . The multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one another. . . . behold, every man's sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture."

Then "all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the battle. So the Lord saved Israel that day." (1 Sam. 14:1-23.)
