Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

JONATHAN IS SPARED

In some respects, Saul resembled the Medes and the Persians who refused to change any law regardless of the circumstances. His discipline was strict and harsh. His son Jonathan almost lost his life because of it.

When the Lord used an earthquake to break up the Philistine battle preparations at Michmash, the Hebrews came out of hiding and pursued the Philistines as they fled from the danger area.

All Israel took heart as they saw the turn of events, and Saul was jubilant. He ordered all his soldiers to press the pursuit all that day, and not stop even to eat. He "adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the people tasted any food." It distressed the people, but all obeyed, for they feared Saul's revenge.

Some of the soldiers did not get word of Saul's command, including his own son Jonathan. As he was pursuing the Philistines through a forest, and being hungry, he saw a honeycomb that had fallen out of a tree. Not having heard of his father's charge, "he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes were enlightened.

"Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food this day. And the people were faint.

"Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey. How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines?

"And they smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the people were very faint. And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them with the blood."

But Saul had decreed death to any who disobeyed his order. "As the Lord liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among all the people that answered him."

An indication came to him that Jonathan had eaten, so Saul said to Jonathan: "Tell me what thou hast done. And Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die. And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt surely die, Jonathan."

The people loved Jonathan and took his part. They said to Saul: "Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the Lord liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not."

They gave Jonathan credit for confusing the Philistines as he and his armor bearer attacked the outpost just before the great earthquake scattered the Philistines.

When Saul heard this he relented, and Jonathan was spared. (1 Sam. 14.)
