Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

"TO OBEY IS BETTER . . ."

The Lord's charge to Saul was to free Israel from the Philistines, and this the king endeavored to do. Although the Lord said he would take the throne from Saul's family because of continued disobedience, he nevertheless used Saul to carry on his fight with their implacable enemy.

"And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took him unto him." (1 Sam. 14:52.)

The Lord now gave Saul a particular assignment: destroy the people of Amalek! The Lord was ready to punish the Amalekites for their present corruption, but also for the attacks they made on Israel in the days of Moses as the tribes came up from Egypt.

It will be remembered that this was the occasion when Moses held his hands high above his head as Joshua led the Hebrews in battle. As long as Moses' hands were held high, Israel was victorious. When he tired and lowered his hands, the Amalekites drove them back. It was then that Aaron and Hur held up Moses' arms, "and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun. And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword." (Ex. 17:8-16.)

Now the prophet Samuel spoke to Saul and commanded:

"The Lord sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the Lord.

"Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt. Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.

"And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah."

It was a mighty army that Saul took to destroy the Amalekites—210,000 men.

"And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to Shur, that is over against Egypt. And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

"But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly." (1 Sam. 15:1-9.)

Here again Saul pitted his own judgment against that of the Lord, and disobeyed a specific commandment. These Amalekites were so wicked that the Lord wanted them wiped off the face of the earth, even their offspring, their livestock—everything. They were to be like Sodom and Gomorrah, obliterated from the earth.

It was not done. Saul failed. Angered by this disobedience, the Lord sent Samuel again to upbraid the king. According to the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, the Lord said to Samuel, "I have set up Saul to be a king, and he repenteth not that he hath sinned, for he is turned back from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the Lord all night." (JST, 1 Sam. 15:11.)

Then, continuing the King James Version, we read: "When Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.

"And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said to him, Blessed be thou of the Lord: I have performed the commandment of the Lord.

"And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?

"And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

"Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the Lord hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.

"And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee king over Israel? And the Lord sent thee on a journey, and said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them until they be consumed. Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the Lord, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the Lord?

"And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way which the Lord sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites. But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in Gilgal.

"And Samuel said, Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king."

Saul tried to excuse his disobedience and said to Samuel: "I have sinned: for I have transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and thy words: because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice. Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord.

"And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected thee from being king over Israel.

"And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

"And Samuel said unto him, The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine, that is better than thou. And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is not a man, that he should repent."

Recognizing his own sad plight, Saul said to the prophet: "I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord thy God. So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the Lord."

To further rebuke Saul for his defiance of the Lord's command, Samuel now called for the Amalekite king, Agag, to be brought before him. He said to the captive king, who had been bitterly cruel in destroying innocent women and children: "As thy sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women." Then Samuel himself killed Agag with a sword. (KJV, 1 Sam. 15.)

A sad commentary is that "Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death: nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the Lord rent the kingdom from Saul whom he had made king over Israel." (JST, 1 Sam. 15:35.)

Samuel stayed away from Saul from this time on, and shortly afterward the old prophet died. The Spirit of the Lord seems to have abandoned Saul also, for we read, "The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit which was not of the Lord troubled him." (JST, 1 Sam. 16:14.) It was another form of punishment for his transgression.

This evil spirit did not depart from Saul during the remainder of his reign. His temper became intolerable, his jealousy unbounded. He was ready to commit murder on the slightest provocation, and at one time he hurled a javelin at his own son, Jonathan.

This was a far cry from the day when God gave Saul a new heart as he commenced his reign, when the spirit of God was his companion, and even when he was given the gift of prophecy.
