Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE LAST BATTLE

Israel was powerless before this latest Philistine invasion. The enemy was well equipped with chariots "made of iron," heavy armor for the men, and skilled archers who could shoot accurately from a distance. The Hebrews fled before them, and many were slain.

The Philistines particularly sought out Saul and his sons Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua. "The battle went sore against Saul," and the archers hit him, badly wounding him.

Saul was afraid of being captured in this condition. Being unable to defend himself, he asked his armor bearer to draw sword and kill him, "lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through and abuse me."

The armor bearer refused, "for he was sore afraid." So Saul drew sword himself, and with hilt toward the ground and the blade aimed directly at himself, he fell upon it. When the armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he committed suicide in the same way. The scripture says: "So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all his men, that same day together." (1 Sam. 31:1-6.)

It was the custom of the victors to "strip" the dead, taking anything of value from the corpses. While doing so, the Philistines found Saul and his three sons lying dead at Gilboa. They cut off Saul's head, removed his armor, and fastened the body to the wall of Beth-shan where all could see it. The head was put in the pagan temple of Dagon. (1 Chr. 10:10.) The king's armor was placed in the temple of Ashtaroth, their heathen goddess. Then they "sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their idols, and among the people. . . .

"And when the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard of that which the Philistines had done to Saul; All the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there. And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days." (1 Sam. 31:9-13.)

Another account of Saul's death is found in the first chapter of 2 Samuel. It reads as follows:

"Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag;

"It came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and did obeisance.

"And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.

"And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.

"And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead?

"And the young man that told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed hard after him. And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And I answered, Here am I.

"And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an Amalekite. He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.

"So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord.

"Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all the men that were with him: And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword.

"And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou? And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite.

"And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the Lord's anointed?

"And David called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him that he died.

"And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lord's anointed. And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son." (2 Sam. 1:1-17.)

The cry of Israel at that time might well have been "long live the king; the king is dead." It was about in the year 1005 B.C. that this took place.

Saul had risen like a meteor in a clear sky. He plunged to the depths in his setting. Had he kept the commandments of the Lord, he might have been one of the great prophet-kings of all time, but he reaped the harvest of his own planting. Indeed, the saddest words of mouth or pen are simply these: "It might have been."

The scripture gives this epitaph upon Saul's life:

"So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he kept not, and also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to inquire of it;

"And inquired not of the Lord: therefore he slew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jesse." (1 Chr. 10:13-14.)
