Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

DAVID OF BETHLEHEM

King David was one of the most remarkable men in world history. Few were as versatile as he, few as gifted.

He was a soldier, a statesman, a liberator, a poet, and a musician. He conquered all the enemies of Israel and set up a kingdom that later became the envy of the world under the rule of his son Solomon.

He took Israel from degradation and despair to a position of power and respect, all within a few years. He went from being an unknown shepherd to Saul's armor bearer, then ultimately to the throne. Few people have achieved as he did. Few ever could!

It was the Lord's rejection of Saul that opened the door for David's ascent to the throne. He was chosen as a mere youth, but at the pinnacle of his success he was almost beyond compare. Where was there another such as he?

He was loyal to his king to the last; never did he raise his hand against him, even though the king was cruel and selfish and murderous at times.

Even the prophet Samuel was afraid of King Saul. He feared his vicious temper and his disregard for human life. He knew that Saul would kill at the least provocation. Yet Samuel mourned for Saul. He had seen his brilliant beginning. He knew the Lord had blessed him with his holy Spirit at first, and had given him the gift of prophecy. He knew, too, that Saul had been the Lord's own choice to be king over Israel, and that he had great promise of success.

And yet Saul had allowed his ego, his insane jealousy, his murderous disposition to destroy what might have been a glorious reign as a prophet-king. For this Samuel mourned.

It was long before Saul's death that the Lord rejected him. Samuel had warned Israel that a king could bring the people down to near slavery, and

he saw it happen before his own eyes, he was weighted down with grief.

Then the Lord spoke to him and said, "How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I have provided me a king among his sons." Samuel expressed his fear as he replied, "How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me." (1 Sam. 16:1-2.)

How the mighty Saul had fallen, that he would kill even Samuel, who had anointed him king!

The Lord persisted, however, and instructed Samuel to go to the home of Jesse of Bethlehem, "and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee." The Lord told him to offer a sacrifice there on the altar and invite Jesse to the sacrifice.

"And Samuel did that which the Lord spake, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest thou peaceably?

"And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.

"And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the Lord's anointed is before him.

"But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart.

"Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, Neither hath the Lord chosen this.

"Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the Lord chosen this.

"Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jesse, The Lord hath not chosen these."

Samuel then said to Jesse, "Are here all thy children? And he said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not sit down till he come hither.

"And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the Lord said, Arise, anoint him: for this is he.

"Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren: and the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah." (1 Sam. 16:1-13.)

In those days Saul was troubled with an evil spirit, which was calmed by music. Saul's servants said to him: "Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to seek out a man, who is a cunning player on a harp; and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit, which is not of God, is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

"And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to me.

"Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a comely person, and the Lord is with him.

"Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me David thy son, which is with the sheep.

"And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul. And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

"And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

"And it came to pass, when the evil spirit, which was not of God, was upon Saul, that David took a harp, and played with his hand; so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him." (JST, 1 Sam. 16:16-23.)

Although Saul was rejected by the Lord, and Samuel had so notified him, it appears that the king as yet knew nothing of David's selection to succeed him. Returning for a time from his duties as a musician in Saul's court, David was back with his sheep.

David's anointing as king was done quietly and in the rural area where he was a shepherd. Nothing was done at this time to actually seat him on the throne. Saul still wore the crown and continued to do so until his death. All through the intervening time David made no pretense toward taking over the government. He remained in waiting.
