Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SAUL BECOMES JEALOUS

Following his defeat of Goliath, David was fully accepted by King Saul, who "would let him go no more home to his father's house." (1 Sam. 18:2.)

David went wherever Saul sent him, and he "behaved himself wisely." Saul gave him command over a thousand soldiers, "and he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants."

But trouble was brewing. David was too popular for Saul's liking. "When David was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, . . . women came out of all cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet King Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of musick."

This should have pleased the king, and probably did until they began to sing about David and compare his accomplishments with those of Saul. "Saul hath slain his thousands," they sang, "and David his ten thousands."

This was like gall to Saul, who "was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom? And Saul eyed David from that day and forward."

Whenever the evil spirit came upon Saul, or when his anger rose and cast him into temper tantrums, he was vicious. His jealousy of David was now so high that he was willing to kill him to preserve his own vanity.

One day as Saul sat upon his throne, David played his harp nearby to soothe the king's feelings. But anger and jealousy reached the explosive point with Saul, who looked upon David with deep hatred. He hurled a javelin at him, thinking, "I will smite David even to the wall with it."

But David, sensing the problem, was ever watchful, and when Saul threw the javelin, David quickly jumped to one side and saved his life. "And Saul was afraid of David, because the Lord was with him, and was departed from Saul. Therefore Saul removed him from him."

David never retaliated, but continued to serve Saul acceptably, always avoiding any conflict with the king. "Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him. But all Israel and Judah loved David."

Saul was cunning, and he now planned to place David in a position in battle where the Philistines would be sure to kill him. Having made him commander of a thousand men, Saul said to himself, "Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him." It was a murderous scheme.

As a ruse to give the appearance of friendliness and confidence, the king offered David the hand of his daughter Merab in marriage, saying at the same time, "Only be thou valiant for me, and fight the Lord's battles." He still had in mind putting David in hot combat where he would be killed.

Later on, David used the same tactics in his dealings with Uriah. After despoiling Uriah's wife, David deliberately schemed to place him in the midst of the battle where he would meet certain death. And there he died, for which the denunciation of Almighty God came upon the king.

David was not pleased with Saul's marriage proposal, and he said, "Who am I? and what is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king?"

Apparently the marriage was arranged, but before it was solemnized the king gave Merab to another man, probably to embarrass David.

But unknown to the king, his younger daughter Michal had fallen in love with David, and when Saul learned of this he was pleased. He said, "I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him." Then he said to David, "Thou shalt this day be my son in law."

Apparently David was not too impressed with this proposal of marriage either, since it became necessary for Saul to tell his servants: "Commune with David secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law.

"And Saul's servants spake those words in the ears of David. And David said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?

"And the servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner spake David.

"And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines.

"And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired.

"Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.

"And Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with David, and that Michal Saul's daughter loved him.

"And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became David's enemy continually.

"Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to pass, after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by." (1 Sam. 18.)

The marriage was accomplished, but it had its problems despite the love Michal had for David. Her love turned to hate.

When war broke out again, David fought with the Philistines "and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from him."

But Saul never relented in his efforts to kill David. He sent messengers to David's house "to watch him, and to slay him in the morning: and Michal David's wife told him, saying, If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

"So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and fled, and escaped. And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.

"And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is sick.

"And Saul sent the messengers again to see David, saying, Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him. And when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster.

"And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee?

"So David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth." (19:8-18.)

Since Michal's marriage to David no longer suited Saul's purpose, the king broke it off and gave Michal to another man. This infuriated David and widened the breach even more.
