Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE STRENGTH OF DAVID

David was a man "after God's own heart." In only one instance did he displease the Lord. Otherwise he did that which was right in the sight of God throughout his life.

So determined was he to serve the Lord in all he did that he constantly refused to retaliate when Saul attacked him. Always in his mind was one great principle: He would not lift his hand against the Lord's anointed.

What a lesson this is even for us today! He would not raise his hand or his voice against the Lord's anointed. He constantly served Saul in everything the king assigned him. He fought the king's enemies and won victory after victory, all to the glory of the king. But Saul still sought his life relentlessly.

Jonathan was David's loyal friend. He knew that Saul was a murderer at heart, and that the king's enmity toward David was in no way justified. Therefore, working against his own father, Jonathan endeavored to protect David.

One day David said to Jonathan, "Behold, to morrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go, that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.

"If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city: for there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family. If he say thus, It is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him."

Jonathan had a plan by which he could forewarn David. He said, "To morrow is the new moon: and thou shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.

"And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel. And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though I shot at a mark.

"And, behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go, find out the arrows. If I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no hurt; as the Lord liveth. But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are beyond thee; go thy way: for the Lord hath sent thee away."

David therefore hid in the field, "and when the new moon was come, the king sat him down to eat meat. And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a seat by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side, and David's place was empty.

"Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought, something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean."

The next day, which was the second day of the month, David's place was again empty. "Saul said unto Jonathan his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither yesterday, nor to day?

"And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem: And he said, Let me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king's table."

Saul became very angry at Jonathan and cried, "Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mother's nakedness? For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely die."

Jonathan answered Saul and said, "Wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?

"And Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to slay David.

"So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David, because his father had done him shame."

The next morning Jonathan went out to the field at the time agreed upon with David, taking a young boy with him. He said to the youth, "Run, find out now the arrows which I shoot." And as the lad ran, Jonathan shot an arrow beyond him.

When the lad came to the place where the arrow had landed, Jonathan cried out, "Is not the arrow beyond thee? . . . Make speed, haste, stay not." The lad hurriedly gathered up the arrows and brought them back to Jonathan. Then Jonathan gave him his bow and arrow, telling him, "Go, carry them to the city."

As soon as the youth was gone, David stood up from his hiding place, fell on his face on the ground, and bowed himself three times. Then he and Jonathan embraced, kissed one another, and wept.

"And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord, saying, The Lord be between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose and departed: and Jonathan went into the city." (1 Sam. 20.)
