Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

DAVID THE FUGITIVE

Saul's pursuit of David never slackened, making it necessary for David to go into hiding. One day he came to the home of Ahimelech, the priest, who gave him food and drink. David, unarmed, asked the priest if there were some weapon there that he could take.

"And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give it me.

"And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath." (1 Sam. 21:2-10.)

David found refuge in the cave of Addulam, "and when his brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither to him."

Others also heard of David's hiding place, and "every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men."

Now David had the nucleus of a little army of his own. His father and mother were still with him in the cave. He feared for their safety, for Saul was without pity, so he took them to Moab and left them there for safekeeping while he took his small fighting force away.

The prophet Gad then found David and said to him, "Abide not in the hold [in hiding]; depart, and get thee into the land of Judah," which David did.

Hearing of David's departure, Saul called his own immediate servants about him and denounced them severely for not spying on David and reporting his movements.

Doeg, an Edomite who was supervisor of Saul's servants, replied, "I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub. And he inquired of the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine."

Saul was furious. He sent for the priest, whom he charged with conspiracy, and promptly condemned Ahimelech and his entire group of priests to die.

When Saul commanded his servants to "fall upon" the priests and kill them, none would obey. Then he turned to Doeg, who had made the report about David and the sword of Goliath, and said, "Turn thou, and fall upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.

"And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

One of the sons of Ahimelech, a man named Abiathar, escaped and fled after David. "And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the Lord's priests.

"And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father's house. Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard." (1 Sam. 22.)

So far had Saul fallen! Human life meant little to him, and apparently he saw nothing sacred in the priesthood either.

Later, as Saul was returning from following the Philistines, he was told, "Behold, David is in the wilderness of Engedi." So Saul took three thousand men and went out to find David and his men "upon the rocks of the wild goats."

Saul "came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the sides of the cave.

"And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the Lord said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily.

"And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt.

"And he said unto his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my master, the Lord's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord. So David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them not to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way."

Suddenly David ran out of the cave and cried after Saul, "My lord the king." When Saul turned to look at him, David bowed low before him and said, "Wherefore hearest thou men's words, saying, Behold, David seeketh thy hurt?

"Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that the Lord had delivered thee to day into mine hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for he is the Lord's anointed.

"Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand: for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my soul to take it.

"The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee."

Saul was a hypocrite as well as a vicious man. When David called to him after this episode, the fearful but deceptive king said, "Is this thy voice, my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

"And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than I: for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil. And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with me: forasmuch as when the Lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou killedst me not.

"For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? wherefore the Lord reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me this day.

"And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand. Swear now therefore unto me by the Lord, that thou wilt not cut off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father's house.

"And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men gat them up unto the hold." (1 Sam. 24.)

At another time also David spared the king's life. He and Abishai came upon Saul's camp at night and found the king there in a deep sleep.

"Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second time.

"And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's anointed, and be guiltless? David said furthermore, As the Lord liveth, the Lord shall smite him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and perish. The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the Lord's anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

"So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it, neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon them."

David then called from the top of a nearby hill and wakened both Saul and his chief guard, Abner.

"And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.

"This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the Lord liveth, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the Lord's anointed. And now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his bolster.

"And Saul knew David's voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.

"And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant? for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?"

Saul, the hypocrite, now replied again to David in the same deceitful tone as before: "I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

"And David answered and said, Behold the king's spear! and let one of the young men come over and fetch it. The Lord render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness: for the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the Lord's anointed. And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.

"Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David: thou shalt both do great things and also shalt still prevail. So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place." (1 Sam. 26.)
