Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SAUL'S LAST BATTLE

Time was running out for Saul. He had steadily lost battle after battle to the Philistines. He had alienated himself from the Lord and received no more help from him.

Samuel the prophet died, "and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah." David must have attended this funeral, for the record says that following it "David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran." (1 Sam. 25:1.)

Saul found himself in such straits, as the Philistines continued to press him and overrun his lands, that he felt the need of more than human guidance. His heart turned to Samuel. It was he who should be helping the king at this point, he felt—but Samuel was dead. That did not deter Saul. He would go to a spiritualist medium and have her bring back Samuel's spirit—as he thought.

Saul had driven the wizards and witches out of his kingdom. Knowing this, he nevertheless demanded of his servants that they find someone "who peeps and mutters" so that he could receive advice, if from no other source, then from the occult.

They found the witch of Endor, and after her seance, Saul felt worse than ever, convinced that his end was near. He fell `straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

"And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled, and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me. Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.

"But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.

"And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened bread thereof: And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night." (1 Sam. 28.)

The king and his sons went out to battle, rallying their broken forces the best they could. But in the fighting his sons were killed. The "men of Israel . . . forsook the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them." (1 Sam. 31:7.)

Seeing he was defeated, Saul ignominiously took his own life.
