Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

DAVID'S LAMENT

In this last battle David had not only seen Israel defeated and scattered, but he had also seen death come to the two men most prominent in his life—Saul, whom he still regarded as the Lord's anointed, and his bosom friend Jonathan. He grieved deeply.

"And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son: . . .

"The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen!

"Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

"Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil.

"From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.

"Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.

"Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.

"How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou was slain in thine high places.

"I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.

"How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!" (2 Sam. 1:17-27.)

This lament is considered to be one of David's superior literary compositions and ranks with the finest of his psalms.

David was exceedingly gifted in music and in poetry and skilled in combat. A wise organizer, he became the greatest governor of Israel since Moses. The measure of his talents and accomplishments can only be found in the fact that he was a man after God's own heart, and God magnified him.
