Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

DAVID'S GREAT TASK

When Joshua led Israel into the Promised Land, he endeavored to conquer the strongholds of the Canaanites. The inhabitants, being extremely wicked, were destroyed by command of the Lord, as were their properties.

But some of the Canaanites were not defeated by Joshua. It was the plan of the Lord that they should remain as a thorn in Israel's side to afflict the tribes from time to time, humbling them and reminding them that God was their King and Deliverer.

The Lord said that even some of their idols would be left as a snare to the Hebrews, a test to see if true faith in the living God would survive among them.

But the Lord was now ready to move forward with his plans to make Israel a great nation as he had planned for it under Solomon. So David was given the responsibility of finishing what Joshua had left undone. The time had arrived when the Canaanites must be destroyed or "put under tribute."

With Solomon, the Lord would set up a kingdom that would reflect great credit upon His name that would then be honored by the heathen nations. They would see the great power, glory, and prosperity that God would shower upon the chosen tribes. So completion of the conquest must come now, and that was David's appointed task.

Following the death of Saul, David inquired of the Lord: "Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the Lord said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron." (2 Sam. 2:1.)

There was still great bitterness between Israel and Judah. The Twelve Tribes had not known harmony since the reign of the Judges when the unity built up by Joshua was lost, and when tribe fought tribe even over little things, with heavy loss of life.

David was of Bethlehem, so Judah accepted him as their "favorite son." The men of Judah met him at Hebron, where the Lord had sent him, and there they anointed him their king.

To the north in Israel, Saul's former chief captain, Abner, took Ishbosheth, one of Saul's sons, and made him king over Ephraim and Benjamin "and over all Israel."

Ishbosheth was forty years old when he began his reign, but he wore the crown for only two years. Abner led a company of troops over to Gibeon, where they met some of David's men, and immediately a battle ensued. Abner and his men were beaten, and Abner fled for his life.

"And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill. Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?

"And Joab said, As God liveth, unless thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every one from following his brother.

"So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more. . . . But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner's men, so that three hundred and threescore men died." (2 Sam. 2.)

Despite this truce, "there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker."

Abner and King Ishbosheth, Saul's son, quarreled over one of Saul's concubines. Abner was accused of infidelity, but he hotly rebuked the king, saying, "Am I a dog's head, which against Judah do shew kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman?

"So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the Lord hath sworn to David, even so I do to him;

"To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.

"And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him."

Abner now determined to communicate with David and to endeavor to turn the throne of Israel over to him. He sent messengers "to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee.

"And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring Michal Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.

"And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines.

"And Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Laish. And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned."

Abner now talked with the elders of Israel and said, "Ye sought for David in times past to be king over you: Now then do it: for the Lord hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.

"And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.

"So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.

"And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth. And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace."

But Joab, one of David's loyal men, was alarmed at Abner's visit, and said to David, "What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone? Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou doest."

Then Joab, unbeknown to David, sent messengers after Abner and had him brought back from the well of Sirah.

When Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him to one side "and smote him there under the fifth rib, that he died." (2 Sam. 3:1-27.)

The death of Abner shocked King Ishbosheth, but "his hands were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled." While he lay sick in bed at noon, he was assassinated by two members of the tribe of Benjamin.

The assassins thought they were doing David a good service. They cut off the head of their victim and brought it to David, who was deeply offended and said, "Shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?

"And David commanded his young men, and they slew them and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ishbosheth, and buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron." (2 Sam. 4.)

With the loss of both Abner and Saul's son, the northern tribes were without a leader. At last they were willing to consolidate with the south and accept David as king of all the tribes. A union of the entire Twelve Tribes was essential to the plans of the Lord, who now arranged to bring it about. With such an alliance, the Canaanites could be successfully controlled, and Israel could come into its intended glory under Solomon.
