Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE UNITED KINGDOM

It was inevitable that the Twelve Tribes would come under one rule, and it was equally certain that David would be their king. Judah had accepted him. The time had come now when the other tribes were ready to do likewise.

During Saul's regime, David was a popular favorite. As the scripture says, "the people loved David." He had his enemies, of course, but the vast majority wanted him to be their ruler.

Beyond all that, however, was the decree of the Lord. It was he who had chosen David to be king, not only of Judah, but of all the Twelve Tribes. The Lord's plans required a united kingdom, not a divided one. The division had come because of the wickedness and the constant stubbornness of the people. Another division later on followed Solomon's reign for the same reasons.

With Saul's son now dead and his chief advocate, Abner, struck down by Joab, the elders and most of the people felt that the time had arrived to approach David and ask him to be their king.

"Then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. And moreover in time past, even when Saul was king, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the Lord thy God said unto thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over my people Israel.

"Therefore came all the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron; and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord; and they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of the Lord by Samuel." (1 Chr. 11:1-3.)

David was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned for forty years. In Hebron he governed Judah alone for seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he ruled thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah. (2 Sam. 5:1-5.)

By way of comparison with the King James Version of the Bible, we also give here passages from the Holy Scriptures According to the Masoretic Text. That version reads:

"Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spoke, saying, `Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. In times past, when Saul was king over us, it was thou that didst lead out and bring in Israel; and the Lord said to thee: Thou shalt feed My people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over Israel. `So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord, and they anointed David king over Israel." (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1955, p. 413.)

This was a most significant event. Not only did it end the long schism between the tribes, but it also laid the groundwork for the distinction God would give to Israel under Solomon, when a temple would be built there to the Most High and when the name of God would be held in respect and reverence even among the heathen nations.

It will be remembered that when the tribes were about to enter the Promised Land, after their long trek from Egypt, the Lord said he would make them the greatest nation on earth, if they would only serve him. When Moses was still with them, he addressed the tribes and said:

"This day the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.

"Thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments,and to hearken unto his voice:

"And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments;

"And to make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken." (Deut. 26:16-19.)

In Deut. 28, Moses reiterated this marvelous promise, saying:

`And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth:

"And all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God."

Moses listed the blessings that would come to them, in their cities and in their fields, in their fields, in their families and in their flocks, if they would serve God. He included this promise: "The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways." Then he added this important declaration:

"The Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways.

"And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the Lord; and they shall be afraid of thee.

"And the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers to give thee.

"The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not borrow." (Deut. 28:1-12.)

All this promised success of course was subject to their becoming "an holy people unto himself." That was basic.

In David's day, through unification of the tribes and through their subsequent complete domination over the Canaanites, peace eventually came to the land. A fulfillment of this "greatest nation" prophecy now appeared to be possible. It was certainly approached under Solomon.

David was at Hebron when he was anointed king of Israel. Hebron was a small town in the hill country of Judah, twenty miles from Jerusalem, and was one of the most ancient cities in Palestine, known as far back as Abraham. (Gen. 13:18.) Isaac and Jacob lived there, as did Sarah. Joshua captured Hebron during the invasion. He assigned the city as a residence for the Levite priests and designated it as a city of refuge.

Hebron was the site of Absalom's ill-fated rebellion when he sought to take the kingdom away from his father, David. But David did not wish to make little Hebron his capital city for the united kingdom. He wanted Jerusalem for that purpose. However, that city was still held by the enemy and would yet have to be conquered. This David prepared to do.

Jerusalem was occupied then by the Jebusites, who were Canaanites, descended from the third son of Canaan. It was a heavily fortified city. On its outskirts was a citadel or castlelike fortress that the Jebusites thought to be impregnable. To stir up the spirit of combat among his men, David promised that the first man to destroy a Jebusite within that fortress would become one of the chief captains in his own army. With this incentive the battle began, and Joab was the first to claim a victim. In the attack both the castle and the city were taken.

For a time David stayed in the castle and called the fortress area the city of David, or the city of Zion. Subsequently the whole city was included in that designation.

There may be some confusion on this point, because Bethlehem, only five miles distant, was also known as the city of David, since the king grew up there and was anointed by Samuel on his father's farm nearby. Bethlehem was called so by the angelic herald announcing the birth of the Savior. The fact of the matter is that both cities—Bethlehem and Jerusalem—at different times were called the city of David.

The scripture now recounts: "And David went on, and grew great, and the Lord God of hosts was with him. . . . And David perceived that the Lord had established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake." (2 Sam. 5:10-12.)
