Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

ANCIENT JERUSALEM

Jerusalem is believed to have been two thousand years old when David seized it. The name Jerusalem is first mentioned in the Bible in Josh. 10:1-27. Its king at that time was named Adonizedek, a name very similar to Melchizedek, who lived some five hundred years earlier in the time of Abraham.

Jerusalem has had several names. Because the Jebusites lived there in the time of David, the city also was known by Jebus. In Judg. 19:10 we read "Jebus, which is Jerusalem."

The New Smith's Bible Dictionary says that the earliest name of the city was Urusalem, by which it was known before the Hebrew conquest of Palestine. It suggests that it was known by that name as early as the sixteenth century B. C. That would put it in the period of Melchizedek, who is definitely known in scripture as the king of Salem. Whether Salem was a short form of Urusalem may be left to the reader.

When David conquered the city, known then as Jebus, he changed the name back to Jerusalem, which could be a combination of Jebus and Urusalem, although the records are not clear.

The city had three principal hills, one of which was known as Zion; hence the frequent expression "Mount Zion." The elevation of the city is 2400 feet.

Smith's Bible Dictionary also says "Jerusalem was beseiged seventeen times; twice razed, its walls leveled." It was destroyed once by Titus the Roman general (A. D. 70), and in the days of Hadrian (A. D. 132) the temple site was plowed over and obliterated.

It is understood that the fortress David captured was located on the hill Zion, and for that reason David called his little area both Mount Zion and the city of David. However, later, the name was extended to the entire city of Jerusalem.

From Book of Mormon reading it will be recalled that during the early part of the reign of Melchizedek, the city was desperately evil. Through his vigorous preaching under the power of the Lord, the people repented completely, and it became a model city. (Alma 13.)

The Bible Companion, edited by William Neal, says that the temple was erected on Zion, the highest of the three hills, and that Solomon's palace was nearby.

This volume suggests also that most of Solomon's wives, a thousand in all, lived in the citadel portion of town. He built a palatial home for his "favorite wife" near the palace on "temple hill." The daughter of Pharaoh of Egypt, she lived for twenty-four years in the city of David.

It was in Jerusalem that Solomon erected the heathen shrines for idolatrous worship by his alien wives.
