Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

BETHLEHEM OF JUDEA

What was so important about Bethlehem that both Jesus, the Prince of Peace, and David, Israel's greatest warrior, were born there?

Was there some eternal affinity between the Lord and David? Bethlehem was called the city of David. It was so announced by the angels who brought word to the shepherds telling of the Savior's birth.

Bethlehem, an ancient city, was already very old when David lived there. It is first mentioned in the Bible with reference to Rachel's death near Bethlehem. Both the later and the earlier names of the village are given. The text reads: "And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem." (Gen. 35:19.) It was there that Jacob set up a monument to her "that is the pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day."

The ancient name was generally known to the Hebrews as either Ephrath or Bethlehem-Ephrathah.

It was in the area of Bethlehem that Ruth met Boaz and that they raised their family. They were ancestors of both David and Christ.

There is no record of the actual origin of the village. It was a place of refuge for more than a century after the time of Ruth, but in the days of David it was threatened by King Saul, possibly because it was David's home and he hated David. David took Jesse and his family to Moab for safe-keeping during the wars then in progress.

Bethlehem was an outfitting place for travelers going to Egypt. Caravans were organized and equipped there. However, as Dr. William Smith says in his Dictionary of the Bible, "David did nothing to dignify or connect himself with it."

During the time of David, Bethlehem was fortified to serve as an armed gateway to Jerusalem. When Rehoboam, Solomon's son, was king, he maintained it for that purpose. It lost its population in the Babylonian captivity, but was repopulated when the Jews returned to Palestine.

Bethlehem is in that portion of Jordan which was occupied by Israel in the 1967 war. The area is very fertile. Its name means "house of bread" to the Jews. To the Muslims it meant "house of meat."

During the crusades, the Christians captured Bethlehem at about A. D. 1000, but later lost it to the Turkish Muslims. The Ottoman Turks gained control about A. D. 1500 and held it until World War 1. It was taken by British General Sir Edmund Allenby in 1917.

The Emperor Constantine caused to be built what has been called the Church of the Nativity marking the supposed spot where Jesus was born. It was there that St. Jerome, a Catholic monk, translated the Bible from the Latin texts (5th century A. D.) and produced the Vulgate, which was the standard version of the Bible of the Roman Church for centuries.

Two Latin kings of Jerusalem were crowned in that old church, which later was demolished by Justinian, who then rebuilt it. Fragments of the murals dating back to the crusades still may be seen there. The site is now occupied by the Latin Church of St. Catherine.

Bethlehem has been a tourist center in recent years. It is said that as far back as the sixteenth century it was noted for its skilled craftsmen who did expert work in olivewood and mother-of-pearl. They still do a thriving tourist business. The actual population of the city is uncertain. Estimates range from 15,000 to 26,000. The ratio of Christians to Muslims is about sixty to forty.

One may speculate over the reason both David and Christ were born there. David certainly was a man after God's own heart. He must have been a powerful figure in the preexistent life, where Jehovah and he no doubt had much communication. It was a great compliment to David that Jesus chose his city as his birthplace.

On the other hand, the scripture indicates that Jesus descended below all things that he might rise above all things. He was born in a stable, presumably in one of the many limestone caves in the area.

Does this imply that Bethlehem was one of the lowliest places in Palestine, just as the stable was one of the lowliest of all places in which the Son of God might be born? Was this the reason the Lord chose Bethlehem as his birthplace?

Micah seems to suggest it: "But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah. . . ." (Micah 5:2.)
