Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE CONQUEST GOES ON

David's battles to conquer the Canaanites were no small engagements. Tremendous fighting forces were involved, and the casualties were very heavy.

At one time David is reported to have had an armed force of 1.3 million soldiers. (2 Sam. 24:9.) In another account he is credited with 1.5 million.

"And Joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto David. And all they of Israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand men that drew sword: and Judah was four hundred threescore and ten thousand men that drew sword." (1 Chr. 21:5.)

Men were killed on the battlefields by the tens of thousands. In just one such fight "the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew the men of seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen." (2 Sam. 10:18.)

Such a loss seems colossal, and would be extremely high for battles fought by the armies of today. David's fighting was largely hand-to-hand combat, however, even where horsemen and chariots were involved. When it is realized that thousands of men stood in single hand-to-hand combat with other thousands, each man fighting to the death individually, it is understandable that there could be such great losses.

This makes more easily understood how such sudden and vast destruction of life could come at the Hill Cumorah in the final battle of the Nephites. Thousands fought singlehanded with other thousands there, each one seeking the life of the other, and at least one in each paired-off joust was killed. A single gladiator could slay many in a single day under these conditions.

Hence it is acknowledged to be quite possible for such heavy losses to occur in battles of this kind.

But not only were Israel's forces large. The forces of the Philistines were large also. In one battle "the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude." (1 Sam. 13:5.)

What a fearsome sight it must have been to see thirty thousand chariots ready for battle, plus six thousand men mounted on horses, as well as numerous footmen. That battle force would strike fear in any opposing army.

When David smote Hadadezer "David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred horsemen. . . . when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men." (2 Sam. 8:4-5.)

When David challenged the Ammonites, they became so frightened that they sought aid from their neighbors. "The children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Beth-rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of King Maacah a thousand, and of Ishtob, twelve thousand." (2 Sam. 10:6.)

So mercenary soldiers are nothing new.

Following his victories, David put garrisons in Syria, Edom, Moab, and in various parts of the lands of the Philistines. The scripture says, "David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and justice unto all his people." "And the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went." (2 Sam. 8:15, 14.)

An attempt had been made to bring the ark of God to the city of David. The king prepared to recover it with great pomp and ceremony.

"And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave the new cart.

"And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.

"And David and all the house of Israel played before the Lord on all manner of instruments. . . .

"And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.

"And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.

"And David was displeased, because the Lord had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to this day.

"And David was afraid of the Lord that day, and said, How shall the ark of the Lord come to me?

"So David would not remove the ark of the Lord unto him into the city of David: but David carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite." (2 Sam. 16:3-10.)

When the ark had been there for three months, some of David's men told him that Obed-edom was highly prospered of the Lord because he had the ark. This gave David courage to try once more to bring it to Jerusalem. He made a place in which to house it and then prepared to move it.

"Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites: for them hath the Lord chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever.

"And David gathered all Israel together to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the Lord unto his place, which he had prepared for it. And David assembled the children of Aaron, and the Levites." (1 Chr. 15:2-4.)

David then addressed them and said: "Ye are the chief of the fathers of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel unto the place that I have prepared for it.

"For because ye did it not at the first, the Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.

"So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel.

"And the children of the Levites bare the ark of God upon their shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded according to the word of the Lord.

"And David spake to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick, psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy. . . .

"So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the house of Obededom with joy.

"And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that they offered seven bullocks and seven rams.

"And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the Levites that bare the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master of the song with the singers: David also had upon him an ephod of linen.

"Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps." (1 Chr. 15:12-16, 25-28.)

It was during this event that Saul's daughter, Michal, David's wife, turned against him. As she saw the king dance in the celebration, her love turned to hate and she despised him.
