Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

MORE TRAGEDY FOR DAVID

Family trouble mounted quickly and severely for David. New tragedy arose that cost the lives of two of his sons, one of whom murdered the other. It also blighted the life of one of his lovely daughters, described in scripture as being very fair.

The daughter, whose name was Tamar, was a full sister of Absalom, one of David's most aggressive sons.

By another wife David had a son named Amnon, who fell deeply in love with Tamar. He was lustful toward her, however, and tried to persuade her to sin with him. She steadily refused.

Amnon had a scheming cousin named Jonadab, "a very subtil man." Amnon said to him one day, "I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.

"And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the meat in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.

"So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was come to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her hand."

David sent word to Tamar to go to her brother Amnon's house, "and dress him meat."

When Tamar arrived at Amnon's house, he was lying down. "And she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes. And she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they went out every man from him."

Then Amnon said to Tamar, "Bring the meat into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand." Tamar did as he requested, and "when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of her, and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister."

She answered him, "Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this folly. And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee."

But Amnon would not hearken to her voice: "being stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her."

Then, the scripture says, "Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.

"And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her.

"Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her."

Tamar was wearing a garment of many colors, a costume traditionally worn by the king's daughters who were virgins. When the servant took her out of Amnon's chambers and bolted the door, she "put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colors."

Absalom, her brother, found her in that condition and said, "Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother; regard not this thing." So "Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house."

When King David heard what had happened, he was very angry.

"And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar."

Two years went by, with Absalom's anger burning deeply within him. He plotted to take the life of Amnon. An occasion arose when sons of David went out with the sheepshearers, and Absalom persuaded David to send Amnon along with them. He told his servants, "Mark ye now when Amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be courageous, and be valiant."

The servants did as Absalom had commanded; then all the king's sons arose, got on their mules, and fled.

"And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and there is not one of them left.

"Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent."

But Jonadab, David's nephew and friend of Amnon, came to the king and said, "Let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.

"Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead: for Amnon only is dead. But Absalom fled."

When the king's sons returned to Jerusalem, they "lifted up their voice and wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore. But Absalom fled. . . . And the soul of King David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead." (2 Sam. 13.)

But Absalom had none of the love for his father that David held for this rebellious son. He now plotted to dethrone his father and become king himself. One of David's saddest days came when he spoke of Absalom and said: "Behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life." (2 Sam. 16:11.)

Because his son had slain Amnon, David kept Absalom from the palace area under a tight prohibition. At last, however, through the persuasions of Joab, the king relented and told Joab, "Go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again."

Joab went to Geshur and brought Absalom back to Jerusalem. "And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him not see my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the king's face."

Absalom lived in Jerusalem for two years, but at no time was he allowed to see the king. Again Joab intervened and went to the king in the son's behalf. Finally David called for Absalom, who "came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king: and the king kissed Absalom."

Absalom now began to build up a secret force of followers loyal to himself, looking to the time when he would declare himself king. He was popular with the people and found it not difficult to recruit followers.

Absalom was handsome and "in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.

"And when he polled his head, (for it was at every year's end that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels after the king's weight." (2 Sam. 14:21-26.) This vast amount of beautiful hair eventually proved to be the cause of his death, however.

Hypocritically, Absalom obtained permission of the king to go to Hebron, where David himself had been when he ruled Judah before becoming king of the united tribes. But Absalom was a liar and deceived his father. Said he, "I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the Lord, in Hebron.

"For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the Lord shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve the Lord.

"And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron.

"But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.

"And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing.

"And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counseller, from his city, even from Giloh, while he offered sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually with Absalom."

Word now came to David in Jerusalem that a general uprising had developed under Absalom, and "the hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.

"And David said unto all his servants that were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword." (2 Sam. 15:7-14.)

With his servants and his family, the king fled and went into hiding. When Absalom and his men of war came to Jerusalem, they found the royal family gone.

David was not one to allow Absalom to take over the government in this way, much as he loved his son. He amassed his own army and prepared to fight it out. "And David numbered the people that were with him, and set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them."

The king's forces were under the command of Joab, who had served David well over the years. The king commanded Joab and his lieutenants, "Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning Absalom."

The battle went forward in the forests of Ephraim, an area heavily wooded, "and there was there a great slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.

"For the battle was there scattered over the face of all the country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.

"And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.

"And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanged in an oak.

"And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.

"And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand against the king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man Absalom.

"Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life: for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest have set thyself against me.

"Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.

"And ten young men that bare Joab's armour compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him.

"And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel: for Joab held back the people.

"And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all Israel fled every one to his tent."

In spite of this rebellion, the king never lost his love for Absalom. When he received word of his son's death he wept and cried out, "O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son." (2 Sam. 18.)

Word was sent to Joab, telling him of the king's deep grief, "And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son.

"And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

"But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!" (19:1-4.)

Thus ended Absalom's revolt.
