Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SOLOMON IS MADE KING

When David was "old and full of days, he made Solomon his son king over Israel." (1 Chr. 23:1.)

"And David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of the king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men, and with all the valiant men, unto Jerusalem."

When these men were assembled, David stood before them and told them what the Lord had told him. "As for me," he said, "I had in mine heart to build an house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and for the footstool of our God, and had made ready for the building:

"But God said unto me, Thou shalt not build an house for my name, because thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.

"Howbeit the Lord God of Israel chose me before all the house of my father to be king over Israel for ever: for he hath chosen Judah to be the ruler; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over all Israel:

"And of all my sons, (for the Lord hath given me many sons,) he hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel.

"And he said unto me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his father.

"Moreover I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.

"Now therefore in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the Lord, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek for all the commandments of the Lord your God: that ye may possess this good land, and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you for ever."

The promise that Israel might "keep the good land" reminds us of the predictions of Moses as he prepared Israel to enter Palestine. The Lord was willing to bless his people with a great inheritance if only they would do their part. The blessings had to be earned.

David then turned to his son Solomon and said:

"And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. Take heed now; for the Lord hath chosen thee to build an house for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it."

It seems that the primary reason for Solomon's selection was to build the temple, thus providing the sanctuary for the ark of the covenant. That was a great objective of his administration.

David said further to Solomon: "Be strong and of good courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the Lord God, even my God, will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of the Lord." (1 Chr. 28.)

David directed that Zadock the priest and Nathan the prophet should anoint Solomon king of both Judah and Israel, and this was done. "And they blew the trumpet; and all the people said, God save king Solomon.

"And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them." (1 Kgs. 1:39-40.)
