Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SOLOMON IS THREATENED

Beautiful as was the coronation of Solomon, and blessed as he was with the Spirit of the Lord, and having full support of the congregation of Israel, a threat was raised against his reign.

One of David's other sons plotted against him and determined to take the throne for himself. Adonijah, half-brother of Solomon and full brother of Absalom, "exalted himself, saying, I will be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him."

Then he invited the king's other sons to follow him "and all the men of Judah the king's servants," and many did so. "But Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he called not."

Sensing that Adonijah was creating a rebellion, Nathan the prophet went to Solomon's mother, Bathsheba, and said, "Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith [another of David's wives] doth reign, and David our lord knoweth it not?"

He sent her to the king to report what Adonijah was doing, and the king was deeply disturbed. Bathsheba said, "Now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king, thou knowest it not:

"And he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the host: but Solomon thy servant hath he not called.

"And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.

"Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted offenders."

David immediately called in Zadock the priest and Nathan the prophet and reaffirmed Solomon's appointment. They again took oil and anointed Solomon king.

Adonijah was having a party with many guests. When they heard that David had reconfirmed Solomon as his successor, "all the guests that were with Adonijah were afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way.

"And Adonijah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar. And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah feareth king Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me to day that he will not slay his servant with the sword.

"And Solomon said, If he will shew himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be found in him, he shall die."

King Solomon sent for Adonijah, and the son was brought down from the altar. As he entered into Solomon's presence, he "bowed himself to king Solomon: and Solomon said unto him, Go to thine house. . . .

"Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father; and his kingdom was established greatly.

"And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably. He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And she said, Say on.

"And he said, Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and is become my brother's: for it was his from the Lord. And now I ask one petition of thee, deny me not. And she said unto him, Say on.

"And he said, Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king, (for he will not say thee nay,) that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to wife.

"And Bath-sheba said, Well; I will speak for thee unto the king."

Bathsheba went to King Solomon, to speak for Adonijah. "And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the king's mother; and she sat on his right hand.

"Then she said, I desire one small petition of thee; I pray thee, say me not nay. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I will not say thee nay.

"And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife.

"And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother, And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.

"Then king Solomon sware by the Lord, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life. Now therefore, as the Lord liveth, which hath established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an house, as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day.

"And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he fell upon him that he died." (1 Kgs. 1; 2:12)

Joab, who had been so faithful to David previously, was one of Adonijah's supporters. When he heard of Adonijah's death, he fled to the sanctuary for protection. But Solomon condemned him to death and the king's men "fell upon him, and slew him." (1 Kgs. 2:34.)

So ended this revolt against Solomon.
