Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE PSALMS OF DAVID

David was one of the world's greatest poets, ancient or modern. Many of the psalms that he wrote in praise to God are in the book of Psalms in the Bible. Others were included in the main text of the Bible. All rank high in quality; some are superb. They are accepted as scripture, being incorporated in the Bible. Hence we regard them as being inspired.

The best-known of all the psalms is the twenty-third, which has now been incorporated in the rituals of some Christian denominations. Its beauty is unexcelled:

The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: He leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness For his name's sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley Of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: For thou art with me; Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me In the presence of mine enemies: Thou anointest my head with oil; My cup runneth over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me All the days of my life: And I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

Another psalm that inspires every reader is the twenty-fourth:

The earth is the Lord's, And the fulness thereof; The world, and they that dwell therein. For he hath founded it upon the seas, And established it upon the floods. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? Or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; Who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, Nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, And righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek him, That seek thy face, O Jacob. Selah. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; And be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; And the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, The Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; Even lift them up, ye everlasting doors; And the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts, He is the King of glory. Selah.

The sentiment of one psalm is incorporated in a well-known hymn, "The Lord Is My Light." It is listed as the twenty-seventh psalm. The first verse reads:

The Lord is my light and my salvation; Whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life; Of whom shall I be afraid?

In his deep distress David cries out to God in the sixteenth psalm: "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell." His further repentance is shown in these words:

Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord Imputeth not iniquity, And in whose spirit there is no guile. While I kept silence, My bones waxed old through my roaring All the day long. For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: My moisture is turned into The drought of summer. Selah. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, And mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions Unto the Lord; And thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. (Ps. 32:1-5.)

Further evidence of his regret is found in the thirty-eighth psalm, wherein David says:

O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: Neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. For thine arrows stick fast in me, And thy hand presseth me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh Because of thine anger; Neither is there any rest in my bones Because of my sin. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: As an heavy burden They are too heavy for me. . . . I am troubled; I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long. . . . Lord, all my desire is before thee; And my groaning is not hid from thee. My heart panteth, My strength faileth me: As for the light of mine eyes, It also is gone from me.

In his twenty-second psalm David cries out:

Why hast thou forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, And from the words of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the daytime, But thou hearest not; And in the night season, And am not silent. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. Our fathers trusted in thee: They trusted, and thou didst deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were delivered: They trusted in thee, and were not confounded. But I am a worm, and no man; A reproach of men, and despised of the people. All they that see me laugh me to scorn: They shoot out the lip, They shake the head.

In the fifty-third psalm he affirms:

The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they, And have done abominable iniquity: There is none that doeth good.

In this same psalm he speaks of apostasy:

God looked down from heaven Upon the children of men, To see if there were any that did understand, That did seek God. Every one of them is gone back: They are altogether become filthy; There is none that doeth good, No, not one. Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? Who eat up my people as they eat bread: They have not called upon God. There were they in great fear, Where no fear was: For God hath scattered the bones of him That encampeth against thee: Thou hast put them to shame, Because God hath despised them. Oh that the salvation of Israel Were come out of Zion! When God bringeth back The captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, And Israel shall be glad.

His psalm on the Creation, Ps. 104, is most impressive:

Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; Thou art clothed with honour and majesty. Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: Who stretchest out the heavens Like a curtain: Who layeth the beams of his chambers In the waters: Who maketh the clouds his chariot: Who walketh upon the wings of the wind: Who maketh his angels spirits; His ministers a flaming fire: Who laid the foundations of the earth, That it should not be removed for ever. Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: The waters stood above the mountains. At thy rebuke they fled; At the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. They go up by the mountains; They go down by the valleys Unto the place which thou hast founded for them. Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; That they turn not again To cover the earth. He sendeth the springs into the valleys, Which run among the hills. They give drink to every beast of the field: The wild asses quench their thirst. By them shall the fowls of the heaven Have their habitation, Which sing among the branches. He watereth the hills from his chambers: The earth is satisfied With the fruit of thy works. He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, And herb for the service of man: That he may bring forth food out of the earth; And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, And oil to make his face to shine, And bread which strengtheneth man's heart. The trees of the Lord are full of sap; The cedars of Lebanon, Which he hath planted; Where the birds make their nests: As for the stork, The fir trees are her house. The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; And the rocks for the conies. He appointed the moon for seasons: The sun knoweth his going down. Thou makest darkness, and it is night: Wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth. The young lions roar after their prey, And seek their meat from God. The sun ariseth, They gather themselves together, And lay them down in their dens. Man goeth forth unto his work And to his labour until the evening. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all: The earth is full of thy riches.

He adds beautifully to it with his eighth psalm. The three best-known verses are these (vss. 4-6):

What is man, that thou art mindful of him? And the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower Than the angels, And hast crowned him with glory and honour. Thou madest him to have dominion Over the works of thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet.

To the Savior David wrote Ps. 110, one of the most inspirational:

The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, Until I make thine enemies thy footstool. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength Out of Zion: Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, In the beauties of holiness From the womb of the morning: Thou hast the dew of thy youth. The Lord hath sworn, And will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever After the order of Melchizedek. The Lord at thy right hand Shall strike through kings In the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the heathen, He shall fill the places with the dead bodies; He shall wound the heads over many countries. He shall drink of the brook in the way: Therefore shall he lift up the head.

And with Ps. 110, Ps. 127 should be read:

Except the Lord build the house, They labour in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the city, The watchman waketh but in vain. It is in vain for you to rise up early, To sit up late, To eat the bread of sorrows: For so he giveth his beloved sleep. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: And the fruit of the womb is his reward. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; So are children of the youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: They shall not be ashamed, But they shall speak with the enemies In the gate.

Some of David's finest classical language is found in Psalm 133:

Behold, how good and how pleasant it is For brethren to dwell together in unity! It is like the precious ointment Upon the head, That ran down upon the beard, Even Aaron's beard: That went down to the skirts of his garments; As the dew of Hermon, And as the dew that descended Upon the mountains of Zion: For there the Lord commanded the blessing, Even life for evermore.

The language of the psalms is exquisite. Where did David receive the training necessary to produce these literary gems? What was the extent of his education?

The schools of Palestine in those days were nothing like ours of today. Could they have produced a Shakespeare? And David was greater than Shakespeare. Could they have produced a Tennyson or a Longfellow? These poets cannot be compared to David. He is in a class by himself.

What is the answer, then?

David was the beloved of the Lord. Despite his one tragic mistake, he nevertheless performed the work assigned to him. He is usually classed first of all as a warrior-king. But who can discount the inspiration in his writings? And what was the source of that inspiration?

Over and over again the scripture says the Spirit of the Lord was with David. Thence came his inspiration! He was taught by that Spirit!

The writings of the prophets had the same source. What was Isaiah's education, obtained in Palestine? Nothing to qualify him to write the works he produced. What school could have taught him sufficiently to write—of his own efforts—chapter 53 of his book, for example? Or chapter 2, or chapter 9? What school could have prepared him to write these words:

For unto us a child is born, Unto us a son is given: And the government Shall be upon his shoulder: And his name shall be called Wonderful, Counseller, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. (Isaiah 9:6.)

And who on earth could have taught him to write the following:

And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, And unto wizards that peep, And that mutter: Should not a people seek unto their God? For the living to the dead? To the law and to the testimony: If they speak not according to this word, It is because there is no light in them. (Isaiah 8:19-20.)

Or who could have taught him the thoughts expressed in chapter 14 of his book? Note these words and marvel:

How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! How art thou cut down to the ground, Which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon The mount of the congregation, In the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, To the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, And consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, That did shake kingdoms; That made the world as a wilderness, And destroyed the cities thereof; That opened not the house of his prisoners?

And Job—who taught him? No one with any existing literary work can surpass these inspired words:

Where wast thou when I laid The foundations of the earth? Declare, if thou hast understanding. Who hath laid the measures thereof, If thou knowest? Or who hath stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? Or who laid the corner stone thereof; When the morning stars sang together, And all the sons of God shouted for joy? (Job 38:4-7.)

Or who taught Ezekiel to write with such wonderful diction? Not the schools of his day. He was the mouthpiece of God and was taught by the Spirit as were the other great prophets. Their works all came through the inspiration of heaven.

Like Joshua, in whose footsteps he trod, David also was a mighty warrior; but he also communed with God as did any other true prophet, and he received divine direction.

His writings were inspired of the Holy Spirit even as were those of Isaiah and Ezekiel. They certainly are not the product of his own mind nor of the schools that were available in that remote day in Palestine.

These writings are scripture. Scripture is in a class by itself. It is the dictation of the Spirit of God, and God is infinite.
