Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE KINGLY CONTRASTS

Completely different from both David and Saul, Solomon now reigned in Israel. His kingdom became the talk of the world, his wisdom the envy of all mankind. His wealth was beyond compare, and peace prevailed in his kingdom.

His reign began far more auspiciously than that of either of his predecessors. Saul had come to the throne in the midst of severe oppression by the Philistines. Also, he was an unknown. When Samuel presented him to the people, it seemed that Saul's stature was the only thing that greatly impressed them. He was head and shoulders taller than anyone else and looked the part of both a king and a warrior. The people liked that. But they did not know him. They knew nothing of his attitude, his skills, or his training. They took him almost entirely on Samuel's word.

It was not so with Solomon, who was raised in the royal court, and who enjoyed the love and admiration of the multitude. He was given every advantage that David, his successful father, could bestow upon him. But far beyond that, he was blessed of the Lord as no other king ever was.

Saul had been a herder of flocks. Nothing is said about any amount of wealth he may have had, if any. Following his choice as king he still continued to tend his father's flocks for a time. That would indicate a moderate living standard at most.

Solomon lived in the lap of luxury, a favored son in the royal palace, with servants everywhere to wait upon him.

Saul came to power in the midst of war, and almost immediately after his accession he had to lead his people out to battle.

Solomon arose in a time of peace. His father had provided that advantage for him. Through his military skill and the strength of his million-man army, David had finally accomplished what Joshua had set out to do. The enemy had been either destroyed or subdued. Now Israel had full control of Palestine. Her wealth was extensive too, largely acquired through conquest of the neighboring nations.

The contrast with his father was equally great for Solomon. David had been a man of war; Solomon was a man of peace. It took war to defeat the enemies of Israel. It took war to unite the Twelve Tribes into one nation and put down insurrection within their ranks. In battle David was supreme.

It required the sword and an iron will to search out enemies from within, the dissenters, the ambitious ones who aspired to become king, and those who would have taken the lives of David and Solomon. This included rebellion even within David's own family.

So it was David who had brought the kingdom up to a point of high respect among the neighboring nations, with the establishment of peace that resulted from it. It was David who had united the kingdom. It was he who had defeated the enemy. It was he who had brought prosperity to Israel and released her from the oppression of the Philistines. And more than that, it was David who had made extensive preparations for the building of the temple, although he was not allowed to build it himself.

All of this Solomon received as a gift from his father. The success of his reign seemed assured from the very beginning.

One thing was common to both David and Solomon, however, and it became the downfall of each. That was love for forbidden women.

As for Saul, women had not been very important in his life—until near the end. But then he demanded a woman, one who was a spiritualist medium, a necromancer, one who peeps and mutters. His need for her was to call up occult powers to guide him through his last dreadful days on earth.

David had wanted only one forbidden woman, another man's wife. For her he lost his exaltation in the kingdom of heaven. (D&C 132:39.)

Saul also had wanted only one forbidden woman, but she was a witch.

Solomon wanted many forbidden women, even idolaters for whom he built pagan shrines, and at least one of a race restricted for marriage by divine decree. Flying in the face of the Lord's prohibitions, Solomon, too, was rejected of God.

So the contrasts between Saul, Solomon, and David in the matter of women was great indeed.

They were three great kings, each in his own way. Each was strong, but also weak. Selfish emotion in all three opened the door to sheer tragedy.
