Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SOLOMON SEES GOD

On two different occasions King Solomon saw Almighty God. The first instance was when he began his reign. Wishing to help him in every way, the Lord came down and asked what gifts he would desire of heaven to assure a successful regime. How great was the condescension of God that he would do this!

The Lord said to the king: "Ask what I shall give thee."

Solomon replied, "Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead. Now, O Lord God, let thy promise unto David my father be established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude. Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so great?"

And God said, "Because this was in thine heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thee king:

"Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like." (2 Chr. 1:7-12.)

Although Solomon's court visitors included the great rulers of the earth, the king was mindful also of the lowliest of his subjects.

One day two women came to him, disputing over their children. One of the women said, "O my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house.

"And it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also: and we were together; there was no stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.

"And this woman's child died in the night; because she overlaid it.

"And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom.

"And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was not my son, which I did bear."

The other woman denied the accusation: "Nay; but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son."

Solomon, after listening to both sides, told his servants to bring him a sword. Then he said, "Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other.

"Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king, for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.

"Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

"And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do judgment." (1 Kgs. 3:17-28.)
