Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE QUEEN OF SHEBA

Famed as he was for his wealth and power, Solomon was best known for his wisdom. Truly the Lord's promise was fulfilled abundantly when he said to the king, "wisdom and knowledge is granted unto you."

One example of this is found in the visit of the queen of Sheba. For years Bible critics thought that this biblical story was a myth, but now archaeologists have proven otherwise. There was a queen of Sheba, and there is evidence of her visit to Solomon.

"When the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.

"And Solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her not.

"And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord; there was no more spirit in her."

The queen then said to Solomon, "It was a true report which I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom: Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou exceedest the fame that I heard.

"Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

"Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, to be king for the Lord thy God: because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do judgment and justice.

"And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon." (2 Chr. 9:1-9.)

Who was this queen of Sheba? And what was Sheba? Was it a city, a country? Where was it?

Archaeologists have found that Sheba was a kingdom in what today is known as Yemen, south and west of Saudi Arabia. It is on the Red Sea facing Africa at a point where the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea merge. It reached its political and historical zenith about 1000 B.C.

Werner Keller in his book The Bible as History refers to writings of the ninth century B.C. relating to the Kingdom of Minaea, in what is now the northern part of modern Yemen. They speak of a southern neighbor, the land of the Shebans. Assyrian documents of the eighth century B.C. also make reference to the Shebans. Keller says this:

"Gradually, with the discovery of documentary evidence, this fairy-tale country of Sheba began to take definite shape.

"A gigantic dam blocked the River Adhanat in Sheba, collecting the rainfall from a wide area. The water was then led off into canals for irrigation purposes, which was what gave the land its fertility. Remains of this technical marvel in the shape of walls over sixty feet high still defy the sand dunes of the desert. Just as Holland is in modern times the Land of Tulips, so Sheba was then the Land of Spices, one vast fairy-like scented garden of the costliest spices in the world.

"In the midst of it lay the capital, which was called Marib. For 1500 years this garden of spices bloomed around Marib. That was until 542 B.C. Then the dam burst. The importunate desert crept over the fertile lands and destroyed them.

" `The people of Sheba,' says the Koran, `had beautiful gardens in which the most costly fruits ripened.' But then the people turned their backs upon God, wherefor he punished them by causing the dam to burst. Thereafter nothing but bitter fruit grew in the gardens of Sheba." (New York: William Morrow and Co., 1956, p. 209.)

Archaeologists for a time excavated the old Sheban capital of Marib and found there an oval-shaped temple three hundred feet long. It was a shrine to the moon-god Ilumquh. There was a pillared hall in the inner court. Stone pillars fifteen feet high still stand there, having been supported and preserved over the centuries by the sand dunes that drifted about them. The hostility of the governor of Marib stopped the excavations.

Speaking of the queen of Sheba who visited Solomon, Keller asserts that the biblical description of her visit "rings true and is completely intelligible."

So there was a Sheba; it had a queen, and her visit to Solomon is entirely within the facts that archaeologists are now beginning to unearth.
