Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SOLOMON'S WEALTH

King Solomon did nothing in a small way. He was what we of today would call a "big-time operator."

His wealth was fabulous, most of it obtained as tribute from nations now subject to him. Much was developed within Palestine itself, however, such as in the extensive mining and processing of copper and iron, even for export.

Solomon was a spender. He had much and he spent much, and all of his planning was on a gigantic scale. For example, he had "a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem. And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the vale for abundance.

"And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

"And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for a hundred and fifty: and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means." (2 Chr. 1:14-17.)

When he prepared to build the temple he planned the most beautiful structure he could devise. When he called men to labor on it, he summoned "threescore and ten thousand men to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them." (2 Chr. 2:2.) That many supervisors surely would get the job done.

When he offered sacrifices to the Lord, again it was no small matter. "Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he offered unto the Lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep." (1 Kgs. 8:63.)

Solomon did much international trading, including the use of overseas shipping, with many varied cargoes coming from distant ports. He "made a navy of ships in Ezion-geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.

"And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon. And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon. . . .

"And all king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.

"For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of Hiram: once in three years came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks." (1 Kgs. 9:26-28; 10:21)

It is interesting that he imported such things as apes and peacocks, to say nothing of ivory and precious metals. The wealth of surrounding nations seemed to flow with ease to Solomon. Of course many of the kings paid him rich peace offerings, for David had conquered them, and they now were subject to Solomon.

"Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and threescore and six talents of gold; Beside that which chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.

"And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target. And three hundred shields made he of beaten gold: three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.

"Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold.

"And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays: And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom."

With all his possessions, the Bible tells us, "King Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom."

Moreover, "all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart. And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.

"And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king of Jerusalem.

"And he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt." (2 Chr. 9:13-26.)

But perhaps even more important than his wealth is this: "And all the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart."

God seemed to withhold nothing from Solomon. Obviously his was the most fabulous regime in all history for Israel.
