Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SOLOMON'S COPPER INDUSTRY

With the knowledge and wisdom God had bestowed upon him, and through his contacts with other nations, Solomon developed the Promised Land industrially for the first time.

Throughout the centuries Palestine had been pastoral. It was so in the days of the Savior too, for by that time industrialization as Solomon knew it had disappeared. The people were back on the land with their sheep and their olive trees.

But with his wealth and knowledge Solomon greatly changed his nation. As has been noted, he opened large mining operations. When it is considered that he employed "threescore and ten thousand men to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them" (2 Chr. 2:2), it is seen that he went into his projects in a large way.

Many of the men who "hewed in the mountain" undoubtedly were miners. Some cut timber there for the king, and others worked in quarries where blocks and slabs of building stone were produced.

For centures copper had been used by Israel. It was one of the first metals known in antiquity. It was soft and easily handled. The artisans of those days learned that by mixing it with tin, they would produce a hardened metal that they called brass, but which modern experts say was really bronze. It will be remembered that brass was known in Genesis, for Tubalcain was an instructor in the use of both brass and iron. (Gen. 4:22.)

When Moses described the beauties of the Promised Land to the people he led out of Egypt, he spoke of it as "a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass." (Deut. 8:9.)

It is believed that reference to brass in this passage in fact meant copper or bronze. Modern experts say that the brass we know today is an alloy of zinc and copper, and that zinc was not known in Palestine in Bible times. However, both copper and tin were known, and, combined, they make bronze.

When Canaan was conquered by the Israelites, they kept to the hill country, leaving the sea coasts largely to the Philistines and Phoenicians. It was in these hills where they found metal.

For years the Bible critics felt that the story of Solomon's mines was another bit of mythology. But now, as with the queen of Sheba, archaeology has proven the critics wrong. It has shown that Solomon did have both iron and copper mines, and that he processed these metals as well. Even the blast furnaces of Solomon have been found.

Keller, in his The Bible as History (p. 197), says that the smelters in Palestine under Solomon were at Ezion-geber, which he calls "the Pittsburgh of old Palestine." Then, in his excellent work, he says:

"King Solomon, whom Glueck describes as the `great copper king,' must probably be reckoned among the greatest exporters of copper in the ancient world. Research on other sites completes the picture of Palestine's economy under King Solomon. South of the old Philistine city of Gaza, Flinders Petrie dug up iron-smelting installations in Wadi Ghazze. The furnaces were like those at Tell el Kheleifeh, but smaller.

"David had disputed the Philistines' right to their monopoly of iron, and he had extracted their secret smelting process as one of the prices of their defeat. Then under Solomon the iron and copper deposits were mined on a large scale and smelted."

William Neal, in his book The Bible Companion (p. 392) says: "Foreign trade did not really begin until David made himself overlord of the surrounding territories of Philistia, Moab, Ammon, and Edom. This opened up the trade-routes to Tyre in the north, Egypt in the southwest, and the Red Sea in the south.

"Under Solomon, trading with these countries greatly increased. Solomon bought horses from Cilicia and Cappadocia and sold them to Egypt, using money to buy chariots in Egypt for sale to Cilicia and Cappadocia. He exported food, mainly to Tyre, receiving in exchange men and materials for building his Temple, and sailors to man the ships which sailed from Eziongeber on the Red Sea to Ophir. These ships exported Eziongeber's production of copper and iron, and brought back in return `gold and silver, ivory, apes and peacocks.' (1 Kgs. 10:22.)"

This same reference also says: "Solomon had a monopoly on foreign trade. In addition he exercised the right of every power lying athwart a trade route, and levied tolls on all the merchants passing through his territory." (1 Kgs. 10:14-15.)

So Solomon's wisdom was not limited to giving advice to people in trouble, nor to foreign ambassadors and rulers who visited his court, nor even to writing proverbs. He used his divinely bestowed knowledge and wisdom in business and industry as well. Never, before Solomon or since, has Palestine known such expansion into fields long thought to be foreign to her.

With Solomon's wisdom and tremendous insight in both industry and international trade, it is no wonder that kings from afar came to visit him. Their trips naturally would have been at least partially business-related to sustain the trading and bartering that went on during those days.
