Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE TEMPLE IS BUILT

David had given Solomon a direct charge to build a temple to the Lord, and the Almighty himself confirmed it. David was not allowed to erect it, for he was "a man of blood." But Solomon, his son, was given this privilege.

David had brought peace to Palestine. There were no more wars in any part of the kingdom, nor internal insurrection, nor attacks from the Canaanites outside. Even the Philistines were subdued.

"And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for Hiram was ever a lover of David.

"And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying, Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto the name of the Lord his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until the Lord put them under the soles of his feet.

"But now the Lord my God hath given me rest on every side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent. And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the Lord my God, as the Lord spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto my name.

"Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee will I give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians."

When Hiram heard Solomon's words, he rejoiced greatly, and said, "Blessed be the Lord this day, which hath given unto David a wise son over this great people."

Then Hiram sent for Solomon, saying, "I have considered the things which thou sentest to me for: and I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir. My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for my household.

"So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to all his desire. And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year.

"And the Lord gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together."

Solomon then called up thirty thousand men from the various tribes of Israel and assigned them to go to Lebanon to produce building material for the temple. "And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home: and Adoniram was over the levy.

"And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains; Beside the chief of Solomon's officers which were over the work, three thousand and three hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in the work.

"And the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house.

"And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did hew them, and the stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house." (1 Kgs. 5.)

The temple was to be approximately one hundred feet long and forty feet wide, and fifty feet high at its tallest point. A front porch about thirty-five feet long, the breadth of the house, was also provided. The temple was approximately the size of our modern temples.

"And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready before it was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in building. . . .

"And the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and open flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone seen.

"And the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of the Lord. And the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and he overlaid it with pure gold; and so covered the alter which was of cedar.

"So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid it with gold. And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished all the house: also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid with gold. . . .

"And for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive tree: the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall.

"The two doors also were of olive tree; and he carved upon them carvings of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm trees.

"So also made he for the door of the temple posts of olive tree, a fourth part of the wall.

"And the two doors were of fir tree: the two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding.

"And he carved thereon cherubims and palm trees and open flowers: and covered them with gold fitted upon the carved work. . . .

"In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the Lord laid, in the month Zif: And in the eleventh year, in the month of Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he seven years in building it." (1 Kgs. 6.)

Numerous vessels pertaining to the temple were manufactured.

"And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the other: it was round all about, and his height was five cubits: and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about. . . .

"It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and all their hinder parts were inward. . . .

"And the pots, and the shovels, and the basons: and all these vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for the house of the Lord, were of bright brass. . . . And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.

"And Solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house of the Lord: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the shewbread was, And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs of gold, And the bowls, and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers of pure gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and for the doors of the house, to wit, of the temple.

"So was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of the Lord. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put among the treasures of the house of the Lord." (1 Kgs. 7.)

Then Solomon built his own palace, virtually as large as the temple and quite as elaborate. Thirteen years were required to build it, compared to seven years for the temple.
