Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE ARK IS PLACED

The ark of the covenant had been kept in a tentlike tabernacle through the years. Now it was the intention of the Lord that it should be placed within the new temple, "in the most holy place."

"Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the city of David, which is Zion. . . .

"And they brought up the ark of the Lord, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle, even those did the priests and the Levites bring up.

"And king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel, that were assembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

"And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord unto his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubims.

"For the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.

"And they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were seen out in the holy place before the oracle, and they were not seen without: and there they are unto this day.

"There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb, when the Lord made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.

"And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of the Lord, So that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord." (1 Kgs. 8:1-11.)

The ark had passed through a troublous history, being carried about on a cart wherever it was taken. It was captured by the Philistines in battle and kept by them until the curse of the Lord made it impossible for them to hold it longer. Then it was sent back to Israel amid the rejoicing of the tribes, who still were sorely afflicted by their enemies.

All during the time of David, he desired to build a permanent place for the ark, but the Lord would not allow it. The ark was to be placed in a temple, and David was not permitted to erect that structure. Solomon had been chosen for that. Now the temple was built and the ark was safely placed within its "most holy place," as intended by the Lord.

The ark was very significant to Israel, for, as the scriptures indicate, it contained the covenant of the Lord that he made with the children of Israel when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.
