Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SOLOMON'S SIN AND DEATH

No king had been so abundantly blessed as was Solomon. No people had experienced such a reign as his. But now the Lord came a second time to Solomon cautioning him because of the king's misdeeds. He said:

"I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have hallowed this house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.

"And if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments:

"Then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.

"But if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:

"Then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them; and this house, which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all people:

"And at this house, which is high, every one that passeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, Why hath the Lord done thus unto this land, and to this house?

"And they shall answer, Because they forsook the Lord their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath the Lord brought upon them all this evil." (1 Kgs. 9:3-9.)

This frightful warning to the mighty monarch was no different from warnings given Israel previously, from Moses' day on down. It was the same as was given in Book of Mormon times. It is the same today. If the Lord's people will serve him faithfully, they will be blessed. Otherwise distress awaits them.

It was a timely warning, too, for Solomon already had begun to drift into forbidden paths. It seems incredible that a man who had been so blessed, and who had been visited twice by the Lord, would go astray.

Solomon had a thousand wives and concubines and he "loved many strange women." (1 Kgs. 11:1.) Many came from nations against which God had raised complete prohibitions, telling Israel not to contract marriages with them for fear they would lead the people of promise into false religions. The Lord had spoken plainly and deliberately:

"Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.

"For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly.

"But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their graven images with fire.

"For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth." (Deut. 7:3-6.)

He also spoke with equal force when he said:

"The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.

"Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing." (Deut. 7:25-26.)

Some of Solomon's wives were from Moab, some from Edom; some were Ammonites, Zidonians, and Hittites. And one of his favorites was one from Egypt. Pharaoh had given one of his daughters to Solomon, who favored her and even built an expensive house for her.

Unlawful as it was to marry them, the king also set up pagan shrines for these women—another sin denounced by the Lord—where these foreigners worshipped their idols. His wives turned away his heart "after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father.

"For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites. And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord, and went not fully after the Lord, as did David his father.

"Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon. And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods."

The Lord was intensely angry with Solomon, since he had specifically commanded "that he should not go after other gods: but he kept not that which the Lord commanded."

Again the Lord spoke sharply to Solomon, and this time announced that as punishment he would take the kingdom away from Solomon's family. Said he: "Forasmuch as this is done of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.

"Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy father's sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.

"Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one tribe to thy son for David my servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen."

The Lord now raised up adversaries to Solomon. Among them was Jeroboam, the son of a widow who served in the palace.

"And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of David his father.

"And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and Solomon seeing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph.

"And it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way; and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in the field:

"And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him, and rent it in twelve pieces:

"And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten pieces: for thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee:

"(But he shall have one tribe for my servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel:)

"Because that they have forsaken me, and have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine eyes, and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as did David his father.

"Howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I will make him prince all the days of his life for David my servant's sake, whom I chose, because he kept my commandments and my statutes:

"But I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will give it unto thee, even ten tribes.

"And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may have a light alway before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen me to put my name there.

"And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel.

"And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did; that I will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee.

"And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever."

Murderous thoughts now entered the king's mind. How different was he at this point from Saul?

"Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon. . . .

"And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.

"And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead." (1 Kgs. 11.)
