Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

SOLOMON'S PROVERBS

Solomon wrote 3,000 proverbs and 1,005 songs. (1 Kgs. 4:32.) They covered a wide range of subjects, far beyond those which are printed in our Bible.

The scripture says that he spake of trees, "from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes." (1 Kgs. 4:33.)

Those proverbs and songs that we have in our scriptures are highly inspirational. They cover a wide field, from the premortal existence to what the Lord hates, to instructions on rearing children, and finally to the "conclusion of the whole matter."

His discourse as descriptive of a premortal existence is one of the finest parts of his writings:

The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, Before his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, From the beginning, Or ever the earth was. When there were no depths, I was brought forth; When there were no fountains abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled, Before the hills was I brought forth: While as yet he had not made the earth, Nor the fields, Nor the highest part of the dust of the world. When he prepared the heavens, I was there: When he set a compass upon the face Of the depth: When he established the clouds above: When he strengthened the fountains Of the deep: When he gave to the sea his decree, That the waters should not pass his commandment: When he appointed the foundations of the earth: Then I was by him, As one brought up with him: And I was daily his delight, Rejoicing always before him. (Proverbs 8:22-30.)

What the Lord hates is direct and certain:

These six things doth the Lord hate: Yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, And hands that shed innocent blood, An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, Feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false witness that speaketh lies, And he that soweth discord among brethren. (6:16-19.)

But then Solomon talks of obedience to the Lord:

My son, keep thy father's commandment, And forsake not the law of thy mother: Bind them continually upon thine heart, And tie them about thy neck. When thou goest, it shall lead thee; When thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; And when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee. (6:20-22.)

His warning against evil women is this:

For the commandment is a lamp; And the law is light; And reproofs of instruction are the way of life: To keep thee from the evil woman, From the flattery of the tongue Of a strange woman. Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; Neither let her take thee with her eyelids. For by means of a whorish woman A man is brought to a piece of bread: And the adulteress will hunt For the precious life. Can a man take fire in his bosom, And his clothes not be burned? Can one go upon hot coals, And his feet not be burned? So he that goeth in to his neighbour's wife; Whosoever toucheth her Shall not be innocent. Men do not despise a thief, If he steal to satisfy his soul When he is hungry; But if he be found, He shall restore sevenfold; He shall give all the substance of his house. But whoso committeth adultery with a woman Lacketh understanding: He that doeth it destroyeth his own soul. (6:23-32.)

One of the most eloquent and beloved expressions speaks of the virtuous woman:

Who can find a virtuous woman? For her price is far above rubies. The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, So that he shall have no need of spoil. She will do him good and not evil All the days of her life. She seeketh wool, and flax, And worketh willingly with her hands. She is like the merchants' ships; She bringeth her food from afar. She riseth also while it is yet night, And giveth meat to her household, And a portion to her maidens. She considereth a field, and buyeth it: With the fruit of her hands She planteth a vineyard. She girdeth her loins with strength, And strengtheneth her arms. She perceiveth that her merchandise is good: Her candle goeth not out by night. She layeth her hands to the spindle, And her hands hold the distaff. She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; Yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy. She is not afraid of the snow for her household: For all her household are clothed with scarlet. She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; Her clothing is silk and purple. Her husband is known in the gates, When he sitteth among the elders of the land. She maketh fine linen, and selleth it; And delivereth girdles unto the merchant. Strength and honour are her clothing; And she shall rejoice in time to come. She openeth her mouth with wisdom; And in her tongue is the law of kindness. She looketh well to the ways of her household, And eateth not the bread of idleness. Her children arise up, and call her blessed; Her husband also, and he praiseth her. Many daughters have done virtuously, But thou excellest them all. Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: But a woman that feareth the Lord, She shall be praised. Give her of the fruit of her hands; And let her own works praise her in the gates. (31:10-31.)

On the subject of training children Solomon speaks a good deal about proper discipline and says:

He that spareth his rod hateth his son: But he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes. . . . Chasten thy son while there is hope, And let not thy soul spare for his crying. . . . Train up a child in the way he should go: And when he is old, he will not depart from it. (13:24; 19:18; 22:6.)

And his advice to children:

My son, hear the instruction of thy father, And forsake not the law of thy mother. (1:8.)

Self-control is emphasized in a number of the proverbs. Among them are these:

He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: But he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly. (14:29.)

A soft answer turneth away wrath: But grievous words stir up anger. (15:1.) He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; And he that ruleth his spirit Than he that taketh a city. (16:32.) Answer not a fool according to his folly, Lest thou also be like unto him. (26:4.) Faithful are the wounds of a friend; But the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. (27:6.)

Solomon's regard for the poor is expressed this way:

He that hath pity upon the poor Lendeth unto the Lord; And that which he hath given Will he pay him again. (19:7.)

And what did Solomon think of pride? He said:

Every one that is proud in heart Is an abomination to the Lord: Though hand join in hand, He shall not be unpunished. (16:5.)

Pride goeth before destruction, And an haughty spirit before a fall. (16:18.)

A good name is rather to be chosen Than great riches, And loving favour Rather than silver and gold. (22:1.)

Among Solomon's choice bits in Ecclesiastes is this well-known one:

To every thing there is a season, And a time to every purpose under the heaven: A time to be born, and a time to die; A time to plant, and a time to pluck up That which is planted; A time to kill, and a time to heal; A time to break down, And time to build up; A time to weep, and a time to laugh; A time to mourn, and a time to dance; A time to cast away stones, And a time to gather stones together; A time to embrace, And a time to refrain from embracing; A time to get, and a time to lose; A time to keep, and a time to cast away; A time to rend, and a time to sew; A time to keep silence, and a time to speak; A time to love, and a time to hate; A time of war, and a time of peace. (Ecclesiastes 3:1-8.)

Solomon's fear of the Lord was well said:

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: But fools despise wisdom and instruction. (Prov. 1:7.)

And then he continues with these:

Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; And lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, And he shall direct thy paths. (3:5-6.) Honour the Lord with thy substance, And with the firstfruits of all thine increase: So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, And thy presses shall burst out with new wine. My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; Neither be weary of his correction: For whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; Even as a father the son In whom he delighteth. (3:9-12.)

In the early days of his reign, when he was blessed abundantly with the Spirit of the Lord, Solomon spoke as a prophet, giving expression to these true teachings of the Lord. They were inspired, and they are scripture to us.

It was only in his later years, when the "strange women" led him into idolatry, that he lost the Spirit, and hence spoke no more wisdom.

While he served the Lord he was great—incomparable!

When he turned away, he became a heartbroken weakling.
