Mark E. Petersen, Three Kings of Israel ( 1980)

THE FINAL LESSON

The lives of the three great kings of Israel teach one unforgetable and poignant lesson. It is summarized clearly in these words from Ecclesiastes:

"Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man." (Eccl. 12:13.)

The history of the world could have been—indeed would have been—entirely different had these three monarchs followed that teaching. They knew full well the right way to go. None of them sinned in ignorance. All of them sinned against the well-known laws of God.

The Lord had promised to make Israel the greatest of all the nations. He showed that he was prepared to do so, and he went far in that direction in Solomon's time. But Israel rejected this opportunity.

In the lives of Saul and Solomon particularly is illustrated the truth of the Book of Mormon teaching that an evil king can truly lead his people into degradation.

Under Saul, wickedness and idolatry spread, bringing captivity and slavery.

Under Solomon, idolatry once abolished returned again. Once more the people suffered. The kingdom was split. Taxes were exhorbitant; sin was rampant; and idolatrous nations became the conquerors of Israel.

How similar is the history of the Israelites in Palestine to that of the Book of Mormon peoples.

The Jaredites brought on destruction by apostatizing from the way of the Lord.

The Nephites, even blessed as no people had ever been blessed for two hundred years after the appearance of the Savior, went down to total annihilation because of their rebellion against the Lord.

In the days of Joseph Smith, when the Lord was prepared to build his modern Zion in Jackson County, Missouri, sin raised the barrier. The Lord told the Prophet:

"Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances.

"They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble.

"In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me.

"Verily I say unto you, notwithstanding their sins, my bowels are filled with compassion towards them. I will not utterly cast them off; and in the day of wrath I will remember mercy." (D&C 101:6-9.)

It is the same in all ages. If the Lord's people will serve him, they will prosper in the land. If they draw away from the Lord, he refuses to bless them. They reap what they sow.

This is true with individuals as well as with nations. The way to peace, happiness, and prosperity is clearly drawn. As Solomon so truly said:

"Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man."
