Compilation, Labors in the Vineyard: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 12 ( 1884)

CHAPTER II.

SET SAIL FROM NEW YORK—ARRIVE IN LIVERPOOL—SENT TO LABOR AS A TRAVELING ELDER—PRAYERS ANSWERED—CALLED TO PRESIDE OVER A CONFERENCE—BLESSED ABUNDANTLY WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT—PROCURE A HALL TO PREACH IN—MOBBED—EFFECTS OF MY PREACHING—TREATED WITH COURTESY—ORGANIZE A BRANCH OF THE CHURCH IN THE TOWN WHERE I WAS MOBBED—MAKE ANOTHER APPOINTMENT TO PREACH IN A DIFFERENT TOWN—SEND FOR HELP—SPEAKERS INTERRUPTED—AUDIENCE QUIETED BY ME SINGING A COMIC SONG—PREJUDICE ALLAYED—A LESSON LEARNED.

HAVING rejoined my fellow-missionaries in New York, we sailed from that port August 15th, on the ship Lady Franklin, passage, $10 per head, we having to board and cook for ourselves. After a fair voyage we arrived in Liverpool on the 14th of September, 1850. I spent a few days in that city, and was most kindly treated by Apostle Orson Pratt, then President of the British Mission.

I was sent from there to London, and Brother Pratt intended me to have a few weeks to rest, and learn the "ropes" among the branches, and Saints of that city. But the president of that conference sent me to Colchester, fifty miles from London. It was a hard place and in order to have raised any life there in relation to "Mormonism," one would have required the power to resurrect the dead.

I suffered very much in spirit as well as in body. I finally said to myself, "you were sent to this land by God's highest authority to preach the gospel, and it is your duty to do it." The next morning, after thus commenting to myself, I started for a town twenty miles distant. The roads were wet and heavy and, with my carpet-bag, the walk was a hard one.

I came in sight of the place, on the top of a long hill, and noticed a woman crossing the road with two pails. She filled them with water and started back, but as she saw me walking towards her, she dropped both pails and came to me, saying, "I knew you would come: I saw you in a dream. Come into my house; I have a room all fixed nice and clean for you."

Here I baptized my first fruits of the gospel, and accomplished a good work. In a few weeks Bro. Pratt sent me to travel with Bro. Jacob Gates, who was really like a father to me. When with him, we would take tracts with us and go from house to house, and shop to shop in Leicester and, in distributing them, try to get a chance to talk with the people.

One day we had been working very hard in the rain and mud, but with little success. As we were on our way home, at dusk, we passed the shop of an herbalist, and I told Bro. Gates I would like to go into this one place before going home. I bought something for a penny and, at the same time, commenced talking "Mormonism" to a stranger. This man's name is now very familiar to the Latter-day Saints, it being none other than George Goddard. Previous to my visit, he had never heard of our religion, but, as he was an honest and brave man, it was not long before he and his family were baptized and, in a little time, gathered to Zion.

During that day I had asked the Lord many times to give me one soul as a comfort and testimony. I went into Bro. Goddard's shop by as direct inspiration as any man ever did anything by its dictation.

I traveled a few weeks with Elder Gates, when I received an appointment to take the presidency of the Norwich Conference.

I wrote to Apostle F. D. Richards, who then presided over the mission, asking him to give me a little more time to get accustomed to preaching and to read up my Bible. I soon received the following answer:

"The presidency of the British Mission wishes to know if Elder C. V. Spencer intends to stand up to the rack in this country."

When I read it I immediately wrote in reply:

"I shall start to Norwich by the next train, and don't care a groat whether there is any hay in the rack or not."

A sister was then washing my clothes, and I had quite a time to induce her to let me have them then; but, at last, she wrung them out as dry as she could and stuffed them into my carpet-bag. Only a few minutes elapsed before I was on the way to Norwich.

I do not think any man ever entered upon the discharge of his duties as president with more distrust than I did; and I wish to record here that the great good afterwards accomplished was God's work, for He worked through me. I only knew enough to speak and act as directed by the Holy Spirit. The conference was represented to me as having refused to sustain, for its president, the man suggested by the presidency at Liverpool, and was otherwise in a somewhat peculiar condition. Under these circumstances I was set to work; how weak I felt, I cannot express in words. For months afterwards people would say to me, when meeting was over, "I heard your knees knock together when you first began to speak."

At the second meeting I held, a man jumped up and said, "We know you be of the devil!" I understood in a moment that the battle for my victory in that region had to be fought right then. I turned and silenced him immediately. When I ceased speaking, the people were as meek as children. I never had any more trouble in that branch, and the work revived in the whole conference. The outpouring of the Holy Spirit and the power and manifestations of God were, I think, as noticeable to the presidency at Liverpool as they were to me.

During the entire mission I was greatly blessed with dreams and manifestations from the Lord. On the day revelation on plural, or celestial, marriage was first made public in "Freemason's Hall," London, one of our most noted and eloquent preachers was called upon to speak. His effort was a dry and barren failure, patent to everybody present. There were over two hundred prominent Elders sitting on the stand.

Jacob Gates, the president of the meeting, arose and, looking around at the Elders, beckoned to me in a quick way, and said, "Come here and talk." I think every one, now living, who was present at that meeting, if asked the question, would say I was literally clothed upon with the Holy Ghost. I prophesied freely and without fear, and have lived to see those prophecies fulfilled to the very letter.

At one time it was manifested to me to go to a town thirtysix miles distant, and open up the gospel. I sent word to a branch president that I would stop at his house on a certain day when on my way to that town. I notified several Elders to meet me at his house. We met and held a council. I had nothing but opposition, the president saying, "Bro. Spencer, if you go to that place, I clear myself of the consequences; your blood be upon your own head."

I replied, "If my blood be shed, it will be upon the heads of those who shed it, and those who ought to have, but have not got, faith to sustain me." I then asked if any one of the Elders would volunteer to go with me. After considerable hesitating, the youngest Elder in the conference promised to meet me there.

That day I walked twenty-five miles and stopped at a roadside inn at dark, with but one shilling in my pocket. I asked for some supper. The lady of the house said she could give me some "Welsh rabbit." Being fond of rabbit I thought I would now have a treat; but, instead of what I expected, she brought in some toasted cheese and bread. I was so disappointed at this that I crept into bed without supper. She, however, took my last shilling.

The next morning I walked to the next town, twelve miles distant, and, on nearing it, saw a lone building on the common. I hunted up the owner and got permission to speak in it. I then went from house to house, notifying the people of the meeting. About this time the young Elder came, according to promise. As we went through the streets a crowd of rude boys and girls followed us, jeering and throwing dry manure, pieces of coal, etc., at us.

About noon we came to four cross roads in the town, one of which led to the Elder's home. Stopping here, he said, "Brother Spencer, I cannot stand this," and tried to pursuade me to give up the labor; but failing to move me he walked away. About dusk I found myself near a cottage on the outskirts of the town. I went in and notified a woman (the only occupant) that in a few minutes I would lecture—and also invited her to attend. I started towards the place of meeting but had got only a few steps when I felt a hand on my shoulder; turning my head, I saw the woman I had just left; she asked me if I had eaten supper, and when I told her I had not eaten or drank that day, she invited me back and placed before me, I think, every good thing she had in the house. I then started to fill my appointment.

The building was full and many were on the outside. My first reception was a peat sod on the side of the head, which knocked me down. I soon rallied, picked the dirt out of my ear, prayed, stretched both hands out before my face as if to make a dive, and made a rush for the crowd, exclaiming, as I came up, "Gentlemen, make room, I'm the man who lectures here to-night." I succeeded in getting into the building after promising the Lord I would say just what He gave me. I knew it was no use to try to sing or pray. The first thought that came to me on arising was the scripture which says, "God hath made of one blood all nations of men that dwell on the earth," etc. I quoted it and was barren of thought for some two minutes, when my spirit in an instant read the people.

I claimed brotherhood by the authority of God's word. alluded to the persecutions of the Methodists in their early days, and asked who would think that the Methodists in so short a time would be found persecuting other religious bodies. I called their attention to my condition, thousands of miles away from home, etc. In a few moments several handkerchiefs were out, wiping tearful eyes. I had a glorious meeting, and at the close was assailed by a minister, but the crowd hoisted him out of the building and hooted him home.

Three gentlemen took me to the best inn of the town and told the landlord to treat me with the greatest courtesy and charge the bill to them. In four weeks from that time I organized a branch of sixteen members at that place.

At one time I was desirous to create an interest in a district, and hired a town hall at a populous sea-port place; I placarded largely, and soon found that possibly I had created more interest than would be pleasant. As the importance of the meeting grew so also grew a sense of my own littleness and I sent word to Elder G. B. Wallace, at Liverpool, and Elder Harmon, in Scotland, to come and help me. I paid $17.50 expenses for Bro. Harmon and I think to Bro. Wallace $25.00. On the day of the meeting I learned there would be a large mob present. I went to the hall before the brethren and soon perceived there was trouble ahead, but realizing how much the meeting would cost me and the pains that had been taken I could not bear the thought of a defeat. I had persistently plead with the Lord for victory.

The idea had become prevalent that Brother Harmon was one of the Twelve. I called on him to speak first. The assembly listened to him for about two minutes. Then Brother Wallace tried it, when a blacksmith by the name of Anguish interrupted him, and Brother Wallace spitefully told him to "shut his head." That remark brought matters to a climax. He spoke no more than ninety seconds, and then we had a good representation of what imagination pictures as the pandemonium of hell. I knelt with my back to the congregation and said, "Father! I have done all I know. If there is anything else you wish me to do, manifest it to me when I get up and I will do it." As soon as I arose to my feet, a comic song that I used to sing in those days came to my mind, and I felt as though it wanted to get out of me in all my parts. I paused a moment, stepped to the front, threw my arms out towards the congregation, and said, "Boys, it will be a new thing for you to hear a minister sing a comic song in a meeting; but if you will be quiet, I will sing you one." I sang it better than ever before or since, and at the close they gave me a good, hearty cheer. I then appealed to them as Englishmen, telling them how Americans treated Englishmen when they came to our country. I continued speaking for one hour, and from the first five minutes the dropping of a pin on the floor could have been heard. At the close many came and shook hands, and in sixpences, shillings, etc., gave me something over $17.00.

When my hands went out towards, and over a part of that congregation I felt power and control go with them as tangibly as I ever felt cold or heat, and I learned this lesson, not to shirk my own responsibilites and run for others to fill my place, let me be ever so weak.
