Compilation, Labors in the Vineyard: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 12 ( 1884)

MY SWISS MISSION.

BY WILLIAM BUDGE.

CHAPTER I.

MANNER IN WHICH THE GOSPEL IS PREACHED-MY LABORS IN ENGLAND-CALLED TO SWITZERLAND-JOIN MY COMPANION AND TAKE PASSAGE TO FRANCE-PROCEED TO SWITZERLAND-MEET ELDERS IN GENEVA-OUR FIELDS OF LABOR ASSIGNED US.

IN presenting a sketch of missionary experience as reading matter for the young people of modern Israel, I am aware that they may have read many such before; but there is so much variety and interest connected with the means and methods which have been, and are, used in the extension of the latter-day work, that I need not apologise. So singular and diversified have been the circumstances surrounding the Elders, that there is a peculiar interest in all their narratives.

Some of the peculiarities of God's work are very prominently manifested in the missionary department. The Elders are sent without purse and without scrip, and the closer they live to this requirement, the more successful they are likely to be. It requires, however, much faith to do this, and it brings us face to face with many trials, temptations and inconveniences; but it also brings us nearer to God, as our condition requires the help which He alone can give, in blessing us with His Spirit, raising up friends and opening up the way before us.

The Elders in modern times, like those of ancient days, have generally been unlearned, which, according to human wisdom, would be a very serious drawback in teaching a new faith. In addition to this, the faith the Elders have been sent to teach is not only strange, but unpopular in the world. The sending of men, without money or learning, to establish a new religion, almost wholly in its nature opposed to the views of the people among whom they are sent, seems a strange thing. We confess it does; but God's ways are not like our ways, yet they are the best. His way of having the gospel preached serves other purposes as well as accomplishing the main object. It proves the integrity of the preacher, as there are no worldly benefits attached to the work; and it proves the sincerity of the believer, as there is no prospect of gain held out, but the truth itself. There must be earnestness and faith on both sides.

The gospel has been carried to many nations, and will be preached to all nations before the end comes. It will be readily understood that the difficulties of missionary work are much increased when the gospel is sent to nations where a foreign language to that of the preacher is spoken, even if the laws are liberal enough to permit the Elder freely to do his duty.

I labored in the Southampton (England) conference, as a traveling Elder, in the years 1852 and 1853. I had labored in the north of England and in the west of Scotland previously, and had seen hard times, endured much and been the means of bringing a number to the knowledge of the truth. The Southampton district, to which I had been appointed when this brief history begins, consisted of the town of Southampton and several smaller places convenient to visit, and containing a number of faithful Saints.

In those days Elders sent to, or connected with, what was termed "foreign missions," especially those of France, Switzerland and Italy, were in the habit of sailing from and arriving at Southampton. I had the pleasure there of making the acquaintance of such men as Andrew Lamareaux, James H. Hart, Edward Stevenson, Nathan T. Porter, T. B. H. Stenhouse, Jabez Woodward, S. L. Balliff and others. Elders Lamareaux and Woodward died in the faith of the gospel. Bro Stenhouse, although a capable man, was proud and fell from the ranks of the righteous. The remaining four named have continued their usefulness unwaveringly, and are brighter and better with the passing years. They often rested at Southampton and enjoyed the hospitality of the ever-kind Saints of that place. Their conversation was interesting as, like the old warrior who, in his stories, fought his battles o'er again, they related their experience and told of the habits and customs of strange peoples, and of the difficulties they encountered in establishing the gospel in distant lands, and of the kindness of those whom they were instrumental in bringing into the light and influence of the Spirit of God.

The Elders engaged in the British mission did not covet a foreign mission, although, probably, not one of them would have hesitated a moment about going if he had been sent. I never knew of one refusing, and I was as well acquainted with our missionaries, personally and otherwise, I believe, as any one man from 1850 to 1860. As I observed, the Elders did not naturally desire a mission that made necessary the learning of another language, and the meeting of other serious hindrances and, oftentimes, suffering and imprisonment on account of prejudice and illiberal laws. I had such feelings; and, in consequence of being acquainted with so many that were connected with missions on the continent, felt sometimes a little uneasy, like Elders at home who think it probable that they may be "called" at conference time. I was, however, ready to go if called.

My labors in the Southampton conference were greatly blessed. I had the pleasure of baptizing quite a number of people, and I am thankful in knowing that many of them are, to-day, faithful Saints in Zion. While laboring here, I was instructed by the president of the mission to prepare to go to the Shetland Islands; but, after further consideration, and especially in consequence of the favorable season of the year being so far gone, it was concluded to let the matter rest.

Early in 1854 I was sent to labor in the Norwich conference where I enjoyed my labors very much. I still thought, sometimes, of foreign missions, but now all thoughts of the French, German and Italian languages which there had been, in my mind, some danger of my having to learn, were forgotten, as there was now no opportunity of my coming into contact with foreign missionaries traveling to or from their fields of labor.

In July, 1854 I received instructions to labor in Cambridge, one of the ancient seats of learning, and now a city of colleges.

My mission here embraced, as a special work, the distribution of our Church tracts among the professors and students; and my experience in this labor, if not always pleasant, was exceedingly profitable to me, arising from the necessity of preparing myself to answer questions, give explanations and to cultivate the virtues of patience and long-suffering. I persisted in the labor, however, and, in time, enjoyed it. Although there was less apparent good done in adding to the Church than in any former field of labor, I endeavord, with the help of God, to do my duty while I remained in that hardened city. One day I was resting at the conference house in Cambridge, when a letter came for me from Liverpool which contained the following appointment:

"TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:—

"This is to certify that Elder William Budge is hereby appointed to labor under presidency of Elder Daniel Tyler, president of the Swiss and Italian missions of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," etc., etc.

It was signed by President Franklin D. Richards who then presided over the branches of the Church in the British Isles and adjacent countries. That foreign mission, at last!

The reception of that appointment brought with it, to me, one of the strongest evidences of the divinity of this work: it brought the spirit of my new mission with it. As I finished the reading of the letter my feelings were entirely changed. I was both ready and willing, and was not satisfied until I procured a work on German, and had actually started on my journey to Switzerland.

Elder Samuel Francis, now of Morgan County, Utah, as stated in a letter accompanying my appointment, was also called at the same time to the same mission. On my way to join him I spent one night in London. In the evening I attended a meeting in one of the branches. Years after I had the honor of presiding over the London Conference, but this was the first meeting I ever attended in the great city. We had a good time, the Spirit being poured out bountifully upon us. Several Elders spoke, and one, referring to my going to Switzerland, prophesied before the people that I would yet preside over the British Mission. I was astonished, and thought that perhaps my brother's zeal and good feelings had controlled his tongue; but, by the direction of our Heavenly Father through His servants, after the lapse of twenty-four years, it did surely come to pass.

Brother Francis received me kindly at Brighton, where he labored. He had, for a companion, a book entitled "French Without a Master," and I noticed he often consulted it. He told me he had been "reading up" and had made some progress. I had not had time to "read up" much, and, consequently, my progress was not worth mentioning; but I felt consoled somewhat when I thought how convenient it would be to have a companion who could act as interpreter on our journey through France. We sailed from New Haven for Dieppe on the 28th of September, 1854. The voyage was not a long one, but the sea was troubled so much that, during part of the time, we did not think a great deal about either French or German, with, or without, a master. As we drew near the shores of France, we thought it necessary to make some inquiry about the Custom House and passport regulations. Bro. Francis made some advances in French to a Frenchman, but the party addressed, evidently, did not know much about "book French," as spoken by my esteemed companion. Long after this I found that the provincial natives of a country frequently speak a corruption of the language and are not familiar with the language proper when spoken. It was agreeable to us to think that this Frenchman might be one of that class.

We landed, had our baggage examined in the Custom House and were passed out into the street, strangers in a strange land. We were anxious to find the railway station and Bro. Francis at once brought his "French Without a Master" to light. He stopped and endeavored to get up a conversation with two different natives whom he met on the street, but, unfortunately, they were not "up" in their education and we were obliged to go back to the ancient and barbarous language of signs, although my companion's perseverance was worthy of greater success.

After stopping several hours in Paris and Macon we arrived at Geneva, the headquarters of the Swiss and Italian Mission, in good health and spirits; but before entering the city the police stopped our diligence (stage) and collected our passports. They were taken into the police office in the city, where they were kept until the owner concluded to travel further; but, in the meantime, that is, next day, we were furnished with a permit, intended to save us from annoyance if the police should take special notice of us.

Our brethren met and welcomed us. They were Elders T. B. H. Stenhouse, president of the mission, although about to leave, having been released to gather with the Church, Daniel Tyler, his successor, George Mayer, J. F. Secrist, G. D. Keaton, C. R. Savage and John Chislett.

On Sunday, October 1st, we met in general conference, which lasted three days, where we had a time of rejoicing together. At this conference Elder Francis was appointed to labor in Italy among the Waldenses who speak French; and I was appointed to labor under the direction of Elder Mayer in the Zurich Conference, a portion of Switzerland where the people speak German. It was with regret that I parted with my intelligent companion, Brother Francis. I heard from him at intervals afterwards; and, in the course of time and changes, under the providences of God, we met again in England to labor together in the Birmingham district.

Geneva, although not the capital of the Swiss Confederation, is its principal city. It has now a population of about fifty thousand. Nearly four thousand of these are employed in the manufacture of watches and jewelry. The city, situated on the southern end of the lake of the same name, presents a majestic appearance; the hills beyond and around forming a beautiful prospect.
