Compilation, Labors in the Vineyard: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 12 ( 1884)

CHAPTER IV.

PROGRESS IN LEARNING TO SPEAK GERMAN—COMMUNICATION FROM THE BRITISH AMBASSADOR—NOTIFIED TO LEAVE ZURICH—GO TO SCHAFFHAUSEN—THE FALLS OF THE RHINE—UNABLE TO OBTAIN PERMISSION TO REMAIN IN THE CANTON—SEEK ANOTHER PLACE OF RETREAT—LODGE WITH A FAMILY OF SAINTS—DIFFICULTY IN KEEPING SECLUDED—CALLED TO GENEVA—RETURN TO ENGLAND.

THE Saints in Zurich and vicinity were enjoying much of the Holy Spirit and rejoicing greatly in the faith of the gospel of Jesus Christ; they were beginning to comfort themselves with hopes that I might be permitted, after all, to remain among them unmolested; and I was, under the blessing of God, making such progress in conversation as encouraged me in hopes of being still more useful, when at length I received the following communication from the British ambassador:

"BERNE, JANUARY 11, 1855.

"SIR:—I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 20th ult., and of your passport transmitted to me therein.

"The information conveyed in that letter, that you belonged to the sect denominated `Mormons,' and the indication it contained that you were in the habit of preaching its doctrines, alike revolting and opposed to civilization and religion, led me to anticipate the results of my application to the Federal Council for explanation as to the motive of your threatened expulsion from the canton of Zurich. But having requested such an explanation at the hands of the authorities here, I thought it right to allow the matter to take its course and I therefore waited until I should receive from the Federal Council a reply to the note I had written on the subject. This reply I only received yesterday morning and I was fully prepared for the tenor of its contents. These are in brief to the effect, that Mormonism has lately been on the increase in the canton of Zurich, and its preaching and ceremonial acts have given rise to disorders in one locality on account of their immoral tendency, so that the police had deemed it necessary to refuse to the two Mormon teachers permission to reside in the canton; that you are one of these teachers, that you have hitherto resided in the district without legal permission to do so, and that it is the refusal to grant you such permission (which is required by Zurich law for Swiss citizens as well as foreigners and may be refused by the authorities to any one on just causes) of which you now complain.

"It is further observed in the note of the Federal Council, that the Government of Zurich, considering that Budge belongs to the sect of the Mormons, and devotes himself to the propagation of their tenets, that among these is found polygamy—a state of things incompatible with the basis of social and family life in the above canton, and, lastly, that the preaching of these individuals has occasioned disorder, is of the opinion that the determination of the police of Zurich is fully justified.

"The Federal Council itself approves of this determination on the part of the Government of Zurich, and is of opinion that there are no grounds for any longer delay being allowed, previous to your being ordered to quit the canton. This decision was transmitted to Zurich by last night's post.

"Coinciding as I do in the estimate formed of the pernicious doctrines held and disseminated by you, according to your own admission in your letter to me of the 20th of December, and considering that a Swiss citizen acting in a similar manner would meet with precisely similar treatment, I can see that I should not be authorized in interfering in any way as the queen's representative here, to prevent the execution of the order of the Zurich authorities—that you should leave the canton immediately. If you will follow my recommendation you will comply quietly with the order you have received, and in selecting your destination, if you should still remain in Switzerland, you will do well to recollect that other cantons have the same laws in this respect as Zurich and that wherever you go it will be advisable for you to refrain from preaching doctrines, which, whatever may be your own belief, are abominated as in the highest degree blasphemous and immoral, by the whole civilized world. I retain your passport in case you should wish to have it signed by me, to render it valid for any particular route you may decide on taking, and I will transmit it to you on learning your intentions. I am, sir your obedient servant,

"G. V. R. GORDON,

"H. B. Majesty's Minister.

"To Mr. William Budge, Zurich."

The strong prejudice of the ambassador is very apparent in the opening lines of his letter. The idea is conveyed, that he would not have made any application at all on my behalf if he had known that I was a "Mormon," that fact apart from the merits of the question at issue would have been sufficient to cause him to neglect his duty as a protector of his countrymen and their interests; but, having requested such an explanation at the hands of the authorities, he "thought it right to allow the matter to take its course." I thought as much when I wrote my first letter, therefore made my protest urgent, and refrained from introducing any religious consideration until he would commit himself in an effort to do me justice.

The reply of the Federal Council as quoted, contained several misrepresentations, but without them there would have been no showing of necessity or consistency in expelling a stranger from a "free republic." The disorders referred to were the acts of native mobocrats without provocation, and there was no more immorality about the baptism of believers into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints than the baptism of people into a Baptist community. It was not necessary to refuse the two "Mormon teachers permission to reside in the canton," as we had duly deposited our passports and met all requirements made upon us by the authorities, and therefore did not ask for permission, which we had long enjoyed.

In regard to polygamy, we did not teach it and had testified before the authorities that we had no disposition or authority, even if we had the power, to interfere with social life in the canton, by advising the practice of our marrige views. It was true that "Mormonism" was increasing and also the rage of the priests proportionately, and as something had to be done to satisfy them, the rulers gave an unrighteous decision, which was endorsed by a narrow-minded British minister.

In a day or two after the ambassador's letter was received, I was summoned before the police and received peremptory orders to leave the canton in three days, or I would be arrested.

At last I was obliged to leave Zurich, and all our friends were full of grief on account of the determination of the authorities to drive us from the country. I had been pursuing my studies at all convenient opportunities and was able now to teach the Saints with more freedom, and since Elder Mayer's departure, the responsibility of the work in this part of the mission had devolved upon me. The interest I felt in the prosperity of the Saints was deep and abiding, and I sought the help of the Lord to enable me to instruct them in those things which were most necessary under the circumstances, feeling as we all did, that I would probably soon leave them. I felt the importance of the work being sustained in German Switzerland, so I determined to go no further away than was absolutely necessary.

On January 16, 1855, I left Zurich for Schaffhausen, and arrived there the next day, having walked part of the way. I had an introduction from a sister to a family in this place on whom I called and by whom I was kindly received, but it was necessary for me to obtain permission to lodge with my friends; I therefore visited the police office and explained that my passport was in the hands of the ambassador and would reach me soon, and they concluded, "as an obligation," that I might stay in town one night without it. On the second day of my arrival I was summoned before the police and examined, and had to telegraph to the ambassador, who replied that the passport was on the way, which for the time prevented me, I suppose, from being locked up.

My passport arriving on the 20th, I went to the police office and presented it, was closely questioned, and came to the conclusion that there was not liberty enough to teach the truth in this place. Schaffhausen is near the line between Switzerland and Germany, which accounts for the unusual severity of its regulations. I was in hope of doing some good, as the neighbors continued visiting my lodgings to see and talk with the "Englishman," and smoke their pipes. In talking we could hear, but it was with difficulty sometimes, when there were a number present, to see each other through the smoke.

Near this city are the beautiful Rhine Falls which have a world-wide reputation. I here introduce the following brief description of these beautiful falls from a work lately published:

"The falls of the Rhine, near Schaffhausen are among the largest in Europe. Though nothing in comparison with such falls as Niagara, they are imposing and beautiful. Shortly after passing the pretty town of Schaffhausen, the Rhine hastens, hurrying on for about three miles narrowed between woody knolls and low rocks. By these rocks, in the pass between Daschsen and Neuhausen, the river is divided into three shoots, which dash down a depth of about seventy feet. The spectacle of the falls is exceedingly fine on both banks, where every accommodation is equally made for visitors to enjoy the scene.

"A fine view of the falls is obtained from the garden of the castle of Laufen, on the left bank of the river. It is immediately opposite the Schweizerhof, from which visitors can cross in a ferry-boat, fare half a franc. The land belongs to a private family, but, by contract with the canton of Zurich, strangers are permitted to visit the castle and grounds; fee, one franc. A wooden balcony overhangs the rush of waters. The actual fall here is about eighty feet. The water's division into three shoots can be well seen. The largest body of water falls during the months of June and July. Although this, one of the finest falls in Europe, is not a Niagara, nevertheless the general landscape is superior to that in the vicinity of Niagara falls. The range of the Alps including Mont Blanc, distant 185 miles, can be seen from this point and this alone would form a feature of the place."

After remaining several days in Schaffhausen without any apparent results, I went to Weingarten and called on a Brother Bonnelli, of whom I had heard, and was received by the family with great kindness. This brother took my passport to the village authority, and was surprised when that dignitary questioned him closely and declared that I was a "Mormon." He was angry with Brother Bonnelli for entertaining me, but eventually sent a permit allowing me to lodge at their house and retained my passport.

I visited and conversed with Saints and strangers for several days in Weingarten when quite unexpectedly I was summoned before the Stadthalter, where I received my passport and a notice to leave the canton of Thurgau in two days. The Stadthalter's instructions contained no reason therefor, but he informed me it was because I was a "Mormon." It was the settled policy of the cantons to drive the Elders out of the country, and the decision of the federal government as given in my case, when expelled from Zurich, sustained them. The papers published every movement made by the authorities, and all strangers being obliged to deposit their passports at the nearest office that they might be permitted to stay where they desired to settle or lodge for the time, it was impossible to remain long undiscovered. To lodge in any house without the legal permit, providing the family were willing, subjected them to fine or imprisonment, and this was not desirable. I fully considered the circumstances and probabilities in the spirit of prayer and supplication to my Heavenly Father that He might guide and preserve me in my efforts to remain in Switzerland until His servants were satisfied with the efforts made to sustain the Church and warn the people. It was true that President Tyler had left the responsibility with me as to what I ought to do, but I was not yet quite satisfied, and finally determined to return to a small village on the Lake of Zurich, where a faithful family of Saints resided and where I might live unknown for a season, except to the family, in whom I had great confidence. How to get there was the question to be solved. On receiving my passport, when asked where I was going as was usual, I replied to St. Gall, such being my intention at the time, and the endorsement was made accordingly, but on reflection it was almost certain that my intention would be known in St. Gall before I could get there myself. To go to Kussnacht (the village on the lake), which was almost in an opposite direction to St. Gall, would probably be fatal to my liberty if my passport should be examined. My first movement from Weingarten towards my place of refuge would also bring me into the canton of Zurich, from which I had been twice expelled; but if I could spend one night on the journey safely, I had strong hopes of making the trip without detection.

On the afternoon of the 14th of February I left Brother Bonnelli's house with regret, as we were doing good and the prospect was encouraging. It rained all day and was very muddy under foot. I therefore concluded to remain for the night at a small town named Elgg. It was evening. I walked into a respectable looking hotel and arranged for supper and lodging. The people were obliging, but to save trouble I concluded not to use any more German than a few words, such as any traveler is supposed to pick up in a few days. After drying my clothes a little, as they were wet through with rain, I sat down to supper. Men were coming and going during the evening as is usual in such places on the continent of Europe. They come to chat with their neighbors, read the papers, smoke and drink beer. I noticed a man sitting at the table opposite me. He had been there some time, although we had not spoken to each other. The man at length said to the waiter—of course in German—"You have a stranger here."

"Yes," the waiter replied, "an Englishman, but he cannot speak German."

That was satisfactory to me as I went on with my supper, but directly after, the man looking over to me, said (in German), "You are an Englishman, I believe?"

"Ein Englaender," I replied, wishing to break off the conversation, when, to my astonishment, he addressed me in pretty good English. After asking several questions which led to an agreeable conversation, he informed me that he was the chief authority of the village, and then requested to look at my passport, which I at once handed him, but as I at the moment complimented him on the ease and fluency with which he spoke English (which seemed to gratify him), he probably did not notice that, according to the last endorsement which was written upon the document, I should have been on my way to St. Gall. My friend returned the passport good-naturedly, signifying his approval and stating that my staying at the hotel for the night was all right.

I was up early the next morning and had breakfast, but it rained so heavily that I was detained an hour or two at the inn. On this day's journey I passed through Winterthur and reached Zurich, as I intended, just as it became dark, and passed through to Kussnacht, distance during the day twenty-seven miles, but the walking was heavy as the roads were bad, and the snow was in many places over eighteen inches deep. The kind reception which I met with from Brother and Sister Elleker and family filled me with gratitude to God and to them, and I had need of their attention as I was completely worn out. I remained with this most excellent family until the eighth day of March, in the strictest seclusion, except when visited by a brother occasionally, from Zurich. The family were silk-ribbon weavers and had necessarily occasional callers. My apartment was up-stairs, but it was lone-some, and as there were no arrangements for warming the rooms, I went below to the sitting room as often as I could with safety. In doing this I had some narrow escapes from being seen, as to return to my room it was necessary to pass through a passage-way in view of the front door. It is a very difficult thing for a person to keep hid in a country like this, for a stranger is readily observed, and had the neighbors' suspicions been once awakened, my hours of liberty would have been few, and my protectors brought into serious trouble. As is common in many houses in Switzerland, Brother Elleker's sitting room was warmed by an oven projecting out from the wall, the mouth of the furnace being in another apartment. The projection was probably not less than five by four feet, and in hight reached from the floor to within eighteen inches or two feet of the ceiling. This is covered on the sides and end with enameled pottery ware. The heat from the inside makes this oven a very desirable place to lean against in cold weather. In addition to other uses the people dry chicory on the top of the oven, which is flat, before grinding it to use instead of coffee. At Brother Elleker's, one side of the oven was near the wall of the house, leaving room for a number of narrow steps leading to the top. These steps were a favorite resting-place for me, as by going up a step or two I could not be seen, unless a visitor came well round into the room; if one did or was likely to do so, I got on top of the oven where I was entirely hid, as a curtain covered the space between the top of the oven and the ceiling. A neighbor woman came in one day whose movements were suspicious and I got on the top, but it happened that the top was entirely covered with small pieces of chicory, quite dry and, of course, very hard. There being no time to consider comfort, I was quickly, hands and knees, on the ragged edges of the dried root, and, to my consternation, from under the curtain I saw the woman deliberately plant herself against the side of the oven. You may imagine my condition, as the heat was oppressive and the chicory to my feelings got every moment harder. Sister Elleker did her best to get rid of her neighbor, without telling her to go, and when she succeeded I came down the steps without the least approach to hilarity in my disposition.

Shortly after arriving at Brother Elleker's I was in communication with a few of the leading brethren in Zurich, and one at a time would occasionally come and see me, the distance being only five or six miles, and I availed myself of every opportunity to instruct them in their duties. I also kept President Tyler acquainted occasionally with my whereabouts and condition.

On March 8th I received a telegram from President Tyler, desiring me to come to him at Geneva, which I at once prepared to do. I had become somewhat uneasy, as the visits of the brethren, although made with great caution, were being noticed by the neighbors, and I was satisfied I could not at present forward the cause to any great extent, not enough to justify the constant risk to myself and others. I and other Elders had been in all the Protestant German cantons, but two or three which we were not warranted in visiting, as they were strongly prejudiced and only in name removed from the bigotry and bitterness of Catholicism, and we had been expelled from, or prohibited from teaching in all we had visited; and during the last three months I had been summoned before the police authorities in different places no less than thirteen times.

I bade my kind friends an affectionate farewell and blessed them for their kindness and consideration which they had manifested towards me, and in a few days was united with my brethren in Geneva again.

Brother Tyler had written to President F. D. Richards, at Liverpool, in regard to my future labors, as there was no opening then in Switzerland, suggesting that there might be an opportunity to open up the work in Germany, but the result of the correspondence was the decision that I should return to England for the present.

I remained in Geneva until the 20th of April, 1855, (expecting to take a small party of Italian Saints from Lyons to Liverpool, on their way to the valleys of Utah, but circumstances prevented their coming), when I left for England by way of Dijon and Paris, where I duly arrived after an absence of seven months.

With regard to the feelings of the Swiss nation, within the last thirty years the policy of the government and the sentiment of the people have undergone a great change in favor of liberty. In 1876, Elder J. U. Stucki, then president of the Swiss and German Missions, was summoned before a district judge for certain expressions relating to polygamy, in a pamphlet which he had published, and he was fined fifty francs and an order was made for the confiscation of the book. Elder Stucki appealed to the supreme court of the canton (Berne) which confirmed the decision of the lower court; but the decision of the judges not being unanimous, Brother Stucki, encouraged, carried the case before the supreme court of the nation which reversed the two former rulings—a result which led to much inquiry by strangers and renewed prosperity for the Church.

I visited Switzerland again in 1879, visiting Schaffhausen, Wienfelden, Zurich, Berne and many other places, attending public meetings without using a passport at all, although I had one with me.

Within the last few weeks, in answer to an application for the repression of "Mormonism" in Berne Oberland (the district from which Elder Secrist was expelled in 1854) the authorities declared in effect, that the Latter-day Saints had as much right to preach their doctrines as any other religious denomination had to expound theirs.
