"Words of the Angel, John, (the Baptist,) spoken to Joseph Smith, Jr., and Oliver Cowdery, as he (the angel) laid his hands upon their heads and ordained them to the Aaronic Priesthood, in Harmony, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, May 15th, 1829:

"Upon you, my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness."—Doc. and Cov., Sec 13, p. 108.

We quote from some of the first revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith upon this subject. "Every President of the High Priesthood (or Presiding Elder,) Bishop, High Councilor, and High Priest, is to be ordained by the direction of a High Council or General Conference. Presiding Elders, Traveling Bishops, High Councilors, High Priests, and Elders, may have the privilege of ordaining where there is no branch of the Church."—Doc. and Cov., Sec. 20, pars. 67, 66, p. 127. At this time Presidents of the High Priesthood, Presiding Elders, Bishops, High Councilors, and High Priests were placed on the same footing. It may be observed that Traveling Bishops are here referred to. These were given for the regulation of the newly organized branches or churches.

From the above we learn: That before the appointment of Bishops there were revelations given and arrangements made for this office. Whilst the following teaches us:

That certain men among the Saints should be appointed by the voice of the Church, to look after the poor and needy, and to govern the affairs of the property of the Church. "And now I give unto the Church in these parts, a commandment that certain men among them shall be appointed, and they shall be appointed by the voice of the Church; and they shall look to the poor and the needy, and administer to their relief, that they shall not suffer; and send them forth to the place which I have commanded them."—Sec. 38, pars. 34, 35, p. 163. The place referred to at that time was Kirtland, Geauga Co., Ohio. (par. 32.)

Edward Partridge was ordained a Bishop—the first Bishop in the Church—and was called Feb. 4, 1831. He was to spend all his time in the labors of the Church. We quote: "And again, I have called my servant Edward Partridge, and give a commandment, that he should be appointed by the voice of the Church, and ordained a Bishop unto the Church, to leave his merchandise and to spend all his time in the labors of the Church: to see to all things as it shall be appointed unto him, in my laws in the day that I shall give them."—Sec.41, pars. 9, 10, p. 168. He was to "see to all things, as it shall be appointed unto him, in my laws" [Who was to give these laws?] "in the day that I shall give them."

Newel K. Whitney was the second Bishop—called to be a Bishop, Dec. 4, 1831. "And now, verily I say unto you, my servant Newel K. Whitney is the man who shall be appointed and ordained unto this power. Even so. Amen."—Sec. 72, par. 8, p.257. "And again, I say unto you, that my servant Edward Partridge shall stand in the office wherewith I have appointed him. And it shall come to pass, that if he transgresses, another shall be appointed in his stead. Even so. Amen."—Sec. 42, par. 10, p. 169; Feb. 9, 1831.

Property was to be consecrated for the poor, and laid before the Bishop and his counselors, who are to be two Elders or High Priests. (See sec. 42. pars. 30, 31, p. 171) The residue was to be kept in a storehouse for the poor and needy, as shall be appointed by the High Council and the Bishop and his Council and for purchasing Church lands, building houses of worship, building up the New Jerusalem; of course he was to act as a general Bishop of the Church, (he was not confined to a ward,) to receive and distribute property, appoint stewardships, etc. It will be perceived that the High Council then had a voice in these matters. It is written:

"And inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor ye will do it unto me, and they shall be laid before the Bishop of my Church and his Counselors, two of the Elders, or High Priests, such as he shall or has set apart for that purpose. And it shall come to pass, that after they are laid before the Bishop of my Church, and after that he has received these testimonies concerning the consecration of the properties of my Church, that they cannot be taken from the Church agreeable to my commandments; every man shall be made accountable unto me, a stewart over his own property, or that which he has received by consecration, inasmuch as is sufficient for himself and family. And again, if there shall be properties in the hands of the Church, or any individuals of it, more than is necessary for their support, after this first consecration, which is a residue to be consecrated unto the Bishop, it shall be kept to administer to those who have not, from time to time, that every man who has need may be amply supplied, and receive according to his wants. Therefore the residue shall be kept in my storehouse, to administer to the poor and the needy, as shall be appointed by the High Council of the Church, and the Bishop and his Council. And for the purpose of purchasing lands for the public benefit of the Church, and building houses of worship, and building up of the New Jerusalem which is hereafter to be revealed."—Sec. 42, pars. 31-35, PP. 171-2.

The Bishop was to receive his support, and also his Counselors, or a remuneration for services. We read: "And the Elders, or High Priests who are appointed to assist the Bishop, as Counselors in all things, are to have their families supported out of the property which is consecrated to the Bishop, for the good of the poor, and for other purposes, as before mentioned; or they are to receive a just remuneration for all their services, either a stewartship or otherwise, as may be thought best or decided by the Counselors and Bishop, and the Bishop, also, shall receive his support, or a just remuneration for all his services in the Church."—Sec. 42, pars. 71-73, P. 175. (See also p. 257.)

"And unto the Bishop of the Church, and unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the Church, and to be Elders unto the Church, are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts."—Sec. 46, par. 27, p. 193. Certain gifts were here referred to. Not only Bishops but Elders were to have this power. We further find that Edward Partridge was to appoint unto this people their portion—every man equal, giving him a writing—and every man was to deal honestly, and be and receive alike; one Church must not use the money of another Church without making arrangements to pay it. A storehouse was to be appointed. The Bishop was to receive unto himself and family what was needed for his wants, and for those of his family. This was to be an example unto Edward, Partridge, and to all Churches.

"And let my servant, Edward Partridge, when he shall appoint a man his portion, give unto him a writing that shall secure unto him his portion. * * And let that which belongeth to this people not be taken and given unto that of another Church; wherefore, if another Church would receive money of this Church let them pay unto this Church again according as they shall agree; and this shall be done through the Bishop or the agent, which shall be appointed by the voice of the Church. And again, let the Bishop appoint a storehouse unto this Church, and let all things, both in money and in meat, which is more than is needful for the want of this people, be kept in the hands of the Bishop. And let him also reserve unto himself for his own wants, and for the wants of his family, as he shall be employed in doing this business. And thus I grant unto this people a privilege of organizing themselves according to my laws; and I consecrate unto them this land for a little season, until I, the Lord, shall provide for them otherwise, and command them to go hence; and the hour and the day is not given unto them, wherefore let them act upon this land as for years, and this shall turn unto them for their good. Behold this shall be an example unto my servant Edward Partridge, in other places, in all Churches."—Sec. 51, pars. 4, 10-18, pp. 203, 204.

First.—From the above we find that bishops were first spoken of as early as April, 1830. (See sec. 20, p. 121.)

Second.—Certain men were to be appointed to look after the poor and administer to their relief and govern the affairs of the property of the Church. (See sec. 38, pars. 34-36, p. 163, January 2, 1831.)

Third.—Edward Partridge was called to be the first Bishop, (See sec. 41, par. 9, p. 168, February 1831,) "and to spend all his time in the labors of the Church."

Fourth.—That Newel K. Whitney was called and appointed to this office as the second Bishop of this Church.

Fifth.—After this, besides Bishops' agents, there were other Bishops appointed. George Miller was appointed to the Bishopric, and had it sealed upon his head.

"I therefore say unto you, I seal upon his head the office of a Bishopric, like unto my servant Edward Partridge, that he may receive the consecrations of mine house, that he may administer blessings upon the heads of the poor of my people, saith the Lord. Let no man despise my servant George, for he shall honor me."—Sec. 124, par. 21, p. 431.

Also, "He who is appointed to administer spiritual things, the same is worthy of his hire, even as those who are appointed to a stewardship to administer in temporal things."—Sec. 70, par. 12, p. 254.

There seems to be a difference in the duties of Bishops; Brother Miller's was to be like Edward Partridge's whose duties are distinctly marked out as follows: "And again, verily I say unto you, my servant George Miller is without guile; he may be trusted because of the integrity of his heart; and for the love which he has to my testimony I, the Lord, love him."—Sec. 124, par. 20 (see also par. 21), p. 431.

At the same time and in the same manner Vinson Knight, Samuel H. Smith, and Shadrach Roundy were appointed to preside over the Bishopric.

"And again, I say unto you, I give unto you Vinson Knight, Samuel H. Smith, and Shadrach Roundy, if he will receive it, to preside over the Bishopric; a knowledge of said Bishopric is given unto you in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants."—Sec. 124, par. 141, p. 446. Vinson Knight was a Bishop, the two others were of course his Counselors.

We find from the foregoing and from what follows that there were several kinds of Bishops, as well as Bishops' agents. Bishop Edward Partridge was appointed to preside over the Saints in Zion, to purchase lands, divide inheritances, and sit as a judge in Israel, as a general Bishop to that district of country, and he had a special agent to assist him, viz., Sidney Gilbert.

Bishop Whitney was appointed Bishop in Kirtland, Ohio, yet he had charge of all the Churches in the eastern country, as a general Bishop. Neither of these, at that time, were presiding Bishops over the Bishopric. George Miller was appointed to fill the place of Edward Partridge and officiate in the same order of Bishopric. Vinson Knight was appointed to preside over the Bishopric with Samuel H. Smith and Shadrach Roundy for counselors, and at the same time that George Miller was appointed to take the place of Edward Partridge. Then there were Alanson Ripley and others. Sidney Gilbert was to be an agent unto this Church in the place that shall be appointed by the Bishop. (Sec 53, par. 4, p. 209.)

"And let my servant Sidney Gilbert stand in the office which I have appointed him, to receive moneys, to be an agent unto the Church, to buy land in all the regions round about, inasmuch as can be in righteousness, and as wisdom shall direct. * * And again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Sidney Gilbert plant himself in this place, and establish a store, that he may sell goods without fraud that he may obtain money to buy lands for the good of the Saints, and that he may obtain whatsoever things the disciples may need to plant them in their inheritances."—Sec. 57, pars. 6, 8, pp. 215-16.

The Lord says Edward Partridge was also to "stand in the office which I have appointed him, to divide the Saints their inheritance, even as I have commanded; and also those whom he has appointed to assist him."—Sec. 57, par. 7, p. 215 * * "Let the Bishop and the agent make preparations for those families which have been commanded to come to this land, as soon as possible, and plant them in their inheritance."—Sec.57, par, 15, p. 216. "I have selected my servant Edward Partridge, and have appointed unto him his mission in this land; but if he repent not of his sins, which are unbelief and blindness of heart, let him take heed lest he fall. Behold his mission is given unto him, and it shall not be given again. And whoso standeth in his mission is appointed to be a judge in Israel, like as it was in ancient days, to divide the lands of the heritage of God unto his children, and to judge his people by the testimony of the just, and by the assistance of his counselors, according to the laws of the kingdom which are given by the Prophets of God; for verily I say unto you, my law shall be kept on this land. Let no man think he is ruler, but let God rule him that judgeth, according to the counsel of his own will; or, in other words him that counseleth or sitteth upon the judgment seat."—Sec. 5 8 pars. 14-20, p. 218. "Let the residue of the Elders * * hold a conference;" and Edward Partridge was empowered to direct the conference which should be held by certain Elders. (Sec. 58, pars. 61, 62, p. 222.)

"And let my servant Edward Partridge impart of the money which I have given him, a portion unto mine Elders who are commanded to return."—Sec. 60, pars. 10, 11, p. 226. If not able, they were not required to return it.

"Let my servant Newel K. Whitney retain his store, or in other words, the store yet for a little season. Nevertheless let him impart all the money which he can impart, to be sent up unto the land of Zion. Behold these things are in his own hands, let him do according to wisdom. Verily I say, let him be ordained as an agent unto the disciples that shall tarry, and let him be ordained unto this power."—Sec. 43, pars. 42-45, pp. 236-7. It would seem from the above that Bishop Whitney was not yet a Bishop when he was ordained to be an agent.

"And even the Bishop, who is a judge, and his Counselors, if they are not faithful in their stewardships, shall be condemned, and others shall be planted in their stead." Sec. 64, par. 40, p. 243.

We find from the following that Bishops must be selected from the High Priests and be set apart to the Bishopric.

"There remaineth hereafter, in the due time of the Lord, other Bishops to be set apart unto the Church, to minister even according to the first; wherefore they shall be High Priests who are worthy, and they shall be appointed by the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood, except they be literal descendants of Aaron. And if they be literal descendants of Aaron, they have a legal right to the Bishopric, if they are the first born among the sons of Aaron; for the firstborn hold the right of the Presidency over this Priesthood, and the keys or authority of the same. No man has a legal right to this office to hold the keys of this Priesthood, except he be a literal descendant and the firstborn of Aaron; but as a High Priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of Bishop when no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called, and set apart and ordained unto this power under the hands of the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood. And a literal descendant of Aaron, also, must be designated by this Presidency, and found worthy, and anointed, and ordained under the hands of this Presidency, otherwise they are not legally authorized to officiate in their Priesthood; but by virtue of the decree concerning their right of the Priesthood descending from father to son, they may claim their anointing, if at any time they can prove their lineage, or do ascertain it by revelation from the Lord under the hands of the above named Presidency. And again, no Bishop or High Priest who shall be set apart for this ministry, shall be tried or condemned for any crime, save it be before the First Presidency of the Church; and inasmuch as he is found guilty before this Presidency, by testimony that cannot be impeached, he shall be condemned."—Sec. 68, pars. 14-23, pp. 249-250.

We may here notice, as elsewhere referred to, that it is the Presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood that is above spoken of, that must be set apart by the First Presidency, and also tried by them, whether of lineal descent or High Priests. Newel K. Whitney was appointed and ordained a Bishop. (See sec. 72, par. 8, p. 257) "Let my servant Newel K. Whitney, and my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., and my servant Sidney Rigdon, sit in council with the Saints which are in Zion."—Sec. 78, par. 9, p. 281. Thus it seems that though Bishop Whitney was Bishop of Kirtland, he sat in council with the Saints which were in Zion, associated with Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, thus showing that he was not a ward but a general Church Bishop.

"Therefore, verily I say unto you, that it is expedient for my servant Alam, and Ahashdah, (Newel K. Whitney,) Mahalaleel, and Pelagoram, (Sidney Rigdon,) and my servant Gazelam, (Joseph Smith,) and Horah, Olihah, (Oliver Cowdery,) and Shalemanasseh, and Mehemson, (Martin Harris,) to be bound together by a bond and covenant that cannot be broken by transgression, (except judgment shall immediately follow,) in your several stewardships, to manage the affairs of the poor, and all things pertaining to the Bishopric, both in the land of Zion and in the land of Shinehah (Kirtland.)"—Sec. 82, pars. 11, 12, p. 286.

This proves that President Joseph Smith and his Counselor Sidney Rigdon were authorized to supervise temporal matters in the Church as well as the Bishop or with him. Here the Melchizedek Priesthood is united with the Aaronic to manage the Bishopric in both lands. We continue our quotations: "Every man seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an eye single to the glory of God."—Sec. 82, par. 19, p. 287.

"Which Abraham received the Priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah; and from Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers; and from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother, who received the Priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam, who was the first man—which Priesthood continueth in the Church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years. And the Lord confirmed a Priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations—which Priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the Priesthood, which is after the holiest order of God. And this greater Priesthood administereth the Gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the Kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God; therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of Godliness is manifest, and without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the Priesthood, the power of Godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; for without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live. Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God; but they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence, therefore the Lord in his wrath (for his anger was kindled against them) swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness; which rest is the fullness of his glory. Therefore he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also."—Sec. 84, pars. 14-25, pp. 290-1.

We have already shown that there was a Priesthood conferred upon Aaron and his seed throughout all their generations. It becomes a question what Priesthood Aaron had before he had bestowed upon him what is termed the Aaronic Priesthood, when he administered with Moses? "The greater Priesthood administereth the Gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the Kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God."

Frederick G. Williams was called and appointed a High Priest and Counselor to Joseph Smith. His call reads as follows:

"Verily, verily I say unto you, my servant Frederick G. Williams, listen to the voice of him who speaketh, to the word of the Lord your God, and hearken to the calling wherewith you are called, even to be a High Priest in my Church and a Counselor unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., unto whom I have given the keys of the Kingdom, which belongeth always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood: therefore, verily, I acknowledge him and will bless him and also thee, inasmuch as thou art faithful in counsel, in the office which I have appointed unto you in prayer always vocally and in thy heart, in public and in private, also in thy ministry in proclaiming the Gospel in the land of the living, and among thy brethren."—Sec. 81, pars. 1-3, p. 284.

From the following we find that God took Moses from the midst of the children of Israel and also the Holy or Melchizedek Priesthood, leaving the lesser, or the Aaronic Priesthood. "Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also; and the lesser Priesthood continued, which Priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory Gospel, which Gospel is the Gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath, caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb; for he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power. And again, the offices of Elder and Bishop are necessary appendages belonging unto the High Priesthood." Sec. 84, pars. 25-29, p. 291. From this, it would seem that the law of carnal commandments was a curse. Paul said the law was added because of transgression. ("It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made." Gal. iii, 19.) And that it was a yoke which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear; and that Christ came to fulfill the law and introduce the Gospel which was greater—a higher law and a greater Priesthood, viz: the Melchizedek.

Both Elders and Bishops are appendages to the High Priesthood. "And again, the offices of Teacher and Deacon are necessary appendages belonging to the lesser Priesthood." (Sec. 84, par. 30, p. 291); thus Elders and Bishops are appendages to the High Priesthood, while Teachers and Deacons are appendages to the lesser, which lesser is an appendage to the higher or Melchizedek. "Therefore, as I said concerning the sons of Moses—for the sons of Moses, and also the sons of Aaron shall offer an acceptable offering and sacrifice in the house of the Lord, which house shall be built unto the Lord in this generation, upon the consecrated spot as I have appointed."—Sec. 84, par. 31, p. 291. When both of these Priesthoods are carried out and united in their purity, the glory of the Lord will be manifested upon Mount Zion, in the Lord's house, both operating according to their callings, position and authority. For it is written, "And the sons of Moses and Aaron shall be filled with the glory of the Lord, upon Mount Zion, in the Lord's house, whose sons are ye; and also many whom I have called and sent forth to build up my Church; for whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two Priesthoods, of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies; they become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the Church and Kingdom, and the elect of God; and also all they who receive this Priesthood receiveth me, saith the Lord; for he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's Kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him; and this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the Priesthood. Therefore, all those who receive the Priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father which he cannot break, neither can it be moved; but whoso breaketh this covenant, after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come. And all those who come not unto this Priesthood which ye have received, which I now confirm upon you who are present this day, by mine own voice out of the heavens, and even I have given the heavenly hosts and mine angels charge concerning you."—Sec. 84, pars. 32-42, p. 292.

"And let all those who have not families, who receive moneys, send it up unto the Bishop in Zion, or unto the Bishop in Ohio, that it may be consecrated for the bringing forth of the revelations and the printing thereof, and for establishing Zion."—Sec. 84, par. 104, p. 298.

In the same revelation "unto Joseph Smith, Jun., and six Elders," it is written: "Therefore, take with you those who are ordained unto the lesser Priesthood, and send them before you to make appointments, and prepare the way, and to fill appointments that you yourselves are not able to fill. Behold, this is the way that mine Apostles, in ancient days, built up my Church unto me.a Also the body hath need of every member, that all may be edified together, that the system may be kept perfect."—Sec. 84, pars. 107, 108, no, p. 299.

[Footnote a: Why should not this be the way now?]

We further quote: "For the body is not one member, but many. * * And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you."—I Cor. xii, 14, 21.

"And the Bishop, Newel K. Whitney, also, should travel round about and among all the Churches, searching after the poor to administer to their wants by humbling the rich and the proud; he should also employ an agent to take charge and to do his secular business as he shall direct."—Sec. 84, pars. 112, 113, p. 299. Thus High Priests, Seventies, Elders, Bishops, and all men holding the Priesthood were to be actively engaged in magnifying their Priesthood.

"It is the duty of the Lord's clerk, whom he has appointed, to keep a history, and a General Church Record of all things that transpire in Zion, and of all those who consecrate properties, and receive inheritances legally from the Bishop; and also their manner of life, their faith, and works; and also of all the apostates who apostatize after receiving their inheritances. It is contrary to the will and commandment of God, that those who receive not their inheritance by consecration, agreeably to his law, which he has given, that he may tithe his people, to prepare them against the day of vengeance and burning, should have their names enrolled with the people of God; neither is their genealogy to be kept, or to be had where it may be found on any of the records or history of the Church; their name shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the names of the children written in the book of the law of God, saith the Lord of Hosts. Yea, thus saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh manifest, saying: And it shall come to pass that I, the Lord God, will send one mighty and strong, holding the sceptre of power in his hand, clothed with light for a covering, whose mouth shall utter words, eternal words; while his bowels shall be a fountain of truth, to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints, whose names are found, and the names of their fathers, and of their children, enrolled in the book of the law of God: while that man, who was called of God and appointed, that putteth forth his hand to steady the ark of God, shall fall by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning; and all they who are not found written in the book of remembrance, shall find none inheritance in that day, but they shall be cut asunder, and their portion shall be appointed them among unbelievers, where are wailing and gnashing of teeth. These things I say not of myself; therefore, as the Lord speaketh, he will also fulfill. And they who are of the High Priesthood, whose names are not found written in the book of the law, or that are found to have apostatized, or to have been cut off from the Church; as well as the lesser Priesthood, or the members, in that day, shall not find an inheritance among the Saints of the Most High; therefore it shall be done unto them as unto the children of the Priest, as will be found in the second chapter and sixty-first and second verses of Ezra."—Sec. 85, pp. 300-2.

"And let the Bishop search diligently to obtain an agent, and let it be a man who has got riches in store, a man of God, and of strong faith, that thereby he may be enabled to discharge every debt; that the storehouse of the Lord may not be brought into disrepute before the eyes of the people."—Sec. 90, pars. 22, 23, p. 325.

"Nevertheless, I am not well pleased with many things, and I am not well pleased with my servant William E. McLellin, neither with my servant Sidney Gilbert, and the Bishop also, and others have many things to repent of; but verily I say unto you, that I, the Lord, will contend with Zion, and plead with her strong ones, and chasten her until she overcomes and is clean before me; for she shall not be removed out of her place. I, the Lord, have spoken it. Amen."—Sec. 90, pars, 35-37, p. 326.

"My servant Newel K. Whitney, also a Bishop of my Church, hath need to be chastened and set in order his family, and see that they are more diligent and concerned at home, and pray always, or they shall be removed out of their place."—Sec. 93, par. 50, p. 332.

"Therefore let my servant Newel K. Whitney take charge of the place which is named among you, upon which I design to build mine holy house; and again, let it be divided in lots according to wisdom, for the benefit of those who seek inheritances, as it shall be determined in council among you."—Sec. 96, pars. 2, 3, p. 337.

"And again, I say unto you, it is contrary to my commandment and my will, that my servant Sidney Gilbertb should sell my storehouse which I have appointed unto my people, into the hand of mine enemies. Let not that which I have appointed be polluted by mine enemies, by the consent of those who call themselves after my name; for this is a very sore and grievous sin against me, and against my people, in consequence of those things which I have decreed and are soon to befall the nations. Therefore, it is my will that my people should claim, and hold claim upon that which I have appointed unto them, though they should not be permitted to dwell thereon."—Sec. 101, pars. 96-99, pp. 358-9.

[Footnote b: This was the Bishop's agent.]

"There are, in the Church, two Priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek, and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood. Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a Great High Priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood after the order of the Son of God; but out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the Church, in ancient days, called that Priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood. All other authorities or offices in the Church are appendages to this Priesthood: but there are two divisions or grand heads—one is the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the other is the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood. The office of an Elder comes under the Priesthood of Melchizedek. The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of Presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the Church, in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things. The Presidency of the High Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek, have a right to officiate in all the offices in the Church."—Sec. 107, pars. 1-9, pp. 383-4.

Thus the Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of Presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the Church, to administer in spiritual things, while the Presidency of the High Priesthood has a right to officiate in all the offices in the Church.

"This is the duty of a Bishop who is not a literal descendant of Aaron, but has been ordained to the High Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek. Thus shall he be a judge, even a common judge among the inhabitants of Zion, or in a Stake of Zion, or in any branch of the Church where he shall be set apart unto this ministry, until the borders of Zion are enlarged, and it becomes necessary to have other Bishops or judges in Zion, or elsewhere."—Sec. 107, pars. 73-75, p. 391. (See all of this section.)

He was to be a common judge among the inhabitants of Zion, or in a Stake of Zion, or in a branch of the Church, when he shall be set apart unto his ministry. His Bishopric is sufficient for any of these places when set apart: and he can only fill those offices for which he is set apart. But a literal descendant of Aaron has a legal right to the Presidency of this Priesthood, to the keys of this ministry, to act in the office of Bishop, without Counselors, except in a case when a President of the High Priesthood is tried.

We have the following on tithing: "Verily, thus saith the Lord, I require all their surplus property to be put into the hands of the Bishop of my Church of Zion, for the building of mine house, and for the laying of the foundation of Zion, and for the Priesthood, and for the debts of the Presidency of my Church; and this shall be the beginning of the tithing of my people: and after that, those who have been thus tithed, shall pay one-tenth of all their interest annually; and this shall be a standing law unto them for ever, for my Holy Priesthood, saith the Lord. Verily I say unto you, it shall come to pass, that all those who gather unto the land of Zion shall be tithed of their surplus properties, and shall observe this law, or they shall not be found worthy to abide among you. And I say unto you, if my people observe not this law, to keep it holy, and by this law sanctify the land of Zion unto me, that my statutes and my judgments may be kept thereon, that it may be most holy, behold, verily I say unto you, it shall not be a land of Zion unto you; and this shall be an ensample unto all the Stakes of Zion. Even so. Amen."—Sec. 119, pp. 418-19.

"A revelation making known the disposition of property tithing:

"Verily, thus saith the Lord, the time is now come, that it shall be disposed of by a Council, composed of the First Presidency of my Church, and of the Bishop and his Council, and by my High Council; and by mine own voice unto them, saith the Lord. Even so. Amen."—Sec. 120, pp. 419-20.

"That when he shall finish his work, I may receive him unto myself, even as I did my servant David Patten, who is with me at this time, and also my servant Edward Partridge, and also my aged servant Joseph Smith, Sen., who sitteth with Abraham at his right hand, and blessed and holy is he, for he is mine."—Sec. 124, par. 19, p. 431.

First.—We find from the above that there are two distinctive general Priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

Second.—That they are both conferred by the Lord; that both are everlasting, and administer in time and eternity.

Third.—That the Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of Presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the Church, in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things.

Fourth.—That the second Priesthood is called the Priesthood of Aaron; because it was conferred upon Aaron and his seed throughout all their generations.

Fifth.—That the lesser Priesthood is a part of, or an appendage to the greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has power in administering outward ordinances. The lesser or Aaronic Priesthood can make appointments for the greater, in preaching, can baptize, administer the sacrament, attend to the tithing, buy lands, settle people on possessions, divide inheritances, look after the poor, take care of the properties of the Church, attend generally to temporal affairs; act as common judges in Israel, and assist in ordinances of the Temple, under the direction of the greater or Melchizedek Priesthood. They hold the keys of the ministering of angels and administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the Gospel, and the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.

Sixth.—That there is a Presidency over each of these Priesthoods, both over the Melchizedek and the Aaronic.

Seventh.—That while the power of the higher, or Melchizedek is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the Church; to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened to them, to commune with the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and to preside over all the spiritual officers of the Church, yet the Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, have a right to officiate in all the offices in the Church, both spiritual and temporal.

"Then comes the High Priesthood, which is the greatest of all; wherefore it must needs be that one be appointed of the High Priesthood to preside over the Priesthood, and he shall be called President of the High Priesthood of the Church; or, in other words, the Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood of the Church."—Sec. 107, pars. 64-66, p. 390.

It is thus evident that this Priesthood presides over all Presidents, all Bishops, including the Presiding Bishop, over all Councils, organizations and authorities in the whole Church, in all the world.

That the Bishopric is the Presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood, which is "an appendage to the greater or Melchizedek Priesthood," and that no man has a legal right to hold the KEYS of the Aaronic Priesthood, which presides over all Bishops and all the lesser Priesthood, except he be a literal descendant of Aaron. But, that "as a High Priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of Bishop" * * * if "called, set apart and ordained unto this power by the hands of the Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood."

We may here notice that John the Baptist conferred this Priesthood upon Joseph Smith, and that therefore, as he held it, he had the power to confer it upon others.

Eighth.—That there are Bishops holding different positions: Bishop Partridge was a general Bishop over the land of Zion; while Bishop Whitney was a general Bishop over the Church in Kirtland, Ohio, and also over all the eastern Churches until afterwards appointed as Presiding Bishop. That there are also ward Bishops, whose duties are confined to their several wards. That there are also Bishops' agents, such as Sidney Gilbert and others.

That the position which a Bishop holds, depends upon his calling and appointment, and that, although a man holding the Bishopric is eligible to any office in the Bishopric, yet he cannot officiate legally in any, except by selection, calling and appointment.

Ninth.—That the power and right of selecting and calling of the Presiding Bishop and general Bishops is vested in the First Presidency, who also must try those appointed by them in case of transgression, except in the case of a literal descendant of Aaron; who, if the firstborn, possesses a legal right to the keys of this Priesthood; but even he must be sanctioned and appointed by the First Presidency. This arises from the fact that the Aaronic is an appendage to the Melchizedek Priesthood.

That the Presiding Bishop, who presides over all Bishops, and all of the lesser Priesthood, should consult the First Presidency in all important matters pertaining to the Bishopric.

Tenth.—That in regard to the appointment and trial of ward Bishops, it appears that they stand in the same relationship to the Presidents of Stakes as the early Bishops did to the First Presidency, who presided over the Stake at Kirtland; but that those Presidents should consult with the First Presidency on these and other important matters, and officiate under their direction in their several Stakes.

That in regard to the office and calling of Bishops it is very much like the office and calling of High Priests. All High Priests are eligible to any office in the Church, when called, ordained and appointed to fill such office. The First Presidency are High Priests. The Twelve are High Priests, High Councilors are High Priests, Presidents of Stakes are High Priests, and all their Counselors; Bishops and their Counselors are High Priests: but it does not follow that all High Priests are First Presidents, members of the Twelve Apostles, Presidents of Stakes, High Councilors, Bishops or Bishops' Counselors, they only obtain these offices by selection and appointment from the proper source, and when not appointed to any specific calling, they are organized in a Stake quorum, under a President and Council. So although the Bishopric is eligible to fulfill any office to which they may be appointed, all are not presiding Bishops, all are not general Bishops, or special Bishops, or ward Bishops, or even Bishops' agents; they occupy their several offices, as do the High Priests, by selection, appointment, as well as ordination, and that the Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood presides over, calls, directs, appoints and counsels all. It is further evident that as the Melchizedek Priesthood holds the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the Church, and that the Presidency thereof has a right to officiate in all the offices of the Church, therefore that Presidency has a perfect right to direct or call, set apart and ordain Bishops, to fill any place or position in the Church that may be required for that ministry to perform in all the Stakes of Zion, or throughout the world. Thus, after going through the whole matter, we come back to a term frequently used among us: Obey counsel.
