As the Levitical Priesthood is referred to in the Old Testament scriptures, as well as in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, the following quotations and remarks may throw some light upon the subject:

### LEVITES AND LEVITICAL PRIESTHOOD.

"And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the Priest, that they may minister unto him. And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation, before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle. And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle. And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons, they are wholly given unto them out of the children of Israel. And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on their Priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death."—Num. iii: 5, 10.

Aaron and his sons held the Aaronic Priesthood, and the Levites were given unto them to minister unto them to keep his charge, the charge of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle, keep the instruments of the tabernacle, and the charge of the children of Israel.

"And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel; therefore the Levites shall be mine; because all the firstborn are mine; for on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast: mine they shall be: I am the Lord."—Num. iii, 12, 13.

All the firstborn the Lord claimed as belonging to him, because when he destroyed the firstborn of the Egyptians, he spared the firstborn of the Israelites. But the Levites were appointed to fill the place of the firstborn of all Israel, and they were commanded to be numbered, viz., all the males from a month old and upward, to assist Aaron and his sons in the service of the tabernacle; at that time there were twenty-two thousand of them. (Ibid, ver. 39.)

"And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Take the Levites instead of all the first born among the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be mine: I am the Lord." (ver. 44, 45.)

The remainder of the Israelites had to redeem their firstborn, and the money for the redemption was given by Moses to Aaron and his sons according to the word of the Lord. (ver. 50, 51.)

They seemed to have been an appendage to the Aaronic Priesthood to assist in the service of the tabernacle and other duties. Aaron and his male descendants were selected for the Priesthood, and the other Levites as assistants, or an appendage.

The Levites had forty-eight cities and their suburbs provided for them from among the possessions of the other tribes: First came by lot the children of Aaron: "And the children of Aaron the Priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities."—Josh, xxi, 4. (See the whole of the chapter for a division of cities to the remainder of the Levites, or the tribe of Levi, who were thus provided for as distinct from the other tribes.) "All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs."—Josh, xxi, 41.

It may here be observed that both Moses and Aaron belonged to the tribe of Levi, and that the Levites had a tithing given to them. "And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: I am thy part and thine inheritance among the children of Israel. And, behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even the service of the tabernacle of the congregation."—Num. xviii, 20, 21. (See also the chapter.)

There is a peculiarity about this tithing, for while one-tenth was given to the Levites, they, the Levites, were commanded to give one-tenth of the tithe to Aaron.

"And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying. Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them. When ye take of the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up an heave offering of it * * * for the Lord, even a tenth part of the tithe * * and ye shall give thereof the Lord's heave offering to Aaron the Priest." Num. xviii, 25-28.

It would seem that while the Levites were called "to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation" (ver. 6), that the Priest's office belonged especially to Aaron and his family. The Lord, in speaking to Aaron, says, "And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel: to you they are given as a gift for the Lord, to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation."—Num. xviii, 6.

It furthermore appears that while the Levites were given to Aaron, that Aaron and his sons were to hold the Priest's office. "Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your Priest's office for everything of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall serve: I have given your Priest's office unto you as a service of gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death."—Num. xviii, 7.

In the case of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, whom the earth opened and swallowed up for assuming the Priest's office, "Moses said unto Korah, hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi: Seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them? And he hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee: and seek ye the Priesthood also?"—Num. xvi, 8-10. And also the whole chapter, in which is depicted the terrible judgment of God upon them for assuming the Priest's office.

From the above it would seem—

First.—That the Levites were selected in the place of the firstborn whom the Lord called his own.

Second.—That they were given to Aaron to assist him in the minor or lesser duties of the Priesthood; but that Aaron and his sons officiated in the leading offices of the Priesthood, and not the Levites.

Third.—That there was a tithing paid to them by the whole house of Israel for their sustenance.

Fourth.—That they paid a tithe of this to Aaron.

Fifth.—That on assuming the higher duties of the Priesthood of Aaron, the judgments of God overtook them.

Sixth.—That their Priesthood was only an appendage to the Aaronic Priesthood, and not that Priesthood itself as held by Aaron and his sons.

TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

Where the original reads "peolpe," this edition reads "people."

Where the original reads "thh," this edition reads "the."

Where the original reads "Willaims," this edition reads "Williams."

Where the original reads "Aopostles," this edition reads "Apostles."

Where the original reads "authotities," this edition reads "authorities."

Where the original reads "too frequent repetion," this edition reads "too frequent repetition."

Where the original reads "Was there anything but the Gospel to add it to to?," this edition reads "Was there anything but the Gospel to add it to?"

A case of a quotation mark appearing without a partner has been corrected by adding the partner, after comparison with the original quoted material.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ITEMS ON THE PRIESTHOOD, PRESENTED TO THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
