James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Preface

A quarter of a century of teaching experience in the professional educational program of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints sharpened my awareness of the value to students and teachers of the official Messages of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Their value in my own teaching career made me increasingly sensitive to the fact that these Messages were widely scattered through Latter-day Saint literature and had not been assembled and made readily available to the majority of students, teachers and readers.

This collection of Messages began with my own file which I labeled "Revelations Not in the Standard Works of the L.D.S. Church."

In the summer of 1960 at Brigham Young University I had the privilege of directing the efforts of sixteen Latter-day Saint educators in a joint research project designed to gather and make available these Messages, at least to our group. This group consisted of: Joseph Melvin Bitter, Wayne R. Boothe, Ralph L. Cottrell, Jr., Ronald T. Daly, Leland H. Gentry, Eldon L. Haag, Ray M. Hall, Henry Q. Holley, A. James Hudson, Ward H. Magleby, Monte S. Nyman, Max H. Parkin, Lawrence C. Porter, Gordon Redd, Richard S. Williams and Don Williams.

It became evident when the results of our research for the summer of 1960 were analyzed that the collection was not complete and would prove more valuable if the project were continued. Accordingly in the spring of 1961 a research grant was made by Brigham Young University to continue the project through the summer of 1961. By the close of the second summer of research the collection had grown to include 671 Messages dating from 1833 to 1962 A. D.

Since our research had indicated that other sources for Messages of the First Presidency needed checking, through the kind auspices of President Ernest L. Wilkinson permission was sought in the fall of 1961 to consult further the files of the L.D.S. Church Historian's Library and of the First Presidency of the Church. Permission was readily granted by President Joseph Fielding Smith, Church Historian. In response to President Wilkinson's request for permission for research in the files of the First Presidency in connection with this project the First Presidency replied that it would seem to them that the information furnished by the Historian's Office "should be accurate and complete pertaining to the subject matter under consideration." They suggested that since material was available in the Historian's office, ". . . We trust that Dr. Clark will appreciate the wisdom of our position in regard to the files of the First Presidency."

The cooperation of the Church Historian's Office has made it possible during the past two years to expand this collection of Messages until now (December, 1964) it is believed that the collection is substantially complete for the period from the establishment of the First Presidency in 1833 A.D. to date.

Final completeness is not claimed because of human limitations. Some Messages have undoubtedly been overlooked in the search. Some files, for reasons explained above, have either not been available for checking or material has not been available for publication at this time. It is felt, however, that the search has in the past four years been thorough enough and the results extensive enough to form a valid and nearly complete picture of the instructions, counsel and revelations issued by the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, apart from those already in the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price, to the Church since the organization of the First Presidency in 1833 A. D.

For final permission to publish this compilation I express my warm thanks to the Executive Committee of the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University.

METHOD OF SELECTION AND REPRODUCTION

As each Message of The First Presidency was located, either as an original document in the Church Historian's Library or in published form in newspapers and periodicals, a Xerox copy was made of the Message in order to insure accuracy of reproduction. Type was set by Publishers Press directly from these Xerox copies. Each Message contained in the compilation is therefore reproduced in its complete form as it was originally issued or published over the signature of The First Presidency. The only exceptions to this rule are one or two messages which were a part of a large handbook. In one or two cases of this kind the opening and concluding statements, (which in reality constitute the Message) are reproduced rather than reproducing the entire text of the handbook.

I have not presumed to edit these Messages in any way because I believe to do so would reduce their value as original and official documents of the presiding authority of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Whether or not notes and explanations should be included in the collection has been a matter of consideration almost from the outset of the project. As early as September, 1960, when the project was almost in its infancy, Dr. S. George Ellsworth, Professor of History at Utah State University had written, "I am pleased to hear about your study of pronouncements by The First Presidency and the Twelve. Surely, one of the finest things would be to have the entire group published in complete form with some introductions and notes, but at least the documents themselves!"

Consideration was also given to the question as to whether an attempt should be made to explain why each of the Messages was issued. It was realized only direct access to the minutes of the meetings of The First Presidency would likely allow such an attempt to be accurate and fruitful. For reasons stated The First Presidency did not consider it advisable to open their files for this purpose. Because of the scope of the collection I had also come to the decision that to reconstruct accurately the setting for each message would not only take a more extensive knowledge of L.D.S. Church History than I possessed, but more space than could be reasonably spared and still keep the collection within manageable size. I had therefore tentatively reached the decision to publish the Messages without any notes until President Joseph Fielding Smith, Church Historian, suggested that the re-publication of some of the Messages in the collection without some attempt to explain the setting might lead to further misunderstanding because some of the Messages are sharply focused on problems that though acute at the time of issuance are no longer points of controversy between the L.D.S. Church and some of its protagonists. Elder Bruce R. McConkie made a similar suggestion. Hence brief historical notes and explanations have been included. These however have been drawn largely from the standard L.D.S. Church histories. Rather than rephrase the treatments of the historical settings for many of the messages I have chosen in many instances to supply the reader with exact references where discussions of the historical settings can be found. The standard L.D.S. histories mainly used for this purpose have been:

MOTIVATION FOR THE RESEARCH AND COMPILATION

of the main motivations for initiating and pursuing this project was the growing conviction over my years of teaching experience that in these Messages there was a source of guidance from the highest authority in the L.D.S. Church which was largely being neglected due to inaccessibility or the failure of teachers and students to recognize their value and true position in L.D.S. doctrine and history.

My own experience as a teacher of literally thousands and thousands of students in L.D.S. Church classes at Brigham Young University and outside L.D.S. circles as well had taught me that time after time questions were being raised and discussions held in areas where it was the sincere belief of the discussants that no official viewpoint of the L.D.S. Church existed on the subject under discussion. As a result free discussions have often ended in a stalemate when the discussants could reach no consensus. It is my experience that frequently as these open discussions ended in frustration and stalemate the question could have been resolved to the satisfaction of the majority of the participants if they had only been aware of the official instructions issued over the signature of First Presidencies of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on the topic under discussion.

This lack of awareness of the official position of the L.D.S. Church as stated by The First Presidency on the part of members and even officers of the L.D.S. Church is understandable when one considers the fact that by design the leadership of the L.D.S. Church is "lay leadership" and by design there is a constant rotation of officer personnel. Many of the new officers and members have had little opportunity to become acquainted with past instructions and policies emanating from The First Presidency of the Church.

For a number of years the history of the compilation of the Pearl of Great Price, one of the Standard Works of scripture of the L.D.S. Church, has engaged my attention and research efforts. The original compiler of this collection of "revelations, translations, and narrations," was an L.D.S. Mission President in Great Britain at the time. Something he said in his Preface to the first edition of the Pearl of Great Price in 1851 seems rather applicable to the present collection of Messages of The First Presidency.

Franklin D. Richards wrote in 1851 concerning the materials then contained in the Pearl of Great Price but which prior to his compilation had been widely scattered throughout early L.D.S. literature:

"Most of the Revelations composing this work were published at early periods of the Church, when the circulation of its journals was so limited as to render them comparatively unknown at present, except to a few who have treasured up the productions of the Church with great care from the beginning."

Undoubtedly some L.D.S.. members in that day had simply failed to value the almost daily instructions they had received through the periodical literature of the Church. The same may be true today. Despite the fact that the Ninth Article of Faith of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints declares: "We believe all that God has revealed, all that he does now reveal, and we believe that he will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God" there seem always to be some who "treasure" only the revelations contained in the Standard Works of the Church. They seem either through a lack of knowledge or discernment or both to be unable to recognize revelation that is not in the Standard Works of the Church. It occurred to me as I proceeded with this compilation that there may be persons today who find themselves in the same relative position of some Latter-day Saints in England over a century ago who made "repeated solicitations" to Franklin D. Richards their mission president because they had not recognized and therefore "treasured" the revelations of Joseph Smith which Franklin D. Richards gathered together and placed in the Pearl of Great Price in 1851.

There were others, however, in that day, as there are today, who found themselves in the position of never having the opportunity of being exposed to these revelations and utterances due to the fact that they were recent converts to the L.D.S. Church. The L.D.S. Church has increased its rate of conversions several hundred percent within the ten-year period from 1954 to 1964. The same was true in England in the decade between 1840 and 1850. Today literally hundreds of thousands of Latter-day Saints are so recent in their conversion to and membership in the Church that they have had little or no opportunity to become acquainted with the teachings of its leadership of the past and even of the present.

In the Story of the Pearl of Great Price Bookcraft, Inc., 1955 (pp. 197-198) a suggestion is made of the magnitude of the instructional problem facing Franklin D. Richards as a mission president in 1851 when two thirds of the membership of the Church in his mission had been members four years or less and nearly five thousand members in that single mission in 1851 had been in the Church a year or less.

Today (1964 A. D.) we again face a period in L.D.S. Church History when hundreds of thousands of members of the Church need instruction in the history, doctrine, background, and procedures of the past and present in the L.D.S. Church or Kingdom of God. This compilation of Messages of The First Presidency from 1833 to 1964 should aid these thousands of recent converts, as well as those who have been born and reared in the Church, in gaining an increased understanding of the doctrine, policies and practices of the Church of which they are members.

SUGGESTIONS FOR USE OF THE MESSAGES

A word should possibly be said about the use of this compilation. While the reader, individually, will undoubtedly discover for himself his own unique use for the compilation, some guide lines may be helpful.

The compilation has been arranged chronologically so far as the assembly of the texts of the Messages are concerned. Whenever possible the date of the first or original issuance of each message has been determined and used as a means of determining the exact place of each Message in the collection. Where the date of composition or issuance of the Message could not be accurately determined the date of the earliest publication of the Message has been used. Where earlier Messages have been re-issued by later First Presidencies as part of their instructions to the Church, both versions have been included in their appropriate chronological sequences.

Following the date of the Message, references are given to the source or sources used for our copy of the particular document, followed by any additional sources of publication that have been noted in our research. This is then followed by any explanatory notes which seem pertinent or necessary. The explanatory or historical notes for each Message is then followed, where available, by a reference or references to standard L.D.S. Church histories where additional background for the period of the issuance of the Message may be studied. These references and notes are then followed by the printing of the entire text of the Message as originally issued.

This organizational pattern was chosen over the arrangement of the material in the Messages under topical headings or by subjects simply because the majority of the Messages do not deal with a single topic and to have re-arranged the material topically would have destroyed the integrity of each message as an original document. The documents can be studied topically, however, through a detailed concordance compiled through the use of the facilities of the Computer Research Center at Brigham Young University.

The arrangement of these Messages chronologically has the distinct advantage of allowing the reader or student to follow the growth and development of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints from 1833 to the present (1964) through the official epistles, revelations, letters, and instructions of its First Presidencies as issued to the officers and membership of the Church. The chronological arrangement has an added advantage of portraying a dynamic Church whose inspired leadership, while adhering to fundamental principles established early in its history, has nevertheless been flexible in meeting changing conditions and altering its programs without surrendering basic doctrine or principle. If one needs documentation for the principle of continuous revelation in the L.D.S. Church espoused in the Ninth Article of Faith, it is not hard to discover as one follows the Messages of the First Presidency from President Joseph Smith to President David O. McKay.

APPRAISALS OF VALUES FOUND IN THE MESSAGES

Some personal reactions of the compiler after having worked with this collection more than four years may not be inappropriate here and may prove helpful to the reader in using the collection.

If one is looking for evidence of the constant and continuing concern of The First Presidency of the L.D.S. Church for the individual member of the Church and for the welfare of the individual as taking precedence over the welfare of the organization, I think one will find ample documentation in this compilation. My experience with this collection leaves me with the distinct feeling that while asking for loyalty to God and His Kingdom, the Messages repeatedly emphasize the dignity and free agency of the individual.

Another impression that has grown as I have used the collection not only in research but in graduate classes at Brigham Young University over the past four summers is that here is evidence of a Church whose programs and policies can be highly fluid and can change to meet conditions of a rapidly changing world without surrender or compromise on basic underlying doctrines and principles.

For some impressions and summaries of the collection I rely not alone on my own experience and judgment, but draw upon the reactions of graduate students-L.D.S. Institute and Seminary teachers-who during the past four summers have gone over the growing collection in graduate seminars. The reader may profit before studying the Messages by the reactions to the collection of some of these mature students and teachers. It seems appropriate in this Preface to quote directly at some length from a series of responses of these students and teachers who studied the collection with me in the summer of 1962.

Each graduate student in a graduate seminar at Brigham Young University in the summer of 1962 was asked to study the collection as it then existed and to evaluate the collection as a teacher in terms of personal reaction and also in terms of possible general benefits to be derived from a study of the collection. Following are some verbatim reactions from their papers which may prove helpful to the many reader audiences to which these Messages are now presented.

John F. Heidenreich, prominent L.D.S. Seminary Principal, teacher, convert to the L.D.S. Church and former minister in another church for over thirty years, wrote his reaction and summary of the collection of Messages in these words:

These directives of The First Presidency are both informative and spiritually inspiring and should be made more readily available.

Another student and teacher in the same seminar reacted to his study of these Messages in these words:

From the earliest beginning of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in which the Father instructed Joseph Smith in 1820, "This is my Beloved Son, Hear Him," the oracles of God have responded to this injunction. In an age of doubt, uncertainty, an age where faith is centered in the "arm of flesh," the Church of Jesus Christ has responded with a message-a message unmistakeably threaded through the pages of its historical dispensation that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Hope of the World, and that nations as well as individuals, if they will have peace, will do well to follow the dictum of the Father, to "hear Him." As one studies these Messages of The First Presidency, one cannot help arriving at this inescapable conclusion.

Through these Messages we can visualize more clearly the Church as an on going, progressive institution-not one that has become obsolescent or anachronous through resting its foundation on former vestiges-but an institution whose heart and soul is the pulse of the members. As one turns through these Messages of The First Presidency, one cannot help but be amazed that the current needs, the relevancies of today, the present yearnings of the spirit, are being met and satisfied. It becomes apparent that yesterday's revelation is unsufficient for today's needs. Not that the eternal verities have changed, but that the conditions of the time have so as to warrant a current instruction from the Lord. For those who have contended in the past, that the Church ceased to be a revelatory institution with the death of Joseph Smith, the preponderance of testimony as given in these Messages should disquiet once and for all these allegations.

Overall, we see the Church as a beacon light to the nations of men, warning, admonishing, and giving hope to those that flounder in darkness. The fact that the nations of the earth have not generally given heed to these Messages is an indictment of the "hardheartedness" of men and bears testimony to the historical axiom that men in all ages have been resistant to the truth.

As we read these Messages, we see the Church in its historical perspective as a vibrant, living institution actuated by the Spirit of revelation. We further see its forward progress being fulfilled through the purpose of its divine establishment, which purpose the Lord gave through commandment to Joseph Smith, in 1831:

Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave unto him commandments; And also gave commandments to others, that they should proclaim these things unto the world; and all this that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets-The weak things of the world shall come forth and break down the mighty and strong ones, that man should not counsel his fellow man neither trust in the arm of flesh-But that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world; That faith also might increase in the earth; That mine everlasting covenant might be established; . . .-Doctrine and Covenants 1:17-23

The peace of the world is predicated on this message and this is the message of hope that permeates these Messages of the First Presidency. William O. Nelson

These reactions came after a short six-weeks' study of these Messages of The First Presidency. They confirm my own feelings and impressions after working with the collection for over four years, but the analysis of the Messages in this compilation has only begun. Indeed this is one of the purposes of the compilation, to bring together this collection of messages in their completeness so that future studies may analyze and evaluate them in total. The compiler hopes that many other studies will grow out of this basic and pioneering research. JAMES R. CLARK, Ed. D.
