James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Introduction

It is hoped that those who wish a general introduction to the volumes of this series have read or will read the Preface and the Introduction to volume one. There we have set forth a brief history of the project in compiling these Messages of the First Presidency, an historical introduction to the authority of the Messages and guides to the use of the Messages as compiled in this series. The reasons for the organizational pattern of the volumes is also there set forth. Briefly that pattern of organization of the materials to be included in these volumes is as follows:

(1) Whenever possible the date of the first or original issuance of each message has been determined and used as a means of placing each Message chronologically in the collection.

(2) References are given to the source or sources of the copy of the document used for this compilation.

(3) Explanatory notes which seem pertinent have been added at the beginning of the documents. These notes have been set in a different type to clearly distinguish them from the documents proper.

(4) The notes are then followed, where available, by references to standard L.D.S. Church histories or sources where additional background for the Message or period of the Message may be consulted.

(5) Finally the document in its entirety has been printed as originally issued whenever available. Some known Messages have not been available for reproduction in this series and some others have been available only in an edited or condensed form. The aim has been to reproduce the original documents as first issued by the First Presidency whenever this was humanly possible.

As stated in the Preface to volume one, and repeated here, final completeness is not claimed for the collection of Messages because of human limitations. Indeed, since the publication of volume one, additional Messages which belong in that volume have been found. This will undoubtedly be true of other volumes in the series as publication of the series progresses. To preserve the chronological sequence of the series in general it is now thought advisable to contemplate the procedure of including documents found after a chronological point has been passed, at the end of the series rather than continually break or back-track on the chronology of the series at the beginning of each volume. This over-all supplement at the end of the last volume in the series can then be unified through the comprehensive index contemplated for the series.

As stated in the Introduction to volume one, the general rule of the compilation of the series was to include only Messages receiving public circulation and signed by the First Presidency as a quorum. In volume one some significant exceptions to this general rule were felt necessary in order to portray the on-going instructions emanating to the Church from its presiding authority. Detailed policy and procedure on what constituted an official public declaration seems not to have been clearly worked out during the formative period of the Church. The compiler, therefore, felt somewhat free to exercise considerable leeway on this point of selection in the first volume.

In this second volume of the series he has attempted to follow more closely the general rule of including only Messages bearing the signatures of the full First Presidency. Some exceptions have still had to be made. It was pointed out to us by one of the present general authorities of the Church whose father was a Stake President in this early period that a message at that time to a single stake president was probably comparable to messages now issued to all stake presidents or even to the whole Church. During periods of apostolic interregnum, however, the signature on the Messages become authoritatively that of the President of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, who as presiding officer of that quorum signed the documents by authority of the Quorum.

At the end of volume one we had reached a stage in L.D.S. Church history where new headquarters of the Church had been established in the Great Basin, the First General Epistle of Brigham Young's administration had been issued and the Church was beginning to operate from a new geographical base.

Volume Two begins with the Second General Epistle of the Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints issued from the Great Salt Lake Valley, "to the Saints Scattered Throughout the Earth," October 12, 1849.

In this volume we will see, among other developments, the First Presidency expand the missionary system of the Church world-wide, direct the colonization of the Great Basin, gather much of the Church membership from Europe, establish and consolidate a Mormon empire in the Rocky Mountains and respond to the challenge of an increasingly hostile "Gentile" world with the hostility centered around the Mormon practice of polygamous marriages.

Again in this second volume the reader should be able to see the image of a dynamic Church whose inspired leadership, while adhering to fundamental principles established early in its history, was flexible enough to meet changing conditions and alter its programs without surrendering basic doctrine or principle. JAMES R. CLARK Ed. D. August, 1965
