James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Letter to Orson Hyde, July 28, 1850

1850-July 28-Frontier Guardian Vol. 2. No. 17 (September 14, 1850)

Great Salt Lake City, Deseret, July 28, 1850. DEAR BRO. ORSON HYDE,-

As the mail is expected to start to-morrow, although much crowded with business, we take this opportunity of answering your communication to us, by Thomas Williams, who arrived here in safety, June 7th; and, although our city has been crowded with swarms of hungry emigrants since the 20th of May, we had received no direct intelligence, or even a paper from the States, until the mail arrived.

The emigration poured in here in such numbers that they raised provisions to a very high price. Flour sold for one dollar per pound, which was sufficient to induce some of our speculators to sell their last morsel, and go without. Harvest commenced with the 4th of July and has continued until the present. Some of the earliest places of wheat were injured by a frost which occurred when it was in the blow. Since harvest flour has been selling for twenty-five dollars per hundred. The amount of grain sowed last fall and spring was immense. The great majority of the fall grain has produced an excellent crop, and the spring crop looks remarkably well. In consequence of the great amount of snow on the mountains, many of our rivers overflowed their banks, causing considerable damage to crops &c. The Jordan was several feet higher than it has been known before, and destroyed a great portion of the crops below the bridge. The crops in Weber, Utah, and Toule counties are reported to be excellent. Brother Morley who has lately visited us from San Pete, gives us flattering accounts of the prospects for an abundant harvest. Our celebration on the 24th was well attended and very interesting, the minutes of which you will find in the Deseret News. It is a general time of health with the saints, and peace and plenty of hard work, as every one has been so busy that they can hardly get time to eat or sleep. You speak about hurry and bustle at Kanesville; but if you were here, to see, feel, and realize the burdens, labors and responsibilities, which are daily, hourly, momentarily, rolling, piling, tumbling, and thundering upon us you would at least conclude that there was no danger of our getting the gout from idleness or too much jollity. * * * We are in the hands of our heavenly father, the God of Abraham, and Joseph who guided us to this land; who fed the poor saints on the plains with quails; who gave his people strength to labor without bread; who sent the Gulls of the deep as saviors to preserve, (by devouring the crickets); the golden wheat for bread for his people; and who has preserved his saints from the wrath of their enemies. He is our Father and our protector; we live in his light, are guided by his wisdom, protected by his shadow and upheld by his strength. * * * * Our public works appear to drag for want of means, and workmen; our council house is not yet enclosed. We have erected a large shop on the Temple Square for doing the blacksmithing for the public works; when completed it will put in our reach a place where we can execute all jobs necessary for the building of the Temple. We have had to make some alterations, and improvements upon the Bowery, and have been unable as yet to get our storehouse done for the public grain, provisions &c. * * * * We meet every Saturday in company with Brothers P. P. Pratt, E. T. Benson, George A. Smith and Thomas Bullock, in a room for the purpose, and lift our hearts to the Most High in prayer, for the prosperity of Israel, in which you are always, with the saints in Pottawattamie, remembered. Our earnest desire is for your welfare, and the welfare of the people that are with you.

We remain your brethren, In the gospel of patience, BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, WILLARD RICHARDS.
