James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Fifth General Epistle, April 7, 1851

1851-April 7-Deseret News, Vol. 1, No. 30 (April 8, 1851); Frontier Guardian, Vol. 3, No. 9 (May 30, 1851); MS 13: 201-216 (July 15, 1851)

FIFTH GENERAL EPISTLE Of the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, from Great Salt Lake Valley, State of Deseret, to the Saints Scattered Throughout the Earth, Greeting:

Beloved Brethren,-Ever mindful of the Redeemer's kingdom and of your interest therein, we gladly improve the present moment in expressing to you our watchfulness and care concerning you, and concerning those things which may tend to your present happiness and future exaltation. There is nothing that transpires around us, but what has its tendency to good or evil; and while we are in the world, and are surrounded by circumstances and events which have a bearing on our welfare, either for or against, it becomes us, as Saints of the Most High, to inform and become informed; and to treasure up knowledge and wisdom concerning all things that are transpiring on earth; and in the heavens, so far as it concerns us and we are permitted to know; and in hell too, that we may be ready to shun every evil tendency, and embrace all good; and if through our pen the wisdom of God shall be made manifest for your good, comfort, consolation, and salvation, the greatest joy of our hearts will be realized.

The Church, of which you are members, was organized on the 6th of April, 1830; then consisting of six individuals, since which time it has continued to increase, and to be persecuted and driven from town to town; from county to county; and from State to State, and out of the States; until its resting place in the wilderness and valleys of the mountains, is about three thousand miles from the place of its organization in the State of New York; and in those persecutions, prophets and apostles have been martyred for the truth's sake, and the elders have been scattered abroad on the four quarters of the earth, and the islands of the sea, preaching as they went, faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, the Lord's Supper, the gathering, the resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment, and hundreds of thousands have believed and yielded obedience to the heavenly message, and are patiently waiting the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; who, ere long, will set his feet again on Mount Olivet, and make himself manifest unto Israel, according to the predictions of the ancient prophets; for Israel must be gathered from all nations, and be again established in the land of their inheritance, and behold the wounds in the hands and side of Him whom they have pierced, and acknowledge Him as their Saviour, their Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. The gathering of Israel has already commenced; Judea is receiving its ancient inhabitants, and the Holy City is re-building; which is one prominent sign of the near approach of the Messiah.

During the twenty-one years since the organization of the Church, the Gospel has been preached in Europe, Asia, Africa, America, the East and West Indies, and on many islands and clusters of islands in the Atlantic and Pacific; many thousands of the Saints have gathered from various parts of the earth, unto Zion; to America; the land which God has pointed out as a place of safety for his people, in these last days; and which will prove a place of refuge for kings and princes, and nobles, and honorable men of the earth of all nations, whether rich or poor, who are disposed to seek refuge therein, when the over-flowing scourges of God's wrath shall destroy the nations, and depopulate the earth on account of the multiplied infidelity and abominations of the inhabitants thereof. The unparalleled spread of the Gospel, in so short a space of time, and the rapid gathering of the Saints, is another token of Messiah's near approach.

The increasing convulsions of the nations; the multiplied wars and rumors of wars; the internal dissensions which threaten the disunion and overthrow of the best governments on the earth; the increasing plagues and sickness in new and diversified forms, baffling the skill of the ablest physicians, and causing the wisdom of their wisest to perish; the increasing divisions among professing Christian parties, and members of the same party, showing, daily, a greater and greater want of that union which must exist to secure the perpetuity of the principles of righteousness among any people, and without which God's kingdom cannot exist on earth or in the heavens; the increase of whirlwinds, hurricanes, tornadoes, and earthquakes; the increase of the loss of life by shipwreck and tempest, by steamboat explosions and burnings; the destruction of life and property by murder and incendiarism, robbery, burglary, and theft; the fearful sights, and strange signs, and knockings and noises, frequently exhibited in the heavens and on the earth; the increase of seers, and wizards, and diviners, and familiar spirits, and soothsayers, and astrologers, who are charming the nations with their magic arts, lulling the foolish to sleep with their magnetic influence, deceiving priests and people by their necromancy, calling rain, snow, and fire from heaven, and scattering abroad the hoar frost like a winter's night, in their halls of science, and the people supporting them by their faith, influence, and money, leaving the poor, the sick, the widow and the fatherless, to mourn for the comforts of life in the solitary chamber, and the too general corruptions, and abominations, and defilements, and polluted practices of all flesh, upon the face of the earth; all, all these signs, and multitudes more of a like nature, now existing, are the fulfillment of the prophecies, not only of the ancient prophets, but more particularly of the latter-day prophet and apostle, seer, and revelator, Joseph Smith, who opened up the way of life and salvation to this generation, by the power of the everlasting Priesthood, which was restored to earth through him, and who prophesied and bore witness that all these and many more like things should come to pass in this generation, as signs of the second coming of the Son of Man, which is near at hand; and verily his testimony is true, and his testament is in force, for he has sealed it with his blood; therefore, hear it all ye ends of the earth! believe on Jesus, be baptized in his name for the remission of your sins, and do all things he shall command, and you shall be saved in the presence of God and the Lamb, and there is no other way by which you can be saved.

Of the day and the hour of the coming of Christ no man knoweth. It is not yet, neither is it far off; there are prophecies yet to be fulfilled before that event takes place; therefore, let no man deceive the Saints with vain philosophy and false prophecy; for false prophets will arise, and deceive the wicked, and, if possible, the good; but while the wicked fear and tremble at surrounding judgments, the Saints will watch and pray; and, waiting the final event in patience, will look calmly on the passing scenery of a corrupted world, and view transpiring events as confirmation of their faith in the holy gospel which they profess, and rejoice more and more, as multiplied signs shall confirm the approach of the millennial day.

The Saints at home are making preparations to receive the Saints from abroad, and we feel grateful to our heavenly Father that we can bear witness in truth, that the choice blessings of the God of Abraham have rested upon his people, in the valleys of the mountains, since we last wrote you. The winter has been mild, compared with most winters, and much business has been transacted which could not have been done, had the weather been severe. Several grain and lumber mills have been erected, in the various settlements, the past winter; many shingles have been made, and all that is wanting to bring them into immediate use is nails; and let the Saints, coming hither, remember this in particular. Chairs and various articles of furniture are multiplying in our midst. Two or three threshing machines have been in successful operation in our valley, the past fall and winter, which have saved the labour of many hundred days, which has been appropriated to other objects of improvements; yet more machines will be wanted for threshing in this valley, the present season, and also in the various settlements of other valleys, and there is no fear of bringing too many, or too many fanning mill irons, and the most approved drafts for manufacturing the same.

It is a subject to be forgotten by the Saints coming hither, that the most highly improved labour saving machinery of all kinds ever needed by almost any community, can be employed to greater advantage in Deseret, than in any other place on the earth. Suppose a brother coming home bring some piece of machinery with which he can sow, reap, thresh, fan, or perform the labour of ten men at this or any other kind of business necessary to be done, nine elders could be immediately released from their employment, and go forth to preach the Gospel, and the improvements of Deseret, and the necessary preparations for a multiplying population suffer no material injury; while, under existing circumstances, there is enough for all to do who are here, to prepare for the coming of others; consequently, it is not wisdom to send many elders on foreign missions at present.

Our Council House was so far completed during the fall, that the several apartments have been occupied through the winter, to the great joy of this people. The Warm Spring Bath House was completed, and dedicated by prayer and festival, on the 27th of November, since which time the house has been open to the public, for health and pleasure. The Tithing store house was enclosed last fall, and so far completed that one apartment has been used for a store, another for storage of grain, others for mechanics shops, while the cellars have been filled with vegetables, and the whole in progress of finishing. Building has hitherto been retarded, at times, for lack of lumber; but the prospect is much more flattering for the future. The inclosing of the University lands by a substantial stone wall is commenced and progressing, with a prospect of being completed this season. Great loss has been sustained hitherto, by the straying of cattle; but the tithing pasture, a large tract of land on the northern border of the city, is so far enclosed by fence and ditch, that it will soon be completed, and be of great utility this season. The Church farm is partly fenced. All who can bring wire, No. 9, will find it of great advantage in fencing in the valley.

The State has appropriated two thousand dollars towards opening a woollen manufactory in this valley, the present season; and any amount of raw cotton, or cotton yarn, which may be brought hither, will prove highly useful to combine in certain fabrics, with the wool which grows in the valley. Our pottery is nearly completed, and we are expecting to use China ware of our own manufacture in a few weeks. Cutlery establishments have commenced in the city, on a small scale, but more laborers are needed.

The snow fell on the mountains surrounding this Valley, on the 10th of October, and has continued to the present time, but in the Valley there was no snow till the 1st of November, about seven inches deep; and the first severe frost was on the 5th; and again on the 1st of December about four inches of snow fell, and at other times, the snow has fallen, but seldom over four or five inches in the Valley during one storm. The last two nights in February were the coldest during the winter. Most of the month of March was very pleasant, and was improved by the farmers in putting in wheat. There was not so much wheat sown in the valley last fall as there was the fall previous, but considerable has been sown this spring. The spring sowing is quite as sure a crop as the winter, and equal in quantity and quality. The last week in March and first in April have been visited with high winds, alternate from south and northwest; some slight showers and some snow squalls of three or four inches, during nights, which would pass off during the next day; and wheat sowing continues the principal business of the day, and may be continued from four to six weeks.

Elder Amasa Lyman arrived by the northern route, from California, on the 30th of September; and Elder C. C. Rich, by the same route, arrived on the 12th of November, each accompanied by a company of thirty to fifty of the brethren on their return from the Gold Mines, of the products of which they brought very little with them; some were compelled to borrow to get home; and many who remained at the mines would gladly have returned home if they could have procured means.

December 7th, Elder George A. Smith left this city with about 130 men, a few families, and a good supply of teams, seeds and tools, for the purpose of establishing a settlement at Iron county (Little Salt Lake), about 250 miles, nearly south. We learn by an express that the colony have located in a good place, excellent soil and water, plenty of wood, iron ore, and alum, with some prospect of stone coal; a field of 1600 acres, and 400 of it sown, and that they designed to sow the whole this season. And their houses which are to constitute a fort, and their meeting-house are progressing rapidly. The name of the place is Cedar City.

November 27th, the quorum of Seventies, in conference assembled, agreed to erect an extensive rotunda in Great Salt Lake City, to be called the "Seventies' Hall of Science," and Joseph Young, their President, was appointed trustee and superintendent of the work. The foundation of the hall is commenced on East Temple and Second South streets. Shares are twenty-five dollars, and the Seventies abroad will do well to forward their means for the hall, to the trustee, inasmuch as they desire to own shares, and partake of the blessings of the hall on their return. All the elders of the different quorums are permitted to take shares. The design is highly commendable to the brethren, and such a building is much needed in this place.

At a special session of the Great Salt Lake County Court, on the 3rd January, a few transient men were convicted of stealing, and sentenced to hard labor for various terms, were pardoned by the Executive, and have gone on their way to California, the place of their original destination. This was the first jury trial there had been in the State of Deseret since its organization, and the first occasion for the empannelling of a grand jury. It is supposed that about three hundred emigrants who quartered in the valley the past winter, have left for the gold mines this spring. Many emigrants on arriving at this place, heard the gospel, believed, and were baptized, and thus far proved their sincerity by their works; while some professed to believe and were baptized, but their works have made manifest their hypocrisy, and their sins remain on their own heads. Had it not been for such kind of characters, no jury would have been needed in Deseret to this day.

In the former part of January, the General Assembly of Deseret granted an act of incorporation to Great Salt Lake City, and on the 11th of the same month the Great Salt Lake City Council was organized; Jedediah M. Grant, mayor, with four aldermen, and nine counsellors; and municipal law immediately began to extend its influence over the city. About the same time, charters were granted by the General Assembly, on petition to Ogden City, in Weber County; to Provo City, in Utah County; to Manti City, in Sanpete County; and to Cedar City, in Iron County. All the counties in the State were greatly strengthened by the last emigration, and since that time several new settlements have been formed, and the agricultural interest of the state has been greatly extended.

A railroad has been chartered, to extend from Temple block in this city, to the stone quarry and mountain on the east, for the conveyance of building materials; the construction to commence immediately.

A small company of brethren arrived from California, by the south route, on the 27th of January, bringing the rumoured intelligence that Utah territory had been organized, and Brigham Young appointed Governor, which intelligence has recently been reiterated through the medium of the eastern mail, in a manner which leaves no room to doubt; but as yet the official notice, reports, or papers have not all been received. We anticipate no convulsive revolutionary feeling or movement, by the citizens of Deseret in the anticipated change of governmental affairs; but an easy and quiet transition from State to Territory, like weary travellers descending a gentle hill near by their way-side home.

As a people, we know how to appreciate, most sensibly the hand of friendship which has been extended towards our infant State, by the General Government. Coming to this place as did the citizens of Deseret, without the means of subsistence, except the labor of their hands, in a wilderness country, surrounded by savages, whose inroads have given occasion for many tedious and expensive expeditions; the relief afforded by our mother land, through the medium of the approaching territorial organization, will be duly estimated; and from henceforth, we would fondly hope the most friendly feelings may be warmly cherished between the various States and Territories of this great nation, whose constitutional charter is not to be excelled.

The First Presidency of the Quorum of Seventies have been in frequent conference, the past winter, with the presidents of their several quorums, enquiring into the situation of their officers, severing from their office all such as have been known to dishonor their high and holy calling, and filling these vacancies with worthy men; also in filling the places of those who have been known to die since the quorums were organized in Nauvoo. The High Priests', and other quorums of the Church, have held their weekly meetings in the Council House during the winter, so that the house has scarce been cold since it was so far completed as to be occupied.

In January we visited the brethren in Davis and Weber counties, and organized a stake of Zion at Ogden city, by appointing a Presidency, High Council and Bishops: Loren Farr is president of the stake. Officers were also appointed in various places in Davis county, as there was occasion.

Elders Amasa Lyman and Charles C. Rich left this place early in March, with others, the camp amounting to about one hundred and fifty wagons, (some of which were to stop and locate themselves in Iron county,) for the purpose of establishing a settlement in the southern part of California, at no great distance from San Diego, and near Williams' ranche and the Cahone pass, between which and Iron county we design to establish settlements as speedily as possible, which Elder Lyman will commence on his route, if practicable, so as to have a continued line of stations and places of refreshment between this point and the Pacific, which route is passable during the winter months.

March 19th, we visited the Saints in Utah, and organized a stake of Zion at Provo city, by appointing Isaac Higbee President, with his Counsellors, High Council, and Bishops.-On the 24th, we visited Elders Lyman and Rich's camp, at Payson, and saw them organized ready for their departure. Elder Pace presides over the branch at Payson, which is situated on Peteetneet creek. There are settlements also at Pleasant Grove and Springville. We left Elder P. P. Pratt, accompanied by Bishop John Murdock, and Elders William J. Perkins, John S. Woodbury, Richard R. Hopkins, Philo B. Wood, Morris Minor, and Francis A. Hammond, with Elder Lyman's company, on his mission to the Pacific.

Our city is now being fenced into blocks, instead of wards as formerly, and many shade trees are being set on the borders of the side-walks. School houses have been built in most of the wards, both in the city and country, and schools have been sustained therein the past winter, and we joyfully anticipate that the time has arrived when our children may be partakers of the blessings of constantly continued schools in their several wards. The Parent school is in successful operation in the Council House, under the tuition of Chancellor O. Spencer and Regent W. W. Phelps. The design of this school is to prepare its pupils to become teachers, and for all who may desire to advance in the higher branches of education. It is designed for the Parent school to be open continually.

Hitherto, California emigrants have been accustomed to leave their sick on our hands, at a heavy expense, and depart without notice; to turn their teams loose in our streets, and near our city, which has caused much destruction of crops and grass, so that if we wanted a load of hay, we have had to go from ten to twenty miles to procure it, and drive our cattle a still greater distance to herd the succeeding winter; but since the organization of a municipality, quarantine has been introduced, and no animals are permitted to roam within the corporation, which extends to some six or eight miles square; and when the surrounding lands are fenced, the accommodations in our immediate vicinity, for those who travel by multitudes, will be small indeed; and we believe it will be more convenient for the great mass of travellers to the mines to go by Fort Hall, or some route north of this, saving to themselves the expense and hindrance of quarantine, and other inconveniences arising from a temporary location near a populous city, where cattle are not permitted to run at large.

In view of the anticipated change in our government, and to facilitate business, the General Assembly of Deseret appointed Governor Young their agent, to receive the 20,000 dollars appropriated by Congress to build a State House in Utah Territory, and cause said house to be erected without delay on Union Square, in this city, a little north-west of Temple block; and the Assembly adjourned sine die on Saturday last. Dr. J. M. Bernhisel has been appointed by the President to select the Utah library, for which Congress has appropriated 5000 dollars, and, at our latest advices, he was in New York making the selection. Dr. Bernhisel has issued a circular, soliciting editors and publishers of newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, and books, to forward a copy of their productions to Great Salt Lake City, for the benefit of Utah library. We are happy in announcing the arrival of a few papers and pamphlets already, and if the friends of science generally shall respond in like manner, by forwarding a copy of their works, we will soon have a most valuable reading room attached to the Utah library, which will cause the blessings of thousands to rest upon the heads of the liberal donors.

The best interests of the Perpetual Emigrating Fund are continually before us, and we would urge the importance of its object upon all the Saints, and desire they would add to its funds by all laudable means, for when once a line of communication, is established between this and the Pacific, those funds can be made to bear in a more effective manner than they can under existing circumstances. We are looking forward in hope that the time is not far distant, when the most speedy conveyance may be had between this and the western coast.

It is wisdom for the English Saints to cease emigration by the usual route through the States, and up the Missouri river, and remain where they are till they shall hear from us again, as it is our design to open up a way across the interior of the continent, by Panama, Tehuantepec, or some of the interior routes, and land them at San Diego, and thus save three thousand miles of inland navigation through a most sickly climate and country. The Presidency in Liverpool will open every desirable correspondence in relation to the various routes, and rates, and conveniences, from Liverpool to San Diego, and make an early report, so that if possible the necessary preparations may be made for next fall's emigration.

We contemplate erecting a wall around the Temple block this season, preparatory to laying the foundation of a Temple the year following; and this we will be sure to do, if all the Saints shall prove themselves as ready to pay their tithing, and sacrifice and consecrate of their substance, as freely as we will: and if the Saints do not pay their tithing, we can neither build nor prepare for building; and if there shall be no Temple built, the Saints can have no endowments; and if they do not receive their endowments, they can never attain unto that salvation they are anxiously looking for. So far as the Saints in the United States and Canada desire to see the work of the Lord prosper, let them arise as one man, and come to Deseret, where they can do more for Zion in one year than they can in many years where they are. Come on the Saints' route north of the Platte to a future resurrection. If all were agreed in this move, there need not be a Saint left in the States or Canada one year hence. This is wisdom; but if you shall continue to hold on to your farms, and improvements, and effects, for the purpose of improving the price, and making money, you may expect to want help at a future day, when it will be difficult to obtain; and the Saints need not ever to expect a more convenient time to gather out of the States than the present.

The Indians have been troublesome in their operations the past winter, driving off cattle from remote settlements, but with less threatening of life than formerly, and more secret in their depredations.

We have received very few letters from the elders abroad since our last epistle, although there is a monthly mail between this and Independence, Mo., when not interrupted by snow, as it has been mostly the past three months. The Twelve Apostles are abroad, except Wilford Woodruff and Ezra T. Benson, who are in the valley. Their president, Orson Hyde, is located at Kanesville, Iowa, and is expected to visit the valley this summer. Parley P. Pratt is on his way to the Society and Sandwich Islands, and Chili; his mission extends to all lands in, and bordering on, the Pacific. At last accounts the work was very prosperous at the Society Isles. We have not heard from the Sandwich mission since the arrival of Elder Hiram Clark and his associates. Orson Pratt is supposed to be in the States on his way to the valley, where he will be associated with the University of Deseret for a season. John Taylor was at Boulogne, in France, at our latest dates, preaching, translating, and publishing. Lorenzo Snow, having visited the Italian States, was located at Piedmont. Erastus Snow is at Copenhagen, and the work is prospering in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Germany, and all that region. We received a letter from Brother Snow dated Copenhagen, August 17, 1850 He is translating the Book of Mormon.-Franklin D. Richards is presiding over the church in the British Isles, and his office is in Liverpool. Amasa Lyman and Charles C. Rich are en route to the Cahone pass. George A. Smith is presiding at Iron county. The mission of the Twelve Apostles now abroad is to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, upon the face of the whole earth; and whenever and wherever the Lord shall open a door for their admission, they will scatter the seed, and, if needs be, will leave wise men to gather the harvest, being guided, directed, and counselled in all their movements by the principle of revelation, and the Holy Ghost dwelling within them; and may the God of Abraham and Joseph help them on their missions, for verily they will not have time to preach to all nations before all flesh will be seized with fear and trembling in view of those things which the Almighty is about to bring to pass, for the wickedness of man is great before Him, and the earth He will purify by fire.

There has been more sickness in the valley this spring than usual, and several deaths, though the people in the other valleys have been well generally. We know of no reason why this valley is not as healthy in its location and character as any other, but as this is the place for the first arrival of the Saints, a greater proportion of the infirm stop here, where they can more readily procure the comforts of life, while the hardier portion go forward to newer settlements; and a great portion of the sickness in our midst arises from the seeds of disease and death sown in the system while tarrying and passing through the agueish regions of the western States. Sickness here is generally of short duration, and ends speedily in health or death. The families of the elders who are on foreign missions are in usual health at this time.

The Saints in their gathering should never forget to gather and bring all choice seeds, for here is the place for them to grow and be useful; a large quantity of osage orange, and other seeds suitable for hedges, through which wire may be passed to make fence, are much needed at this time. Bring all the lath and shingle nails you can, also glass, wire no. 9, raw cotton, cotton yarn, machinery, and domestics.

Amid all the revolutions that are taking place among the nations, the elders will ever pursue an undeviating course in being subject to the government wherever they may be, and sustain the same by all their precepts to the Saints, having nothing to do with political questions which engender strife, remembering that the weapons of their warfare are not carnal but spiritual, and that the Gospel which they preach is not of man but from heaven; and if they persecute you beyond measure in one city, country, or kingdom, leave the testimony which Jesus has given for a witness unto your father in heaven, that you are free from their blood, and flee to other cities, countries, or kingdoms where they will receive you and believe your testimony.

During the early part of the last session of the General Assembly of Deseret, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was incorporated into a body politic, in accordance with the general principles of incorporation, given by christian governments to religious societies, with power to choose a trustee in trust and assistant trustees to hold the property, and manage the financial affairs of the Church for its benefit and convenience; and during the present general conference President Brigham Young was unanimously and legally elected trustee in trust of the church, and Edward Hunter assistant trustee, and Presiding Bishop.

Should the way open for any of the scattered saints (except such as we have before counselled to tarry where they are) to ship direct to San Diego, in California, they will do so, and from thence they can work their passage to the settlement about to be formed by Bros. Lyman and Rich in that vicinity, and from thence to this place.

May grace, mercy, peace, and prosperity be multiplied unto all the Saints, in the name of Jesus. Amen. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, WILLARD RICHARDS. G. S. L. City, Deseret, April 7, 1851.
