James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Addenda to Fifth General Epistle, April 16, 1851

1851-April 16-MS 13:227 (August 1, 1851)

ADDENDA TO THE FIFTH GENERAL EPISTLE Of the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, from Great Salt Lake Valley, State of Deseret, to the Saints Scattered throughout the Earth, Greeting:

(From the Deseret News.)

Beloved Brethren,-Some items having escaped notice in our communication of the 7th instant, we again resume the pen in reference particularly to the necessary supplies of sugar, molasses, and honey, for the citizens of Deseret. Some experiments have been made with beets, in the manufacture of molasses and vinegar, mostly in private families, the specific results of which, in minute detail, we are not informed; but we have learned for a certainty, that with little labor, any family who have a supply of beets can make themselves comfortable for molasses, though the art of removing the gas and foreign matter, is not sufficiently understood to secure so perfect an article as is desirable. Vinegar has been produced from the same source, of a good quality. Let the brethren bring all the white sugar-beet seed they possibly can, for years to come.

Messrs. Beach (of St. Louis), and Blair (of Texas), have opened a general manufacturing establishment this spring, mostly too late for sugar, but progressing in making molasses and vinegar. It is expected that this establishment will continue its operations, and be prepared for more extended labors on the approach of another harvest, but it will not be possible for one factory to supply all the sweet that will be needed; and if a practical chemist and manufacturer of sugar from the beet, one who understands the business in all its bearings, or a company of individuals, who are severally versed in the various branches, could come to this place and open their sugar factories, our farmers and families would gladly surrender their domestic operations, and procure their supplies, in a more perfect form, from the factories; and it would now require several extensive establishments to supply the people. It is our wish that the presidency in England, France, and other places should search out such practical operators in the manufacture of sugar as fully understand their business, and forward them to this place, with all such apparatus as may be needed and cannot be procured here.

Several swarms of bees, that have been brought from the States, are doing well in the Valley, and it is very desirable for the brethren to bring all the bees they can; for it is believed they will flourish here; and so far as honey can be produced, it will supersede the necessity of making sugar, and if there were ever so much sugar, honey is needed as a medicine, as well as a luxury. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, WILLARD RICHARDS. G. S. L. City, April 16, 1851.
