James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Letter to President Woodruff and Apostle Heber J. Grant, June 6, 1884

1884-June 6-L. John Nuttall Letter Press Books Vol. 3 1883-1885, pp. 147-149. Brigham Young University Library, Special Collections.

While this letter is not signed by the First Presidency nor even by President John Taylor, it is evident by the opening sentence of the letter that it was intended to be an official letter of instructions of President Taylor to Wilford Woodruff and Heber J. Grant who were in Rexburg, Idaho, on official Church business.

This letter or Message again refers to the on-going process of organizing the Church into Stakes of Zion in order to put leadership in local hands and relieve the Quorum of Twelve Apostles of many administrative duties.

LETTER to President Wilford Woodruff and Apostle Heber J. Grant. President Wilford Woodruff and Apostle H. J. Grant Rexburg, Oneida Co. Dear Brethren: I am directed by President John Taylor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of May 31st. which arrived this morning, and to say that the contents thereof are highly appreciated and very satisfactory. And he desires to say that during the coming summer he, with one or both of his counselors and probably some of the Apostles, expects to visit the Northern Stakes, at which time the complete organization of those Stakes will be attended to. But in your visiting in the settlements where you deem it necessary to ordain and set apart one or more Bishops, you are at liberty so to do. In this of course you will use your own judgment.

Everything is moving along satisfactorily here. Jordan River very high. Day before yesterday, at the request of Bro. Jesse W. Fox, President Taylor called upon Bp. Wm. B. Preston who, at a meeting of the Bishops called upon 20 men with a sufficient number of teams from each Ward to turn out yesterday and today and as many days as may be necessary to make the banks of the Jordan secure from the high waters so as to save a vast amount of property which is threatened in the 5th, 6th, 16th, & 19th Wards, as also upon the river bottom; When over 300 men turned out yesterday with tears and a great many also today, so that the brethren in charge now feel comparatively safe from the Jordan.

At the Republican Convention at Chicago today, in balloting for nomination for President, on the 4th ballot the following was the result: Arthur 207, Blaine 544, Edmunds 41, Logan 7, Hawley 15, Lincoln 2, so that Blaine received the highest number and was put in nomination for President.

Prests. Taylor and Smith and others visited the Sanpete Conference last Saturday and Sunday. Apostles Erastus Snow and John W. Taylor proceeded to attend the Kanab Stake Conference tomorrow and Sunday. It was decided at our last Wednesday's meeting that Bro. Snow be instructed to have the Kanab Stake fully organized by the appointment of a President and Counselors. Edwin D. Woolley of Upper Kanab was selected for President.

The health of the President and brethren, as also myself, is good. Trusting that you will have an enjoyable trip in visiting the Saints in the Northern settlements, and return enjoying full vigor of health and good spirits, and ever praying for your welfare, I subscribe myself Your Brother in the Gospel L. JOHN NUTTALL Sec. [To the First Presidency]
