James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Letter of Instruction to Saints in Bannock Stake, August 16-17 1884

1884-August 16-17-Andrew Jenson, Bannock Stake, p. 133 This earlier Bannock Stake organized in the upper Snake River valley, January 26, 1884, should not be confused with the later Bannock Stake, organized July 25, 1898, from the north part of Oneida Stake and a small part of Bear Lake Stake.

The Letter of Instructions answers some questions about problems of land settlement put to the First Presidency by Thomas E. Ricks, the first President of the Stake.

According to Andrew Jensen (Encyclopedic History, p. 698) Mormon settlement of the upper Snake River Valley had begun in 1879. Settlement had continued until the writings of these instructions called for a more equitable distribution of desirable and undesirable parcels of land among the Mormon colonists. Suggestion is made that lands be so divided that all will share equally in the distribution of all types of land. It was the hay and timber lands that were giving the most concern at the time.

This letter once again emphasizes that Mormon colonization is to be a cooperative venture.

LETTER of Instruction to the Salts in the Bannock Stake.

To the Saints in the Bannock Stake of Zion: Having been asked some questions by President Ricks in regard to the timber and hay land in this valley or among our settlements, we beg leave to present the following in answer thereto.

You have your city lots surveyed here and public squares laid out. You have your lots provided for meeting houses, school houses and tithing offices, as well as farm lands for missionary purposes. You are operating together in your general public arrangements in building meeting houses, school houses and other public enterprises in the interest of the whole community.

You have also laid out some big fields and in your combinations have fenced them; you have made some very excellent water ditches; and have in contemplation the construction of others; these are all of a public nature and in the interest of all; each person is supposed to have contributed his portion in the interest of the whole community.

The same principle should be carried out as far as practicable with regard to other matters. You have timber and hay lands, and so far as these can be arranged as to make an equitable distribution of the timber and of the grass lands it would be as just, as proper and as strictly in accordance with the principles of equity, as any of the aforementioned.

You all stand on an equal footing in regard to these matters, and all should operate together in the interest of all and for the benefit of the whole.

Were you acting singly and individually, any of these lands would have been of very little consequence to you, and of no special profit, and if these settlements had not been organized in the manner they have been, they would have been of no special advantage to parties claiming them.

It is the combination, the concentration and the united effort alone that make them valuable, and no good Latter-day Saint, in possession of correct principles, could seek to take advantage of this combination to aggrandize himself at the expense of the public. Such action is not compatible with the ideas that are entertained and will be carried out in the building up of Zion, where equitable principles must prevail, and all covetousness and individualism must be obliterated.

Serious objections have been raised to the settlements on the timber and lowlands, in consequence of the prevalence of mosquitoes thereon. Why not divide those lands up, on some equitable principle, among the people and only go there when it is necessary to look after the hay and timber, and in this way gather together on your townsites, according to counsel and leave the mosquitoes to their own dominion?

And why would it not be better to divide up those lands among the settlers on the higher lands so that each one would have a portion of timber and grass land, and thus place all on an equal footing? This might be done either by purchase or exchange of lands, furnishing those on the lowlands with good positions on the highlands, while the people on the highlands would then have a proper proportion of the lowlands both for hay and timber, and the people of the lowlands have the same privilege and facilities as those on the highlands, and an equitable adjustment be made in the interest of all parties under the direction of your presiding authorities.

By this arrangement all would be placed on equitable footing, and those things be amicably adjusted as are others by the properly constituted authorities.

This principle might apply just as far as you can agree among yourselves in regard to other matters, such as the erection of grist mills, sawmills, co-op stores, or anything else that may be considered beneficial to the whole community, and thus try as near as possible to get this Stake of Zion placed in a proper condition.

In securing the titles to your land you must of necessity conform to the law in every particular, but this being accomplished you can unite together as in all other matters before alluded to.

In all these matters be very careful that no coercion of any kind is used, but that all men be left to enjoy the fullest and most untrammelled free agency in all of their actions, providing a full and fair compensation to all persons interested in any and all of your secular affairs. Keeping this in view, you avoid all interference with private rights.

The nearer you can come to union in all of your agricultural, mechanical, manufacturing, commercial, political, social and religious pursuits, the nearer you will approach to that harmony that is contemplated by the Almighty in the organization of this people. Thus giving the fullest and most complete free agency to men on the one hand, and the most perfect union of action on the other. By these means a band of union will be formed and these matters be amicably adjusted.

And then the people should pay their tithes and attend to all their social, moral and religious duties, and those who thus operate harmoniously in the interest of all and for the benefit of the whole, will place themselves in accordance with the spirit that ought to exist in the land of Zion, and will be blessed and prospered in all their enterprises, while those who take a contrary course will be deprived of many of the blessings resulting from an observance of the laws of God.

With sentiments of the highest regard, we remain Your Brethren in the Gospel, JOHN TAYLOR, GEORGE Q. CANNON, Of the First Presidency.
