James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To all the Saints in Pottawatamie, September 21, 1851

1851-September 21-Frontier Guardian Vol. 3, No. 21 (November 14, 1851)

(For the Frontier Guardian.)

GREAT SALT LAKE CITY, Sept. 21, 1851. To ALL THE SAINTS IN POTTAWATAMIE,

Beloved Brethren: We send unto you our beloved brethren, Ezra T. Benson and Jedediah M. Grant, for the special purpose of counselling and assisting you to come to this place, and we desire you to give heed to their counsel in all things and come to this place with them next season; and fail not.

Come all ye officers in the Church, and all ye officers in the State or county. There is no more time for Saints to hesitate what course they will pursue. We have been calling to the Saints in Pottawatamie ever since we left them to come away; but there has continually been an opposing spirit, whispering, as it were-Stay another year, and get a better fit-out, until many who had means to come conveniently have nothing left to come with, even as a former Prophet said, "If a man will not gather when he has the chance, he will be afflicted with the Devil," his property will go to waste, his family fall by sickness, and destruction and misery will be on his path; even so has it been with some of you, and soon will it be with more of you, if you do not hearken to this call and come away.

What are you waiting for? Have you any good excuse for not coming? No! you have all of you, unitedly, a far better chance than we had when we started as Pioneers to find this place: you have better teams and more of them. You have as good food and more of it; you have as much natural strength as we have had to come; our women and children have walked here, and been blessed in walking here, and barefoot, too, only as they could occasionally get a skin from the Indians to make a moccasin, and can you not do the same? You can. And we say again, come home! And if you can get one good wagon and team to five families, and five teams to 100 souls; or no teams at all, more than cows and calves to your handcarts, you can come here with greater comfort and safety than the Pioneers came here who had nothing to come to; while you will have every thing; and here is the place for all the Saints to get their fit-out for Zion, even from all nations, therefore we say again, Arise and Come home.

Elder Hyde will return to your place, with Brs. Benson and Grant, and act in his calling as usual; but you must not depend too much on him, for he has his private affairs to settle and prepare to bring on his family, and come with you; and we have sent Brs. Benson and Grant to bless you, and counsel you and relieve Br. Hyde. Therefore we wish you to evacuate Pottawatamie, and the States, and next fall be with us all ye Saints of the Most High, and it shall be well with you if you will keep all the commandments.

Oh ye Saints, give not your heritage to reproach, neither sell your improvements in Pottawatamie to strangers for nothing. No! rather sell your improvements for their value or give them into the hands of those you shall be counselled to, for the benefit of the poor Saints who are coming after as consecration, for the benefit of the poor.

It is a day of sacrifice, and those who are ready to sacrifice and do their duty, and come home, they may save being burnt. How long will the Saints in St. Louis, remain where they are? Arise and come with the Saints of Pottawatamie, and you shall be blessed.

We remain your brethren in the New Covenant, BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, WILLARD RICHARDS.
