James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Certificate to Orson Pratt, September 13, 1852

1852-September 13-MS 15:42 (January 15, 1853)

This certifies that Professor ORSON PRATT, of the University of Deseret, one of the Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is appointed by us, with the sanction of the Special Conference, convened in this city on the twenty-eighth day of August, A.D. one thousand eight hundred and fifty-two, to preside over the affairs of the Church throughout the United States and the British Provinces in North America; and also to write and publish periodicals, pamphlets, books, &c., illustrative of the principles and doctrines of the Church; and to do all other things necessary for the advancement of the work of the Lord among all nations. Elder Pratt is authorized and required to receive and collect tithing of the Saints through all his field of labour; and we request the Elders and other officers and members of the Church to give diligent heed to his counsels as the words of life and salvation, and assist him to funds to enable him to travel, print, establish book agencies, and perform all other duties of his calling; and the blessings of our Father in heaven shall rest upon them. Brother Pratt is one of the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company, and is hereby appointed and authorized to act as Travelling Agent in the United States and British Provinces in North America; and he is instructed to collect and disburse aid, to promote the emigration of poor Saints to the valleys of the mountains.

Brother Orson Pratt is too well and favourably known, to need any testimonial, further than his own presence and acquaintance, to secure the esteem and confidence of all among whom his lot may be cast. His acquirements and attainments are of the highest order; and possessing, as he eminently does, every requisite of an honourable and high-minded gentleman, we take great pleasure in recommending him to the kindness and consideration of all good men. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, WILLARD RICHARDS. Presidency of said Church. Signed and sealed at Great Salt Lake City, UT., Sept. 13, 1852.
