James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Ninth General Epistle, April 13, 1853

1853-April 13-MS 15:436-441 (July 9, 1853)

NINTH GENERAL EPISTLE of the Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, from Great Salt Lake Valley, to the Saints scattered abroad throughout the Earth, Greeting:

(From the Deseret News)

BELOVED BRETHREN.-It is with peculiar emotions of gratitude to our heavenly Father, that we address you at the present time-a period in the history of this last dispensation, when the Chief Corner Stones of the House of the Lord are laid in the tops of the mountains, according to the predictions of ancient Prophets, and at the time previously suggested by us.

While the movements of the heavens and the earth, and all things connected therewith, betoken the speedy fulfilment of the visions and revelations, and prophecies concerning the latter-days, preparatory to the second coming of the Son of Man, we rejoice that the God of Abraham has prepared a hiding-place for His people, amid the valleys of the everlasting hills, where we have been permitted, for a few years, to dwell in safety, far removed from the fire and blood that have been poured out upon the Saints in former years, by those who feared not God, neither regarded man.

Since our last Epistle, of October 13, 1852, we know of but few particulars that have transpired among the various nations of the earth. But we know that the revelations of Jesus Christ are true, and that peace is taken from the earth, and that those who will not receive and obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ, when they hear it, will grow worse and worse, in evil passions, strife, war, and blood, until the wicked shall have overthrown the wicked, and destroyed themselves from the face of the earth, that Jesus may have the privilege to reign unmolested in the midst of those that love him.

No mail has been received from the east since last November, and a part of that is still cached in the mountains, while the remainder was drawn over the snow-drifts by hand. And, as yet, we have no certain information who was last elected President of the United States, or who is now President of the nation.

During this long silence from the east, we have received two mails from California, by the south route, containing very little news. A few letters from various foreign missions, show an increase to the Church, and the spread of the Gospel, except in the Society Islands, from whence the Elders have been banished by the French authorities, and the Saints forbid to pray, even in their own houses. Elder Addison Pratt, and others have returned to the continent. Elder Cannon is translating the Book of Mormon into the Owyhean language. Elder Woodard has been banished from Italy, for teaching the truth, and passed over into Switzerland, according to the command of the Saviour to his disciples sent forth to preach his Gospel-When they persecute you in one place, flee to another. The brethren in Denmark have experienced bitter persecutions, but the truth is spreading in every direction.

Our population has become so numerous, and our settlements so extensive, that we cannot give so many particular events and circumstances concerning the Saints at home, as hitherto. All the faithful Saints, and there are many such, are filled with the spirit of peace, joy, and rejoicing; and general prosperity has attended their labours in the Valley, from their earliest arrival; and they have no wish to exchange their location for any other portion of the earth, or even to leave for a temporary absence, unless sent, by proper authority, to preach the Gospel.

As it has been in all ages of the Church, so it is now, (and so it will continue while the net gathers all sorts of fish,) there are unfaithful members, they have a name to live, but are dead; and being destitute of faith are destitute of good works, are faultfinders, backbiters, evil surmisers, false prophets, apostates. All such are fit subjects for the gold mines, where probably most of them will go, and we hope all such will go this spring, and all that we ask of them is that they will pay their debts, go in peace, and choose whatever god they please to worship.

The Saints have been prospered exceedingly in the Valley; and the abundance that has been poured out upon them, even till they had no room to receive, has been made the occasion of sloth, and wastefulness, insomuch that there will be a greater scarcity of flour before harvest, than has been in years previous. With these things the Lord is not well pleased, and unless such repent speedily, they will find famine instead of plenty in their habitations.

Domestic manufactures are improving, but not so fast as is desirable. Saw and grain mills have increased rapidly in the various settlements, but they cannot keep pace with the demand for flour, and especially for lumber. The tanneries are gradually improving, and considerable leather has been produced. Our nail factories progress slowly. A manufactory of combs has commenced. The fine comb from our mountain mahogany bids fair to supersede the necessity of ivory. Manufacturers of all kinds are wanted more extensively, and labour-saving machinery, particularly for the husbandman, so that the farmers can raise the grain, and every mechanic work at his own trade.

The prospect is flattering that many of these evils will soon be remedied by a supply of iron ware, in its various forms, from Iron County. One brief blast of the furnace, produced twenty-five hundred of excellent pig iron, when the blast ceased for want of coal. The snow having been unusually deep on the mountains the past winter, has prevented bringing wood and coal from the kanyons. An excellent pair of hand irons was exhibited at Conference, as the first fruits of the iron foundry.

The large addition to the Lord's Store House is completed, and store houses generally are in the various settlements. Much valuable machinery has been added to the Temple shop. The extensive blacksmith, and joiner, and machine shops are on the Temple block, where all the labour of the Temple is to be performed within the walls, the stone work of which is about one-fourth completed. The Social Hall was so far completed as to be occupied by social parties, and for dramatic entertainment the past winter. It was dedicated January 1st.

Our sugar apparatus arrived too late for use last fall, a portion of it is now attached to the water works of the public machine shop, and is engaged in making molasses. Experiments have proved that the saccharine matter of the beet is superior in the valley, and we have the apparatus and means to make the various sweets from molasses to refined sugar, and the factory will be located on Big Kanyon Creek, ready for use, next fall.

January 21st, the Legislature arose from an arduous session of forty days, and were cheered with a social and happy entertainment by the Governor, the same evening. The laws of the country are generally observed, and our courts are seldom troubled with a law-suit. Travellers occasionally, quarrel with each other, and require a legal settlement; otherwise our courts are nearly useless, there being no occasion to use them. The Indians have preserved their peaceful relations with each other, and the citizens generally. No serious or lasting outbreaks have occurred the past season, and a disposition for peace, and raising bread, is increasing.

The last accounts from the Elders who went out last fall, were of their arrival at St. Louis, in sixty days from their departure. Those bound for China, Hindoostan, Australia, and the Western Islands, left on the 20th of October, and at our latest dates, nearly all had shipped from San Francisco.

The first severe frost last fall was on the 4th of November, and the first snow to cover the ground in the city was on the 10th, three inches deep; and another on the 23rd, from one to two feet. The winter has been cold and stormy, with many strong winds. February was very mild, and March generally very pleasant, and much farming and gardening was done. Many young fruit trees have been transplanted this spring, and millions more would be if they could be had. Let the Saints ever remember to bring with them all choice seeds, from all parts of the earth.

Elders Amasa Lyman and Charles C. Rich arrived on the 19th of December, and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles have spent the winter in the Valley, with the exception of Orson Pratt, who is at Washington.

February 14th, in the presence of an immense concourse of people, assisted by the Apostles and others, we broke the ground for the foundation of the Temple, and the day following preparations were commenced for the erection of an Arsenal.

Sister Hosea Stout died on the 11th of January, and her infant a few days previous, and sister Thomas Rhoads on the 11th of February. We recollect no other deaths in the families of the mission Elders. There is occasionally some sickness in the Valley, but it arises more from the seeds of old disease brought from foreign countries, and imprudence, than from any thing unhealthy in our climate or location.

The Block of Stone designed by the Deseret Legislature for the Washington Monument, has been prepared, and exhibited at this Conference, and will be forwarded to Washington at our first convenience. The device is a Bee-hive, in full operation, in the centre, encircled by the convolvulus, &c., with the inscription, "Holiness to the Lord. Deseret."

The 6th of April dawned upon our city, in all the effulgence of a lovely vernal morn; as though the bright luminary of day, was typical of the Sun of Righteousness, and about to open up a new dispensation on the face of our snow-covered, rock-bound Valley. A more lovely day never dawned on earth-the sun, the sky, the atmosphere, the earth, appeared neither too cold, nor too hot, nor lukewarm; but all seemed filled with life, REAL LIFE, adapted in all their several temperaments to each soul, to cheer, and make happy every individual of the many thousands of aged, middle aged, and youth, who had assembled from the near and remote parts of this inhabited Valley, to attend the General Annual Conference, and witness the laying of the Corner Stones of the House of the Lord, that for ages the Prophets have foretold should be erected to the name of the God of Jacob, in the "tops of the mountains."

So immense was the assemblage of the Saints, on the opening of the Conference, at ten o'clock, A.M., that the ingress or egress of twenty-five hundred at the Tabernacle was scarcely missed, or noticed by the multitude without. After the opening of the Conference by singing and prayer in the Tabernacle, the general authorities of the Church, surrounded by escorts, guards, police, martial music, instrumental bands, and choir, with the National Flag unfurled from its topmost staff the ensigns of the various bands and escorts floating in the breeze, and the banner of "Zion's Workmen" towering aloft, proceeded to the Temple ground, and after singing by the choir, the First Presidency laid the South East Corner Stone of the Temple, followed by an oration from President Young, prayer by President Kimball, and singing by the choir.

The Presiding Bishop and Council, with the Presidents of the lesser Priesthood and Council, laid the South West Corner Stone.

The President and Council of the High Priests' Quorum, with the President of this Stake of Zion, and High Council, laid the North West Corner Stone.

The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, with the First Presidency of the Seventies, and the President and Council of the Elders' Quorum, laid the North East Corner Stone.

The laying of each Corner Stone was followed by an oration, prayer, and singing, in the same order as at the South East Corner Stone. And all those orations, prayers, and hymns, are in print, as part of the minutes of the Conference, and will accompany this Epistle, in the next Number of the Deseret News.

The Corner Stones now rest in their several positions, about sixteen feet below the surface of the eastern bank, beneath the reach of mountain floods, when the edifice shall be completed, and so deep beneath the surface, that it will cost robbers and mobs too much labour to raze it to its foundation, leaving not one stone upon another, as they did with the Temple at Jerusalem.

The work for the redemption and salvation of Israel has commenced, as it were, anew on the earth, which makes Satan mad, and causes devils to howl. But their doleful moans are not heeded by the Saints in the mountains, their hearts are cheered to press forward with all their energies, to complete the Lord's House, as speedily as possible. And all the Saints abroad who want to become partakers in blessings in the House of the Lord, with the Saints in the Valley, and who cannot come immediately to work in person, can, by one process, and one only, reap the blessings they desire, and that is by being humble, keeping all the commandments, being diligent in business. Gather up the good things of the earth as fast as you possibly can, in uprightness, and send your gold, and silver, and precious stones, and every thing that you can, which may be useful to us, in forwarding the work we have commenced. And let all who can, come home without delay, and put their own hands to the work.

If the kings of the earth would become nursing fathers, and queens would become nursing mothers, to the Israel of God; and the nobles, and the great ones of the earth would secure a hiding-place from the storm, and the tempest, and the plagues, and the fire, and the sword, that God will cause to pass through all lands, to depopulate the nations on account of their great wickedness in his sight-let them, with the Saints from every clime, forward their rich treasures, to beautify and adorn the House of the Lord, that He may have a pleasant place to lay His head on the earth, where those kings and queens and nobles may delight to visit, and where they may rest in peace, and learn the will of heaven concerning them, by inquiring of the servants of the Most High God, concerning their kingdoms.

The Perpetual Emigrating Funds are in a prosperous condition, although, from surrounding circumstances, but a small portion is available for use this season. It is only about three and a half years since this method of assisting the Saints to gather was first suggested; and the report of the Recorder, at this Conference, exhibits the actual fund by valuation in part, now on record, in this place, about 22,000 dollars, but a considerable portion thereof is in oxen, and wagons, and property, which will take till another season to turn to advantage; also, in addition to the above, there is about 11,500 dollars due from individuals who have been assisted by the Company, making a total of about 34,000 dollars, independent of what has been gathered in England and other places the last six months, of which we have no account.

With the blessings of Providence, most, or all of these funds will be brought forth to the assistance of the emigration of the poor, one year hence. Therefore let not the Saints stay their hands, but let books be opened, and donations be received by the Presidents of all the various missions of the Latter-day Saints upon the whole earth, to help the Perpetual Emigrating Fund, and the Saints to come home. And let all who can, come without delay, and not wait to be helped by these funds, but leave them to help those who cannot help themselves.

Twenty-five Elders have been appointed on various missions, during the Conference just closed; namely, two to China, two to the United States, twenty-one to England or Europe, whose names will appear in the Conference minutes. These Elders will co-operate with the Elders already in the several countries where they are going, and be subject to the counsel of the Presidency already established in their several locations. Those destined for Europe, will journey by the South Pass and the United States; and those for China, will go by California; and all will take their departure in a few days, or apostatize.

The Holy Spirit has been in our midst, and the revelations of Jesus have guided His Apostles and Prophets, in laying the Corner Stones of the Temple, and ministering unto the Saints, during Conference, in an unusual degree, which has caused much gladness of heart, and great joy and rejoicing. And that same Spirit will accompany this our Epistle, and be felt, and experienced to the joy of your hearts, even by all who will receive our testimony, and practise those precepts which we inculcate.

[Let all the Elders who have been sent forth on missions to foreign lands, magnify their high and holy calling, in word and deed, and be an example unto all men. Teach the first principles of the Gospel; and so far as men shall believe your testimony, administer the first ordinances of life and salvation; and when they want to know more, send them home, tell them that Zion is the place for them to receive those teachings which you have not time to teach, and which do not belong to your mission. Do not undertake to teach the mysteries of the exaltations and powers of the worlds to come, and of eternal lives, unless you want to lose all the little claim to eternal life which you may have.]

Think not, O ye Elders of Israel! that your eternal heirship is won, and immutably secured, because you have attained to a portion of the Holy Priesthood, and few of its initiating ordinances, while as yet your life and the security of all your great and glorious blessings in hope and prospect, are as a vapor before the sun; as yet depending wholly on your meekness, faithfulness, and perseverance to the end, in everything good. Think not that you are legally entitled to even one life, while you live on this earth, unless you are sealed up to everlasting lives, by the will and decree of the Eternal Father, and a knowledge of the fact has been communicated to you, through the proper source, and not direct, to you, in person. And consider that the blessings you have hitherto received, through the mercies of Him who loveth you, even your Father in heaven, will all be wrested from you, like David's of old, should you err like him.

To the sisters in Israel, we say, be patient. If your husband has died in the faith, and you wish to be sealed to him for eternity, you must come to Zion to receive that sealing ordinance. And if a High Priest or an Elder, should tell you that you cannot be saved if you are not sealed to him, either as proxy for time, or for eternity to the exclusion of your dead, thrust him from your presence, as Lucifer was thrust from heaven; for that High Priest or Elder will be damned, (unless he speedily repent,) as sure as Lucifer was; and he can neither save you, nor you him. But come to Zion, be patient till you get here, and the Temple is completed, and your oldest son, by the husband to whom you wish to be sealed, may stand as his father's legal representative by your side, and by him you may be sealed to your dead husband; for it is the legal right, in God's Kingdom, for the oldest son to minister, and obtain blessings for his father, and act for his father when he is gone into the eternal world.

Keep yourselves pure, live spotless and undefiled, all ye who profess to be Saints. Show your faith by your works. Let the Elders flee from any country where they are persecuted beyond endurance, and open the door of salvation to the first people who are willing to receive them. Translate the Book of Mormon into every language and dialect under heaven, and print the same, as God shall give you the opportunity. And from this hour the gift of tongues, and by it translations, from language to language, shall be more and more manifest unto the Elders of Israel, until no nation, kingdom, tribe, or family, shall be destitute of the offer of the word of God on the earth.

So far as the Spirit shall direct, let not the Elders forget to ordain native Deacons, Teachers, Priests, and Elders, and set them to work in every nation where they are; and if God shall open the door to a nation that has never heard the Gospel, fill it with the best messengers you can.

Elders Lyman and Rich will soon leave for their home at San Bernardino, California, where all Saints from warm latitudes, may gather, the first opportunity, and when they arrive take the counsel of these brethren. San Diego will be the best port of entry for all such, and may be reached at any season of the year-the Saints coming thither can bear the heat. The remainder of the Apostles have no special mission abroad at present.

Brethren, come home as fast as possible, bringing your poor, your silver, your gold, and everything that will beautify and ennoble Zion, and establish the House of the Lord; not forgetting the seeds of all choice trees, and fruits, and grains, and useful productions of the earth, and labour-saving machinery, keeping yourselves unspotted from the world by the way side.

And may our Father in heaven bless you to your hearts' content, in all good things, even all you need, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL WILLARD RICHARDS. Great Salt Lake City, April 13, 1853.
