James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Tenth General Epistle, October 13, 1853

1853-October 13-MS 16:17-19 (January 14, 1854)

TENTH GENERAL EPISTLE of the Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the Saints Scattered abroad throughout the Earth; Greeting:

(From the Deseret News, October 15)

BELOVED BRETHREN.-This short Epistle we now send you, testifying that we always hold you in lively remembrance in our hearts, and before the throne of our Father in heaven humbly acknowledging that the goodness of our God still continues to abound towards His gathering Israel, both in the fruitfulness of the past season, and the many confirmations of the faith of such as diligently keep His commandments without wavering.

Many appreciate the privilege of their adoption into the glorious kingdom of our Redeemer, and also the covenants of promise whereby the faithful are made partakers of the divine nature; their peace consequently abounds, and their pathway readily shines brighter in every successive step of their delightful and yet peculiar journey. Striving to keep pace with the unfolding signs of the times, and lending both ears to the whisperings of the Holy Spirit, and with eyes fixed vigilantly upon all movements that can in any way help to interpret the opening designs of the Father concerning the great latter-day work, our hearts are often rejoiced with the increased dawn and brightness of the long promised day of the restoration of the remnants of Jacob, and the full completion of the Lord's Hole in the tops of the mountains.

The best observers of morning light usually lie very low, so that any observable object that is above them, cannot well escape the scrutiny of their watchful eye. The meek and lowly in heart are always satisfied. To them the work of the Father progresses just fast enough. To them the work could not be bettered, though it should move faster or slower Why? Because they live by their faith in every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God. They have renounced their own righteousness, knowing that they cannot of themselves survey the end from the beginning, and consequently cannot judge of the things of God only by the Spirit of God.

The world by wisdom do not know God; but the meek Saint, by the Spirit of God, judges all things. Who can tell, without the Spirit of God, or the immediate revelations from above, when and where it is a time to build and to plant, and which of two or of many things will prosper? Who can tell how near a desolating sickness may be, or a pinching famine, or a great division of the nations in a war? The true answer to these questions is, He only who knows the end from the beginning, and such as He appoints to receive the manifestations of His will. The kingdom of God cometh without observation.

On the 20th April last, the Governor visited some of the Southern settlements, passed Palmyra, a new town that had sprung up in the short period of a few weeks, and staid at Payson and Nephi in his journey.

On the 26th of the same month, our brethren A. Lyman and C. C. Rich started for San Bernardino.

On the 27th, the brethren of Allred's settlement were warned to build a fort and canal, and subsequent events have proved the necessity of the warning.

Although the Presidency did not return home till the 2nd of May, still the journey was performed through a period of considerable frosts, hail, and snow; and at Spanish Fork the waters overflowed their usual barriers to that degree that the waggons were obliged to be taken over the stream by the hands of the brethren. The waters during the past season have rushed down the mountains in greater abundance than in any previous year since the Saints' settlement in the valley.

On the 7th of May, the Nauvoo Legion had a general parade; and as late as the 16th of the same month, the frost was sufficiently severe to kill potatoes and vines. On the 29th, the Delegate to Congress, Hon. J. M. Bernhisel, arrived in the City of Great Salt Lake, cheerful and blessed.

On the 1st of June, the Legislature of Utah celebrated their anniversary, which happened to be on Prest. B. Young's birthday, by a Legislative Ball, and went into public session on the 2nd and 3rd. At this period the waters became very high, doing damage to many places in the city.

On the 12th the first Emigrant Train arrived from the Missouri, when the waters of the valley were very high, doing much damage, necessitating a ferry across the river Jordan, through the loss of the principal bridge. Big Cottonwood was rendered impassable at the same time, while the snow was fifteen feet deep in North Kanyon; and, strange as it may seem to the inhabitants of some countries, a field of wheat was harvested on the 28th, almost in the immediate vicinity of such immense quantities of mountain snow. But neither mountain snows, nor frightful torrents of water, with thunder and hail trying their fury upon the Emigrants in the mountains, sweeping off their animals of burden, have as yet deterred the gold seeking emigrant from pursuing his favourite idol through difficulties in the spring of the year, often great difficulties, and more perilous to health and prosperity, than the Saints' experience in the month of October.

Our own people have experienced the loss of some cattle, and the inconvenience of frosty nights, and sometimes of short fare before plenty could be conveyed to them on the plains, yet their privations can scarcely be counted as strange, or even severe. Generally they have made a great improvement on the score of health, without the painful servitude of taking medicine, or paying doctors' bills. And generally, they have learned by the journey to set light by the luxuries and superfluities that, in some countries and circumstances, require a life of servitude to supply.

Our emigration over the plains have mostly arrived here, the rear company under the charge of Capt. John Brown, being within a few miles of the city. They have found the land journey very healthy, and met with no serious impediments on their route.

Some depredations have been committed upon our citizens by the more ungovernable portion of Indians, which it is hoped will be checked without any very serious hostilities on the part of the inhabitants of Utah territory. On the 19th of July, brother Creel was shot while standing sentry at Payson, by an Indian belonging to Walker's band; since that time a few others have been killed by the Indians; two were shot while riding express from Fillmore city. But, brethren, let us not be shaken in our minds by these outbreaks committed by the savage remnants that surround us. The Lord, our Redeemer, has a purpose to subserve by these long degraded, and often much abused descendants of Abraham, and when the Saints shall have learned to do as well as Laman, in proportion to their knowledge and long experience, we may reasonably expect little more difficulty from that source.

This chastening from our enemies may prove to be a timely warning and benefit to many, to arouse themselves from their lethargy and neglect of express and timely counsel, while the immediate, and, perhaps, unoffending victims of their cruelty have not fallen to the earth unnoticed by our Heavenly Father. The rigorous discipline which our enemies are sometimes allowed to inflict upon the Saints, as a body, for negligence of their salvation, may sometimes contribute to keep them from errors, much more to be dreaded than the chastenings which are designed to forewarn them. The promises of God, concerning the restoration of Israel, cannot fail, and nothing should divert our faith and our prayer from the constant expectation of their fulfilment.

You will perceive, by reference to the minutes of our last General Conference, that the time has come for the leaven of salvation to be offered to the remnants that dwell on the continent of America. While the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are carrying the Gospel to every considerable and distant portion of the inhabitants of the earth, not excepting any nation, however distant, we cannot seal up our testimony concerning the degraded sons of Abraham, on our immediate borders, without offering them the same glorious Gospel which their fathers so meekly and nobly obeyed in the day of their visitation; but the Elders abroad will not slacken their hands on this account, for if they persecute in one nation, and cast you out, go to the first door that is open in the next nation that will receive you; and spare not your exertions, from the rising to the setting of the sun, till every ear has had the opportunity to hear the Gospel of salvation.

Active preparations are now in operation to wall in the cities and all the considerable settlements throughout the Territory. The Twelve Apostles, with few exceptions, have recently received important appointments to the charge of considerable sections of the Territory, and will repair to the field of their missions as soon as practicable. And the facilities for instructions to all the cities and settlements through the Territory will be increased by the Twelve officiating personally among the people that dwell in different locations.

It is intended to make increased efforts for gathering the Saints from distant lands; and while some means at home can and will be spared to assist foreign Saints to gather to the appointed places of safety, over and above the expense of accumulated efforts to build and fortify cities and towns, and send out a larger number of missionaries, we would still remind Saints in England and elsewhere, that have a stewardship over a portion of earthly treasures, that now they may enjoy the privilege of helping themselves to come to Zion, and also of helping such as cannot help themselves, even the Lord's poor, and receive their reward in the resurrection of the just.

Finally, brethren, slacken not your hands, but be diligent to do with your might a good work in every just and laudable calling, and prove your own selves by embracing every opportunity to be useful, and magnify your callings, that you may be counted worthy of eternal life. Live your religion so manifestly and indisputably, that you may feel the peaceful and purifying fruits of it, and the power thereof, lest temptations seize upon you that you have not power to withstand, and you lose what you have seemed to gain. Let not your lives be such that your own hearts will condemn you, lest He who is greater than your hearts should prefer charges against you far more and greater than a misty, darkened mind has supposed.

Ever remember, dear brethren, that if you would be righteous like your heavenly Father, His righteousness comes by REVELATION, through your faith. Be content with nothing short of the revealed will of your heavenly Father; for being built upon this foundation, the floods of error and temptation that must come upon all them that dwell upon the earth, will not be able to overthrow you.

Remember the teachings of your Prophets, Joseph and Brigham, and obey them. Think of the teachings of the Conference Minutes, which accompany this Epistle. Walk humbly before your heavenly Father, and do His will. If any Presidency of the various branches of the Church in the different nations, have the opportunity of forwarding the Saints from the torrid zone to San Pedro, or San Diego, California, send them; let them go directly to Presidents Amasa Lyman and Charles C. Rich, San Bernardino, and take their counsel, and may God our Heavenly Father give you wisdom in all things, Elders, sisters, and friends, that you may meet us in the celestial kingdom, is the prayer of your brethren, BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, W. RICHARDS. Great Salt Lake City, October 13, 1853.
