James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To the Bishops, July 20, 1854

1854-July 20-DN 4:9 (July 20, 1854)

TO THE BISHOPS of the Several Wards throughout the Territory:-

As building the Temple has already commenced, and nearly all the public works for the Church are building, and will, for some time, be built in this city, and for many other good reasons which will occur to you upon slight reflection, you are counseled to forward to the Tithing Office in Great Salt Lake City, all available Tithing Funds, as fast as they come into your hands, and opportunity offers, and to be diligent and vigilant in so doing, like wise stewards of the Lord's bounties. Labor Tithing, potatoes a long distance off, and other unavailable means may be so commuted as to be available here. You will use your best facilities and efforts to forward all the Tithing wheat, and other grain, all the butter, cheese, onions, &c., &c., not over one hundred miles off, before winter sets in or the fall traveling is bad; and not retain it in your store houses doing no good, or going to waste, nor withhold it, as some have, to speculate upon.

It is very difficult and unpleasant for us to make calculations to forward the Temple, and other public buildings for the Church, without the necessary data upon which to base such calculations; hence we wish each of you, in your respective wards, to forthwith prepare a list of the names of all the persons in your wards, who pay, or should pay Tithing, and place opposite each person's name the amount of wheat and all other grain, and of potatoes and all other vegetables he raises this season, as fast as it can be ascertained; also the amount of stock owned by each person, specifying the yearly increase; and in short, state all the items upon which a saint should rightfully pay tithing, keeping each item in a separate column.

By a little exertion and good counsel on your part, the few who need assistance, and are not able to remunerate therefor, can easily be cared for, independent of the Tithing Fund; thus relieving our Public Works of what has been quite a serious drawback.

It is expected that this counsel will not be departed from, unless by direct permission. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, JEDEDIAH M. GRANT First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
