James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To the Missionaries from Utah, August 31, 1854

1854-August 31-MS 16:46 pp. 721-722 ( November 18, 1854. )

TO THE MISSIONARIES FROM UTAH.

(From the Deseret News, August 31.)

Dear Brethren-Though at times you may be tempted to imagine that you are forgotten at home, while struggling, amid the powers of evil and darkness, and among strangers, without purse or scrip, to proclaim the pure principles of the everlasting Gospel, and to gather out the honest in heart from every nation under heaven, still you are ever sustained by our faith, and remembered in our prayers. We are perfectly familiar with the trials to human nature which have to be endured by all who magnify their calling in the Priesthood.

In obedience to counsel, you have turned your backs upon the endearments of family, home, and the sweet society of your brethren, and cheerfully gone forth to meet the scowls of evil spirits, and the scoffs and revilings of the wicked, with hearts burning with salvation for your fellows, and the contrast is so great that the unaided spirit of man would not only shrink from the calling, but utterly refuse, and be entirely incompetent for the task.

To cheer and assist you in your arduous, though most pleasing of all labours to a Saint, we shall occupy a portion of the columns of the Deseret News, from time to time, in furnishing you home news that may be of interest, and in making those suggestions, and giving such counsel as may be dictated by the Holy Spirit.

In times of sore temptation and trial, the human mind is prone to doubt and despondency, and, without strict humility, faith, and obedience, is liable to make shipwreck of the fairest prospects, hence the instruction to get the Spirit of the Lord if you have not got it, and keep it, and walk in it continually, taking it for the man of your counsel, cannot be too often reiterated, nor too closely adhered to by all Saints, and more especially by those who are bearing truth to the nations of the earth.

Your distant and scattered situation renders it impossible for you to receive direct communication from us on every question that may arise, even when you may be very anxious to do so. This is wisely designed for our benefit in the far reaching policy of the economy of God in regard to this probation, for by this plan all are made subject, for light, guidance, and true intelligence, to Him who rules and controls all things in wisdom, and "lighteth every one that cometh into the world."

Therefore, upon true faith, repentance, baptism by the proper authority, and the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, it is not only the privilege, but the duty of every individual to so live in accordance with the light and requirements of the Gospel, as to be able to ask and receive revelation from the Almighty at all times, and under all circumstances, whenever necessary, to enable him to magnify his calling, roll forth salvation, and honour our Father in heaven.

These are simple truths which you are familiar with, and which you all do, or should, know for yourselves, for salvation is an individual work-each for himself primarily, and secondarily each for all in assisting his brethren, and the human family at large, so far as lies in his power.

The mission to the British Isles is now under the immediate superintendence of Elder Franklin D. Richards, of the Quorum of the Twelve, and circumstances enable him to consult us, at times, on most questions of grave importance. This is not so much the case with the Scandinavian, French, Channel Islands, Swiss, German, Italian, Hindoostan, Australian, and Cape of Good Hope missions. From this cause from office connexions, and other facts, it is deemed advisable that the missionaries on the Eastern Continent look more immediately to Elder Richards, for counsel on those movements and views about which they may happen to feel any serious dubiety; at the same time we shall always be pleased to learn from you your situation and prospects, and be ever ready to give such replies to questions, and offer such instructions, as the exigencies of the case may require.

The Elders from Utah now in Australia, Hindoostan, and the Cape of Good Hope, are at full liberty, upon the reception of this article, to tarry in their respective missionary fields, to extend their labours to new fields, or return home as the Holy Ghost may dictate in their councils, with reference to their respective joint or individual movements, and all will be right.

Our public works are progressing steadily, but not, at all times, with that energy and speed that we could desire; still the Saints in Utah are constantly increasing in faith and good works.

Lest you may not get full files of the News, we will add that the foundation and adobe portion of the wall around the Temple Block are finished, and the workmen are now laying the coping stone, which will prepare the wall for the iron railing.

Workmen are busily engaged in placing the huge blocks of sandstone and fine conglomerate in the massive foundations for the Temple.

The natives are at peace with us, and with each other, and the Lord is still blessing us with the choice blessings of heaven and earth, insomuch that we rejoice in His Spirit, in union, and general good health, with an abundance of the necessaries and many of the luxuries of life.

From your brethren in the Gospel, BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, JEDEDIAH M. GRANT.
