James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To the Saints in Utah, September 14, 1854

1854-September 14-DN 4:27 p. 2 (September 14, 1854)

TO THE SAINTS IN UTAH. (Number 1.)

Upon leaving your former homes to gather to these valleys at the requirement of the Lord thro' his servants, where you could worship the God of Israel in accordance with his commandments, your hearts glowed with gratitude for your deliverance from the wickedness and oppression which prevail in the world, and you were fully persuaded that from and after your arrival here, you would devote all your time, energies, and means, in a manner every way becoming a saint, for your salvation, and the salvation of the human family to the uttermost.

These feelings were prompted by the Holy Spirit, and while under its immediate influence, had you been told how far you might stray, after settling in your new homes, you would have been moved upon to reply in the words of Hazael, "But what! is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?" Now, inasmuch as those good feelings oftentimes pass away, and many are induced to act widely different from what they anticipated, and some even go so far as to make shipwreck of their faith, we deem it proper to publish a few remarks upon the spirit of man, the Spirit of the Lord, and the spirit of evil, and, from time to time, upon those subjects the proper understanding of which may conduce to your temporal and spiritual welfare.

When starting on your journey, your faith was strong, your understandings clear, and you could discern between truth and error; but soon the adversary, taking advantage of the weaknesses of human nature, endeavored to induce you to become impatient, to find fault with the sayings and doings of your brethren, to neglect your prayers, and begin to doubt, and become self-sufficient.-This being accomplished, a person becomes disagreeable to himself, to his family if he has one, to his animals, for they have reason, and in short to all the true intelligences around him, and the travel over the dreary and monotonous plains becomes vexatious instead of pleasant and a profitable lesson on the pages of probation is left unlearned, or in other words worse, for evil has usurped the place of good, and instead of an advance, the course is retrograde, as there is no neutral point in conduct.

Upon arrival in our settlements, the high wrought expectations of such a person are doomed to still further disappointment; the whole surface of the country is at fault; his brethren do not step forward in mass to hail his arrival, and contribute of their industriously earned means to support and gratify his whims in doing nothing, or next to nothing, nor vacate their farms, and buildings, and invite him to occupy without price; and he begins, like the inebriate who fancied all the city intoxicated but himself, to imagine that even the First Presidency are going wrong, and need the suggestions of his unerring wisdom to guide them in the path of duty, forgetting that they, like all others, are only amenable to their superiors.

It would be as reasonable to suppose that the feet were designed to direct the head, that evil is good, and good is evil, as to expect good thoughts, correct counsel, and corresponding action from the above described character, until he repents, and does his first works over. Still it often happens that instead of repenting, and bringing forth fruits meet therefor, such an one infects others within his influence, tho' never unless their minds are more or less ready to receive erroneous ideas.

Well, we are in the valleys of the mountains, with none but ourselves to oppose us in doing the will of the Lord; for, unless listened to, evil spirits have no power over ours to turn us from the pathway of righteousness, and still there is plenty of room for reformation, for in the midst of all the lessons of the past, the time has not yet arrived when we can say we are one in all things, which time must come, and our wills must be perfectly subject to the will of the Father ere we are privileged to enter upon the full fruition of all righteous desires.

You reply that these are old truths with which we are perfectly familiar, and the reply is correct; then why not live more closely in accordance with your knowledge, and day by day watch and chasten yourselves, casting aside temptations, overcoming evils, that unclean spirits may not find place in your tabernacles, that you may constantly grow in the knowledge of the truth, and that grace may be continually multiplied to you? The answer comes booming up on every side,-the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak," but omitting the command which immediately precedes it, viz: "watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation." Taking the quotation as a whole, it affords an excellent key to the plan, and economy of this probation, wherein we are made 'subject to vanity,' but not enjoined any duty which it is out of our power to perform.

But instead of all walking uprightly, at all times, and under all circumstances, each pursuing his particular avocation with his face steadfastly set Zionward, one goes to his buildings, fields, or stock, and becomes so absorbed in their improvement, and increase, that he forgets why he came here, that the hands upon the Public Works need food to sustain life, that after all he is only a steward at most, and at length even forgets to thank the Giver of all he possesses; while another, still more culpable in that he produces nothing, strives to amass wealth, and build up a name by becoming a mere trader, and far too often a shaving trader, and of course he too is soon fully imbued with the ruling passion of selfishness, and the purpose for which he came here is almost, if not wholly lost sight of.

You can all easily extend this list by adding to it examples under your own observation, and readily within the scope of the weakest capacity. It is obvious that a deviation from the right line is not at first made ignorantly, that it is never hidden from the eyes of the just, and that no one is eventually deceived but the evil doer.

From these facts it appears strange upon reflection, that any person could be induced to do wrong, though at the same time it requires the most vigilant effort to do right, owing to human infirmity operated on by the spirit of evil; hence the human family require "line upon line, precept upon precept," that by practising thoroughly upon what they receive they may go on from perfection to perfection, or in other words, each walk perfectly in his own sphere.

Inasmuch as the spirits of men have wisely been organized as diverse in power and peculiarities as their number, it is not expected, possible, or desirable, that the thoughts and actions of mankind be run in the same mould, but it is positively necessary for every one who wishes salvation under a celestial law to abide that law. Any course short of this will deprive that person of a full salvation, for every one will be "rewarded according to the deeds done in the body," hence those who are striving to dwell with the just, must uniformly perform good deeds to the extent of their capacity, or they will suffer more or less loss. If this principle were always kept in mind, and acted up to agreeably to the dictates of the Spirit of the Lord, and the counsels of his servants, every saint would be diligent in doing all the good in his power, and no one could be found retaining tithing in kind after it was due, nor commuting it without leave from the proper authority, nor even limiting his aid to the letter of the law as commonly understood, but each would be aware that every public improvement is a public benefit, and allow no limit to his public and private efforts, short of the utmost of his skill and ability. Then faith would increase in a powerful ratio; good works would abound, the kingdom would roll forth with greatly increased power, and darkness flee away.

Now will you all give strict heed to these remarks, which are written in all plainness, and solely with a view to your welfare? No, you will not-but many will, and you will ever find it unwise to quarrel with your neighbor for difference of opinion, or for his course of conduct, but simply be concerned to always do right, and rest assured that each one the world over, will attain to precisely that amount of intelligence, happiness, and glory, or the reverse, which he has lived for.

This brings us again to observe that salvation is an individual work, and that so long as any person operates in a course which does not infringe upon the proper rights of others, his belief and conduct should not incur their violence, anger, or improper interference, for he is walking in his own sphere, enjoying the agency given him, and will reap the reward thereof, and all undue interference will be charged to the account of whoever thus interferes.

As these ideas are advanced for your reflection, and action, the counsel is made brief', that you may not overlook it, nor your minds be wearied, or confused while reading. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, JEDEDIAH M. GRANT.
