James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Litigation, September 21, 1854

1854-September 21-DN 4:3 (September 21, 1854)

LITIGATION.

We have often observed it written in schoolboy copy-books that 'Evil communications corrupt good manners,' and there is a fear that constantly open courts and an increasing number of professed limbs of the law may tempt the uninitiated to waste their time and substance by engaging in law suits, or by voluntarily attending their progress.

This conclusion is deemed correct from the fact that almost daily an idle crowd around the Council House is seen to be on the increase.

It is indisputable that the large majority of our population come here on purpose to serve the Lord, and walk uprightly in his sight, and in the sight of their brethren. It is equally true that there are some in Utah who neither 'Fear God nor regard man,' and many who appear to be striving to hit between wind and water, for they are actually trying to see how much evil they can commit and at the same time keep their standing among the saints, and peradventure slip inside the gates of heaven, even at the risk of a tight squeeze. Such persons seem to forget the ancient and true saying, 'Ye cannot serve two masters,' the one being good and the other evil; hence, when they have travelled in the path of evil until the instigator thereof has lured them into its quagmires, or until the chastening hand of the Almighty is upon them, they call upon the upright to help them out, clean them off, stand between them and their God, and place them where they would have been had they committed no sin.

That you may be further able to avoid such an unpleasant predicament, a few suggestions are offered for your reflection.

Tradition seems to have invested court houses and the proceedings therein with a peculiar charm to a certain class, and the lawyers, and possibly now and then a judge, love to have it so, for by this craft they get their living, and the dupes and the obstinate foot the bill, except when honesty is driven to the wall through lack of evidence, or by some quirk of law, or corruption in the court; and all this goes on much to the amusement and benefit of those who pocket the fees, and laugh at the gullibility and stubbornness of the litigious: and to keep up the craft, if you will stop and listen, your ears will be stunned by its professors with the mysteries of the law, the dignity of the law, and the vast amount of profound study required to become familiar with it.

Now what are a few of the main, simple facts in the case? It is a fact that law is, or should be, neither more nor less than a rule of action founded in justice for the proper regulation of the human family in their social intercourse, and written with the utmost plainness. That every one amenable thereto is able to understand it, or there is a radical defect in its phraseology, which should be remedied. That 'common law,' as it is commonly understood and practised, is a labyrinth of abominations, and should be struck out of existence. That the Constitution and applicable laws of the United States, and the laws passed by the Governor and Legislative Assembly of Utah Territory, are all the laws of human enactment in force in Utah. That our laws are so few and so plain that you can become familiar with, and understand all which concern your individual conduct. What necessity then for courts and law cases? Not one particle, except through the wickedness, stubbornness, and folly of one or both parties to a suit.

Crimes are committed, hence there must be an understood and acknowledged legal mode of trial, or mob law would prevail, or criminals go unpunished. What is necessary to constitute this legal mode? A law plainly defining the crime, specifying the court having jurisdiction, and empowering that court to cause the criminal and all pertinent evidence to be produced, if to be found, and indicating some plain, brief mode of procedure with the trial, which will subserve the ends of justice. Any lawyers needed in such cases? No; why? Because they could only at best hinder progress and annoy the ears of judge and jury, and irritate the witnesses. For it is taken for granted that judges are acquainted with the law in the case, that both they and the jury have ears with which they can hear, and know how to ask the witnesses pertinent questions, and are capable of understanding the answers, and discriminating between true and false evidence, to say the least, in as great a degree as a lawyer, and for doing this they have the advantage of being simply employed to adjudicate the case, while lawyers are hired by one or both parties expressly for the purpose of darkening 'knowledge by words without counsel.'

So long as the tares grow with the wheat a criminal case will arise occasionally, but among saints a civil case should rarely, if ever, be taken before what is commonly called a legal tribunal. How are you to avoid doing so? We might answer, in brief', by faithfully keeping your covenants, but, as before remarked, some professed saints are mainly concerned to see how few covenants they can observe, and keep along in fair weather, and a more extended answer is necessary for their benefit.

In your dealings with your fellows let all parties have an explicit understanding concerning services, prices, payments, or any important point touching the matter in hand; and when of so much consequence that you cannot afford to risk losing, or being swindled, or wronged out of what may be your actual rights, either have written agreements, or at least two good witnesses to the understanding, if you will deal extensively with those who are not tried and proven.

When a person will not arbitrate, nor listen to the counsel of two of his brethren, nor that of his teacher, and you actually cannot afford the loss, you have a right to a hearing before his bishop, which should be amicable and final. When you deal with one who is not even a professed saint, you must expect to run the risk of dispute, and of obtaining justice in a law court, for their ideas, traditions, and customs, all lean in that direction; though many of that class are very honorable, exemplary, and upright in fulfilling civil contracts.

So far as mere property is concerned, when a person would compel you to go with him a mile, go with him twain, but if unforeseen events so transpire as to render it almost out of the question, or morally wrong for you to avoid appearing in the capacity of a party in a suit at law, hire no lawyer, but produce your evidence, make your statement if you wish, and submit the question to the magistrate, judge, or jury; and let no persons be found at a trial except the court, the parties, witnesses, and such others as actually have business there.

It will be well to observe this plain, and necessary counsel, and bear in mind that we have no fellowship for litigious lawyers, nor for any person who prefers litigation. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, JEDEDIAH M. GRANT.
