James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Circular to Presidents and Bishops, March 8, 1855

CIRCULAR To the Presidents, Bishops, their Counselors, and all the Brethren in the various Branches of the Church in the Valleys of the Mountains:-

DEAR BRETHREN-

Having received information concerning the situation of our brethren, AMASA LYMAN, CHARLES C. RICH, and those who located with them at San Bernardino, in relation to their circumstances as regards paying for, and securing the title to that place, we feel to lay the matter before you and ask your aid therein.

They purchased the Ranch when times were considered good, and agreed to pay therefor seventy seven thousand dollars; some fifty two thousand of which has been paid, including interest-leaving a balance of thirty-eight thousand which has to be paid the ensuing season, or they will lose the place, together with all they have paid.

Owing to the scarcity of money in that country, and the hardness of the times, our brethren have no prospect of being able to meet this debt in time to save the Ranch, we have therefore assumed to help them raise the required amount.

It is to this end that we address this Circular to you, that we may receive your assistance to accomplish this object.

We propose to drive sufficient cattle to the California market in order to obtain the means which we cannot raise in this Territory, and make up the deficiency which the brethren of the ranch cannot supply; and wish the brethren to let us have money, cows, or oxen as they can spare, either on tithing or as a loan until the property of the ranch can be made available to refund it.

It is required of all the aforesaid authorities to collect and forward to the Trustee in Trust, from their respective locations, any amount, either in money or cattle, that can be obtained upon these terms, for that object. You will also see that no cattle belonging either to the Church or Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company are disposed of or diverted to any other purpose, but are carefully gathered up and forwarded to us. A great many cattle are lost, through carelessness and neglect, which belong to the Church, and a great many others which should be devoted to the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company are retained unjustly by the people. Let all such cattle be turned over and brought to this place, instead of being kept, or sold for half price, as has too generally been the case.

We request the Presidents and Bishops, in their respective locations, to ascertain what amount of means, and kind, whether money, cows, or oxen, can be obtained, and forward the information to us immediately; and all means collected should be delivered here by the first of May next. Our herd is kept by Brs. Miles and Frank Weaver, on the west side of Jordan, in Utah county, near Lehi city, on Dry Creek, where cattle coming in from any place south of this city can be delivered, and appraised. All north and west may be delivered and appraised at this place.

Brethren, lend us your aid, and be energetic in assisting us at this time in behalf of our brethren, that the blessings of Heaven may continue with us, and also be extended to others in their necessity. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, JEDEDIAH M. GRANT.
