James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Circular to Presidents and Bishops, September, 1855

1855-September-Circular on file in Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City.

CIRCULAR to Presidents and Bishops of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, throughout the Territory of Utah:-

You will see, by the list of names and amounts attached in the columns below, that there is over fifty seven thousand dollars due from individuals to the Perpetual Fund; those individuals are living in settlements and wards over which you preside. Are they suffering for food, or starving for a morsel of bread? Do you see them traveling the streets pleading for work to obtain a morsel of food for themselves, their wives and children? Do you see them go bowed down, with their faces emaciated for the want of food to sustain life? Do you see men with wheel barrows, and women and children with their aprons, gathering manure in the streets, to get a penny to buy bread to keep spirit and body together?

Do you see men, women, and children, working sixteen hours in a day, to earn their sixpence or shilling, and when Saturday night comes, and their rents are paid, they have but very little left to buy bread with?

Do you see any one living in hovels, sheds, caves, or holes dug in the earth, where they vegetate in filth, covered with vermin from generation to generation, not having time to spare from the incessant labor necessary to procure a scanty subsistence, to observe the salutary and healthful practice of decency and cleanliness during their whole life time?

Do they live on vegetable soups, water porridge, with the least possible amount of oatmeal to thicken it, and upon roots and herbage of the most indifferent character? No, you do not! You do not witness such scenes in any of the settlements in these valleys of the mountains. Have you ever witnessed them-have you ever endured them? Yes you have, hundreds and thousands of you have been raised in the very midst of just such scenes, and more or less of you have been delivered therefrom by the aid of this fund, to which you now stand indebted for the same. Are there any others left behind? Yes, many, just as good as you are, who feel just as anxious to be delivered from those scenes of want and distress as you were? There are thousands of men, women, and children, who belong to this Church, who would be willing to lick the very dust from your feet, for the privileges which you enjoy, for the privileges of being delivered from their most incessant labor, which from five years old to eighty, from daylight in the morning, to dark at night, and often times hours before, and after too, from week to week, month to month, and year to year, one generation after another, does not, will not procure, neither can they obtain anything more than a precarious subsistence. Are you not now in a land of peace and plenty? Have you not the benefit of receiving instruction and of participating in the society of your friends and brethren, and worshiping God without molestation from mobs, and wicked men. And shall you, will you now become so blind to your own former situation, and the situation of those you have left behind, so neglectful of your duty to yourselves, to your brethren in the old country, to the FUND, to your God, as to live on quietly, year after year, without refunding and paying the dollars and cents merely which you owe the fund?

Have you considered since you have been here how you felt before you left that place, how you longed to get away from wicked Babylon, how much faith you had to exercise in order to effect your deliverance, how you dreaded the famine, pestilence, and war which you saw approaching? And have you ever considered the situation of those brethren who are, and have long been looking for deliverance through the same source, since all those dire calamities have come upon them? Put yourselves in their situation for a moment, in the midst of starvation at home, and liable to be drawn into the army at any time, see them upon the stormy sea in hurricane, and tempest, cholera, and shipwreck by sea, cholera, and disaster by land; also before Sebastopol, prosecuting an almost hopeless seige, where they die daily by hundreds and by thousands, and then ask yourselves the question: If I might not, by even paying up punctually what I owed the fund, have brought those poor brethren away before these great calamities came upon them, consider if you cannot even now, by strict application, and making this your first object, instead of waiting to get rich first, be the means of bringing some of them to partake with the like, and similar blessings with yourselves. Will the Lord, Angels, and holy beings fellowship you if you longer neglect these matters, if you longer exhibit a careless indifference to this important subject? Will the church and the brethren sustain you in their faith and prayers, while the lamentations and cries of the worthy poor are filling the ears of the Almighty for release and deliverance?

No they will not; and if you do not act, feel, and do different, the withering curse of the Almighty will be upon you to darken your minds, to lessen your faith, and cause a famine spiritual and temporal to consume you.

Brethren, hearken to the whisperings of the spirit, and manifest your faith by your works, and witness unto the Lord and your brethren, that you the mindful of your duty, and willing to perform your part in the gathering of Israel,-the great work of the last days. BRIGHAM YOUNG, President of the P. E. F. Company.

Note: This document is followed by a list of names and the amounts each individual owed the P.E.F. Company. For the sake of space and for reasons of saving possible embarrassment to their descendants, the list is not produced here. It is assumed that it will be available for consultation by qualified investigators who have genuine interest and need for the information contained in the detailed list of names and amounts.-JRC
