James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To the Brethren, January 9, 1856

1856-January 9-DN 5:349 (January 9, 1856)

TO THE BRETHREN who hold or are entitled to land warrants.

DEAR BRETHREN:-Ever solicitous for your welfare, as well as to promote the cause of Zion, we feel to counsel you in regard to your 'land warrants.' It is wisdom for all who are entitled to them to make applications therefore at such times and in such manner as will incur the least expense. Lawyers and speculators are to be avoided. The Hon. James W. Cummings, Clerk of G. S. L. County, and Judge Phelps and Robert Campbell, Notaries Public, will make out the papers and give the necessary certificates, for a just and honorable remuneration for the time occupied therewith. They can easily attend to all claimants, and any person can ascertain whether he is entitled to a land warrant, by application at the Adjutant General's office. Obtain your land warrants and then keep them, until the lands in the valleys of Utah are surveyed and brought into market, then you can secure your firesides and other improvements to yourselves and friends. Hundreds who were in the Battalion have sorely regretted the manner in which they suffered themselves to be fooled out of their warrants, back pay, mileage, &c.

Brethren, be wiser now and keep the staff in your hands while you have it, that it may sustain yourselves and this people in time to come. Those warrants are as good as money, dollar for dollar, in the Land Offices; therefore do not let land jobbers, speculators, &c., whose only study is to subserve individual interest and get rich by oppressing and swindling the community, re-enact with you the ever memorable transactions pertaining to the disposal of the land warrants of the Mormon Battalion.

Let the spirit of wisdom dictate your course, and you will follow the counsel of God. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, J. M. GRANT.

1855-January 31-Charles C. Rich and Sale of San Bernardino Ranch No available copy of this message has been located.
