James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Counsel from the First Presidency-Gleaning and Saving, July 9, 1856

1856-July 9-DN 6:141 (July 9, 1856)

COUNSEL FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

GLEANING AND SAVING.-The continued drouth, the failure of the streams, the destruction by insects and by cattle allowed to run at random, or miserably herded, will compel the strenuous efforts of all, to secure sustenance for the present and incoming population until a harvest in 1857. To accomplish so desirable a result, and prevent unnecessary privation and suffering, we have heretofore counseled, and now repeat it, that both the owners of fields and gardens and those who have none should be extremely careful that not a particle of food be lost, wasted, or made an unwise use of.

When small grain is cut, and the owners have seasonably secured that portion they intend to, let them permit the destitute to go in and glean, either without charge or at a reasonable rate, as may be agreed upon. Hundreds can in this way secure their bread-stuff from grain that will otherwise be lost, and the same course pursued with corn, potatoes, beets, turnips and every other description of produce, will make a material difference in the amount that will be saved.

But much of all the industry and skill in our power will be expended for naught, unless stock owners take great pains that their animals do not trespass. Unfortunately this is not and has not been the case, and animals are feeding, more or less, upon the growing wheat and corn; and that too often by cattle breaking through good fences, or by the fences being thrown down by those having herds in charge. Such conduct is so obviously improvident and outrageously wrong, that every one will admit it should forthwith be stopt. But all are not careful to look after their stock, nor to see that those do who have them in charge, for this reason all officers are called upon to assist the field owners in securing their crops against destruction by animals, and to use such necessarily stringent measures as the circumstances may lawfully require.

While the crops are being secured and the cattle taken care of, several will be accumulating a surplus of wheat, corn, potatoes, &c., and at the same time hundreds will be almost or entirely destitute. Such condition of a community tempts to unrighteous speculation by the wealthy, and leads to much suffering by the poor. Both these positions can be easily avoided, if those who have will at once sell or otherwise dispose of their surplus to those who lack, and thus also avoid the expense, care and loss consequent upon storage, and feed laborers for making useful improvements. And let not the poor waste their time in haggling about prices for labor, but all go with their might to produce and save sustenance for themselves and families.

Some may be fearful that their forethought and wise obedience to counsel will be thwarted by the improvidence, gluttony and waste of those whom they may befriend, which doubtless would be the case in many instances, were they left entirely to their own guidance. To obviate the misuse of the earthly bounties so kindly bestowed upon us, the Bishops in each Ward are required to see that those having a surplus make a wise disposition thereof, and that the poor are not improvident in using it, for people are not fond of practising industry and self-denial, and then seeing the fruits of their economy extravagantly squandered.

If the Bishops learn that any of the poor in their Wards are improvident in the use of provisions, let them take charge of their provisions and deal them out as necessity and a fair proportion may demand. And if the poor feel to complain of such treatment, and are unwilling to comply, let the Bishops say to them that they have the privilege of leaving their Wards.

Wisdom in temporal as well as spiritual matters should invariably mark the course of saints; they are entitled to the blessings flowing from peopling these desert wilds, and it would seem to be high time for all to understand and rightly practice their use and distribution. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, JEDEDIAH M. GRANT.
