James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Small Pox, August 13, 1856

1856-August 13-DN 6:181 (August 13, 1856)

SMALLPOX.

The small pox has been brought into Great Salt Lake county by a company which lately came in from the States with Benjamin Matthews, and who, contrary to all rules of propriety, fellow feeling, or even common decency, most carefully kept to themselves the knowledge of their having imported a disease so contagious and dreaded. Through such an unwarrantable course many lives have been wickedly jeopardized, without a word of warning, to an extent impossible to determine at present.

It is not designed in this article to appropriately animadvert upon the gross conduct of Matthews and his company, in their silent introduction of a disease so baneful, nor to allude to what the law does or does not provide in such cases, for immediate, united and energetic action for self-protection must be first entered into.

To effectually accomplish this object the Select Men in this county, the several Bishops thereof, so far as any communication with Matthew's company may have extended, are required to use the utmost diligence in seeking out those who have been in the least degree exposed, and in taking every precaution to prevent the further prevalence of so loathsome a disease.

Matthew's company is camped on Big Cottonwood, about a quarter of a mile north-east of br. Robert Pierce's; and all in that company who have the small pox, or are liable to have it, are hereby cautioned and warned to at once remove from the road into some uninhabited and unfrequented spot, and to cease traveling or mingling with those who have not had the small pox; and all inhabitants liable to be infected are cautioned to keep entirely aloof from that company.

And in case any of the inhabitants should be seized by a disease, which has been so scandalously kept secret, all parties concerned are required to use every precaution to prevent its spreading beyond such persons. Among the precautionary measures, let every locality of the disease be amply guarded by plain and abundant notices conspicuously posted at every approach thereto; and let there be no communication with the diseased, except by those who are not liable to the contagion. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, JEDEDIAH M. GRANT.
