James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Fourteenth General Epistle, December 10, 1856

1856-December 10-MS 19:241-249, 250-253 (April 18, 1857)

FOURTEENTH GENERAL EPISTLE of the Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the Saints in the valleys of the mountains, and those scattered abroad throughout the earth, Greeting:

(From the Deseret News)

Beloved Brethren-Feeling impelled by the Spirit of our God to write unto you concerning the things of the kingdom, and having greater boldness therein by reason of the faith and testimony of the Lord Jesus and the Holy Ghost, of which we have received and bear record unto the whole world, we proceed to manifest unto you such intimations of the Spirit pertaining unto the Church and kingdom of God as are or may be presented unto us, trusting that they may prove instructive and beneficial unto the Saints.

To those who read our publications we need not minutely recapitulate the operations and success attending the labours of our missionaries, as all such information is promptly and fully laid before the people through those channels. Suffice it to say, uniform success has attended the efforts of our Elders, and thousand are now rejoicing in the light of truth, having renounced their traditioned errors, obeyed the ordinances of the House of the Lord and received with gladness, praise and thanksgiving the pure principles of the Gospel of Christ. They are now anxiously looking for deliverance, to unite and cast their lot with us in these peaceful vales.

The missionaries who have been absent in Europe two years and more, have mostly returned this season, having been relieved by others appointed at our last April Conference. Notwithstanding thousands from Europe annually find their homes in Utah, still the numbers are increasing abroad.

The interest excited in favour of and to learn the truth and hatred of its opposers were never greater than at the present time. The power of Almighty God is made manifest in the administration of His servants, and is plainly discernible in His hand dealings with the nations of the earth, as well as with His people, making the assurance doubly sure that His word will not return unto Him void, nor His promises be made in vain. He will sustain the righteous, the ungodly will He cut off.

In California the Western Standard is faithfully warning the people, under the able care and guidance of brother George Q. Cannon, who has also published the Book of Mormon in the Hawaiian language. The publication of that paper has proved very useful and beneficial in correcting public opinion, and in exercising a salutary influence over the few to be found in that land who are seekers after truth. Gold is the shrine at which they bow, and the truth emanating from High Heaven's King has but few admirers. The Standard, however, will be able to sustain itself, mostly through the aid of the Saints, and will continue to be issued so long as it shall be considered beneficial in aiding the cause of truth in that region.

The Sandwich Islands and Australian missions are in a healthy and prosperous condition. We learn by late advices from Silas Smith, who is at present presiding over the Sandwich Islands' mission, that the crops on Lanai are much better this season than usual, which will greatly facilitate the gathering of the native Saints upon that island, the appointed place. The repeated failure and destruction of their crops has involved the mission somewhat in debt, and partially frustrated the design in gathering the Saints to that place, where they could be measurably protected from the hireling missionary operations and other contaminating influences of licentious civilization. But, through the present prosperity, the aid of the faithful Elders, and continual blessings of the Almighty, who is ever mindful of His faithful Saints, we hope and expect that the mission will soon rise above its present embarrassments. There was represented at a Conference held on Lanai, on the 24th of July, 1855, 90 organized branches, 4,220 members-723 of whom had been baptized within that year-25 American and 118 native Elders then labouring on the islands, besides native Priests, Teachers and Deacons

From the Society Islands we have no very satisfactory accounts. Owing to the difficulties with the French government, the Elders were compelled, some two years ago, to leave those islands. Brothers Addison Pratt and Ambrose Alexander were appointed to that mission from San Bernardino, at their last April Conference, and sailed for those islands on the 24th day of the same month, but were soon obliged to leave, and have since returned.

Elder Farnham, from the Australian mission, arrived in this city on the 21st of November, leaving a ship load of Saints at San Bernardino, the most of whom, it is expected, will come on during the ensuing season.

Brothers John S. Eldredge and James Graham, with 28 Saints from Australia, on board the ship Julia Ann, were wrecked near the Society Isles on the 4th day of October, 1855. We regret to add that five persons, two women and three children, were lost, the remainder barely escaped with their lives upon a barren and uninhabited island, where they remained, subsisting upon turtle, for six weeks. They were finally relieved from their perilous situation by the captain of Julia Ann, who had sailed over three hundred miles in an open boat to an inhabited island and procured another vessel, but were left upon that group and the Sandwich Islands, with no means to further prosecute their journey; though they have since arrived on the western coast, on their way to Zion.

Without reflecting upon the officers of the Julia Ann, all of whom are well spoken of by our brethren, or even upon the strength and sea worthiness of the vessel, which we understand was good and new, still we wish to caution our Elders not only those in Australia, but all in foreign countries, not to permit an over anxiety to emigrate and gather with the Saints to make them careless or indifferent to the kind and condition of the vessel in which they embark, nor to the character of the officers and crew on board. This is the second instance of vessels, sailing from that mission with Saints on board, not reaching their destination. In the other case no lives were lost, though the vessel had to put into port where she was condemned, and the Saints, after having paid their passage to the western coast, were left on the Sandwich Islands. It is a matter worthy of record, and a source of great joy and satisfaction to us, that in all our foreign emigration those are the only losses by sea, of that character, that have occurred.

From the Cape of Good Hope, South Africa, there is a company of Saints en route for this place, the first fruits of the labours of brothers Jesse Haven, William Walker, and Leonard I. Smith, who have been manifestly blest of the Lord in planting the work in that distant part of the Lord's vineyard. At a Conference held at Fort Elizabeth in the month of August, 1855, three Conferences and six Branches, comprising 126 members, were represented. The brethren of the mission, having organized various Branches and ordained faithful Elders to prosecute the work, are, together with a small company, on their way home, except brother Leonard I. Smith, who arrived in this city on the 31st of last May.

The East India missionaries have now all returned, having effected but little in the redemption of that benighted people. How truly have they become 'joined unto their idols' and left of the Lord, even like unto the aborigines of America, a law unto themselves, until the Lord shall again visit them with salvation in great power and glory.

From the report of the Conference held at Copenhagen we learn, through brother John Van Cott, that over two thousand Saints have emigrated from that mission; and there still remained over twenty-four hundred anxiously looking for deliverance. Although the Elders in the Scandinavian mission and in various places in Germany, Italy, Switzerland, and France, owing to the suspicions and intolerance of those governments, have been thrown into prison and banished from place to place, still the work of the Lord has gained a foothold in those countries which cannot now be eradicated. When our Elders are banished from one kingdom they go to another, still teaching the people the way of life and salvation. Thus the enemies of the truth, by their over anxiety to suppress, have unwittingly been the means of spreading the Gospel and causing the bread of life to be cast upon the waters, which will be gathered after many days.

From the British Isles we have the most cheering accounts of the progress of the work. We learn, by brothers F. D. Richards, Daniel Spencer, Cyrus H. Wheelock, and others lately returned, having been succeeded in the presidency of that mission by brothers Orson Pratt, Ezra T. Benson, and James A. Little, that notwithstanding the great annual emigration from Britain's shores, it does not keep pace with the annual in crease and onward progress of the work in those lands.

In the United States and the British provinces we also hear of an increased interest springing up in behalf of the truth, and of the work of God now fully established upon the earth.

It is the testimony of all the Elders that, while signal success attends their labours in all of these lands, being attended by the Spirit and power of the Lord in all of their ministrations, the opposition also increases in equal proportion. In truth it is stated that the deep-rooted hatred of the wicked towards the work of God was never so great as now, and appears to steadily increase with the increase of the work. But their opposition cannot hinder this work, for it is from heaven; and if the Saints of the Most High God will be faithful, diligent and united, they will always be able to wield an influence and power which none shall be able to gainsay or withstand.

In consequence of the temporary absence of brother Erastus Snow, and the subsequent death of our beloved brother Orson Spencer, who was left in charge, the Luminary, published in St. Louis, was discontinued; and, although brother Snow has since returned to the field of his labours, it has been as yet deemed wisdom not to resume that publication.

It is considered that The Mormon, having the increased patronage which the aid and influence of the patrons of the Luminary would give it, might become as useful to the Saints as the publication of both papers, and be much better sustained.

In the death of brother Spencer we sustained a loss which, though lamentable to us, our faith compels us to admit is to his superior gain and happiness. He fell asleep in the faith of Jesus on the 15th day of October, 1855, in the city of St. Louis, being absent from home in the performance of the mission which had been appointed him at the April Conference of 1854. Our beloved brother has gone to try the realities of the spirit-world, in the full faith of our holy religion and confidence of the people; and though our words of commendation may not extend to cheer and encourage him in his onward and progressive labours, yet we cannot refrain from bearing our testimony to his unwavering fidelity and integrity, his useful but arduous labours, always evincing great firmness of character, and to his unyielding and uncompromising integrity to Joseph and his brethren.

We deplore his loss for our own and his friends' sake-and who was not his friend that knew him? but rejoice that another faithful and able champion of the truth has gone to assist in the labours of Jesus and Joseph behind the veil.

It has also become our painful duty to record the death of our beloved brother Jedediah M. Grant; whose obituary and funeral proceedings are published in this day's paper. In this afflicting dispensation of Providence we feel that the Lord hath touched us "in a tender spot;" but we realize that in His unbounded goodness He is able and willing to make good our loss, yea, more abundantly as we draw nigh unto Him and live our holy religion.

Although he is gone to another and more extended field of labour, having ripened in the knowledge of God and efficiently and faithfully performed his work upon the earth, still his frequent admonitions, his burning eloquence, his zeal and anxiety, which he manifested for the salvation of Israel, are too indelibly impressed upon our minds to be easily forgotten. Let us, therefore, exhibit our respect to the memory of our departed but beloved friend and brother, by remembering and practising his precepts and emulating, so far as in our power, his virtues.

Owing to the illiberality, bigotry, and intolerance of so many of this priest-ridden generation, every obstacle and hindrance that can be is thrown in the way, with a view to obstruct the progress of the work and hedge up the way of those whose most earnest desire is to leave their parting testimony with old neighbours and associates in life and come home to Zion. The Gospel of salvation now as anciently finds more ready access to the poor than the rich, forcibly illustrating and confirming the truthfulness of the remark of our Saviour, "How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God." The poor, down-trodden oppressed of ages, whom the aristrocratical lordlings have for centuries continually crushed with the iron heel of despotism, feel, when the light of truth and salvation penetrates their minds, a new impulse to try again to redeem themselves and their posterity from the thraldom of ignorance, wickedness, error, superstition and tyranny which so long enchained them and their fathers. They are inspired by an all-absorbing desire to rise above and throw off the filth and abominations, mystery, corruption, and worse than Egyptian darkness of wicked Babylon, and bask in the sunlight of pure principles emanating from Heaven's King; to rejoice with the Saints in Zion, and become co-workers in that cause which, having redeemed them, may enable them to contribute a share in the redemption of others who are still in the bonds of iniquity and gall of bitterness.

This ever rising, ever increasing desire for the gathering of the remnants of Israel pertains unto all the Saints of God, who live their religion and enjoy the rich blessings of the Holy Ghost. It is in the heart of every faithful Saint, their constant prayer to the Almighty Father to enable them, not only to promulgate the Gospel of Christ to those who sit in darkness, but to gather out the honest in heart, even the Israel of God, from their long dispersion and to aid them in returning to a knowledge of the Lord God of their Fathers, that they may participate in the society of the Saints and a peaceful inheritance in these sequestered vales. To this end, and the further accomplishment of this object, are continually directed the efforts of the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company for the emigration of the honest and worthy poor-those who desire to serve God and keep His commandments, being full of virtue and integrity towards God and their brethren. These are those we wish to deliver from the oppression of wicked Babylon, whose vital energies the proud and powerful are crushing out; upon whom the despotism, bigotry, ignorance and superstition of the world hang like an incubus, and to bring them to a land where manhood though found in poverty is respected, and where the God of Heaven can receive the homage due from man to his Maker; where freedom and liberty of conscience can enjoy protection, honest and faithful labour meet a just equivalent, and where the light of revelation and power of the Holy and Eternal Priesthood hold the adversary of truth in abeyance and roll back the curtains of error and darkness, sin, and death which have so long enveloped the earth.

This season's operations have demonstrated that the Saints, being filled with faith and the Holy Ghost, can walk across the plains, drawing their provisions and clothing on hand-carts. The experience of this season will of course help us to improve in future operations; but the plan has been fairly tested and proved entirely successful. The entire trip from Iowa city, a distance of over thirteen hundred miles, to this city has been thus accomplished in less traveling days than it has ever been by an ox train of wagons, and with far greater ease to the travellers. These companies, with the exception of the two last, which started too late in the season, have made their trip from the Missouri river in a little over two months, and could have made it in less time, had they not been hindered by the few ox teams which accompanied them. Herein have our expectations been realized, and the usual vast expense and trouble attending this branch of business been in a good degree avoided.

The account of this year's operations not yet being completed, we are at present unable to state the precise amount of expenditure incurred per passenger; but we know that it must be far less than heretofore, and may still be lessened in future.

The Saints who have come in this way have been healthier, more contented and happier, and have encountered less trouble and vexation than those with teams; and have, moreover, manifested to the world their faith, perseverance and good works.

They have shown a willingness to have others as well as themselves assisted, by using as little as possible of the Company' means for their own emigration. They have manifested a disposition to accede to any terms, so that their emigration might be accomplished without impeding that of anxious thousands looking to the same source for relief.

Although, in the first instance, drawing laden hand-carts so long a distance appeared to some difficult to be accomplished by the brethren, and especially by the sisters, yet the result has proved that it is fully as easy as and indeed easier than the method hitherto practised; and the women endured the trip quite as well, in comparison, as the men.

We have taken pains to collect facts upon this subject, as it was an experiment this season. The enterprise, having proved so eminently successful, will in future enter largely into all our emigrating operations.

Let the Saints take courage and avail themselves of the privilege of gathering to this place while the way is open before them, for the time will come when whoso would gather to Zion must needs flee with his budget upon his shoulder, or under his arm. Verily, they will come like flocks of doves to the windows, comparatively bare and naked, without food or clothing, escaping, as it were by the skin of their teeth, from the righteous indignation of an offending Deity poured out upon and passing over a wicked and adulterous generation.

While we, therefore, feel to congratulate ourselves and our brethren and sisters upon the happy issue of this experiment, we wish to direct our agents and others concerned to a few suggestions, drawn from this season's experience, by way of improvement.

In the first place, our emigration MUST start earlier in the season, and the necessary arrangements MUST be made and completed by the time they arrive on the western frontier, and no company must be permitted to leave the Missouri river later than the first day of July.

They must be provided with stronger hand-carts, and endeavour so to arrange as to have the burden upon each cart vary as little as possible during the journey. Than starting with such heavy loads and lightening them up so soon, it would be better to start with lighter loads and gradually increase them, as the brethren become more accustomed to the labour. This might be accomplished by sending out a few teams with provisions a few days in advance of the companies, to be taken on the handcarts as they come up, when the teams could return.

All emigrants should provide themselves with an extra supply of good shoes.

The hub or nave of the cart wheels should be eight inches long and seven inches through the centre. The boxes at the shoulder should be two-and-a-quarter inches, and the point boxes one-and-a-half inches in diameter.

If it should be considered best to have cast iron arms, they should be one-and-a-quarter inches thick at the shoulder and three-quarter inch at the point. The wooden axles should have iron or steel skeins, and the wheels should be bound with band iron one-quarter or three-eighths of an inch in thickness, with a dish of two inches, and track four feet apart. The timber must be of the best quality for toughness, and be well seasoned. In other respects they may be constructed as heretofore.

The very aged and infirm should be brought in wagons, in a separate train.

On account of their greater experience, let good, faithful Elders from this territory have charge of the companies. By observing these suggestions it is believed that, with one four or six-mule team to each two hundred persons, the emigration will be much facilitated at a still lessened expense.

We had the pleasure, at our October Conference, of meeting with our brethren Franklin D. Richards, Daniel Spencer, John Van Cott, George D. Grant, and others of the returned missionaries who had been long absent, from whom we learned the condition and situation of our immigrating companies still upon the plains.

We immediately took effective measures for sending them such aid and assistance as, owing to the lateness of the season, they should require to enable them to reach these valleys, before the snow of winter should block their way and render their progress impossible. This was the first business which engrossed the attention of the Conference, and has since absorbed almost the entire attention of many of our citizens. But little has been done except to forward teams and assistance to their relief, and yet they have not all arrived, though the remainder are expected in a few days.

To companies immigrating to this place we wish to say a word, by way of counsel. Move every day, even if it be but a few miles; that is far better than tarrying in one camping place. On the Sabbath, after meeting and resting during a portion of the day, it will generally be better to make a short march. Move on every day, if you wish to accomplish your journey in due season.

Absolute necessity may justify stopping a few days in a place, but that will but rarely occur, and should be avoided so far as possible. It is far better, for both the teams and people, to keep travelling, until the journey is fully accomplished.

The through emigration will be conducted by our travelling agents, under the general direction of the agents presiding in Liverpool, from which place it starts, but will receive the aid and co-operation of our agents presiding in New York and St. Louis. All other emigration will be received and disposed of by our agents in the United States.

It is desirable to make a few locations along the line of travel, and our agents at Florence and St. Louis have been instructed in relation thereto.

We trust, therefore, that the brethren and sisters will be sufficiently mindful of the general interests of the cause of Zion to readily respond to our wishes and the requirements of our agents, who are entrusted with these matters. Any material departure from the spirit of these instructions will be considered cause for disfellowship from the Church, or suspension from office.

Elder Orson Hyde is still presiding at Carson county, Utah, and Elders Amasa Lyman and Charles C. Rich at San Bernardino, California.

Elders Orson Pratt and Ezra T. Benson are presiding over the European mission, and publishing the Millennial Star, in Liverpool, England.

Elder John Taylor is presiding in the United States, and publishing the Mormon, in New York City. That publication commends itself to the favourable consideration and patronage of the Saints, being ably conducted and exercising a very salutary influence in correcting public opinion and defending our people and the principles of our holy religion from the calumny, abuse, and misrepresentations of the world.

Elder Erastus Snow is also in the United States, presiding at St. Louis, assisting in the emigration, &c.

Elder George A. Smith, being one of the delegates elected by the Convention and people to present our constitution and application for admission as a State into the Union, has gone to Washington city to perform that mission.

Elder Parley P. Pratt is also in the United States on a temporary visit, intending to return in the spring.

Elder Wilford Woodruff is in this city, engaged in the Historian's Office.

Elder Lorenzo Snow is presiding at Box Elder, in this Territory; and Elder Franklin D. Richards is at his home in this city, having recently returned from his mission to Europe.

Owing to the almost total loss of crops last season, loss of stock during the past winter, and heavy indebtedness occasioned by the last year' immigration, we were compelled to suspend operations upon the Public Works, until we could pay our debts and somewhat replenish our means. Since harvest we have partially resumed, but will not commence laying stone upon the Temple until next Spring, when we hope to prosecute that work with much vigour. We are collecting and preparing materials, and it is our wish and intention, in the meantime, to finish the canal for boating the rock for the Temple.

The wheat crop of this season was good, but corn was rather light and potatoes were almost an entire failure, though by a very prudent course, we trust there will be sufficient provisions to last until another harvest.

In persuance of an act passed at the last session of the Legislative Assembly, a Convention of Delegates met in this city on the 17th day of last March, and closed their labours on the 27th of the same month; having, in a session of ten days, formed a constitution, elected delegates, and adopted a memorial to Congress making application for admission into the Union as a sovereign State. Their proceedings, subsequently submitted to the people, were unanimously sustained.

We learn, by recent advices from our Delegates to Washington, that in consequence of the exceeding great opposition and prejudice against us as a people, they have not deemed it wisdom to present our application, although no fault has been found either with our constitution or our ability to sustain and administer a State government. The opposition seems to be arrayed against us rather on account of our religious faith and Church ordinances, as though they were a legitimate subject for Congress to canvass. What course may be taken is to us unknown, for our memorial has not yet been presented. When the excitements of the presidential election are past, it is hoped more favourable indications, fore-shadowing a candid and honest action upon its merits, may warrant its presentation. If this can be accomplished, and the claims of our application for admission into the Union as a State be fairly and honourably canvassed upon every point legitimate to the issue, we have not a doubt as to its successful termination.

We are more indifferent in regard to this subject in a religious than in a political sense, for, whether we are organized in a Territorial or State capacity, Government is bound to protect us in the rights of conscience, or over-ride plain Constitutional guarantees. And no intelligent person holds in very high estimation that union which is hourly endangered by the frenzied zeal of rampant, misguided, and fanatical demagogues, who trample that heaven-inspired instrument-the Constitution-into the dust, and regard neither their fathers' legacy nor their children's inheritance.

It is not our purpose in this Epistle to discuss political questions, but we cannot refrain from honestly and sincerely invoking the power of Him who sits enthroned in the heavens, to behold those who are distracting the Councils of our nation and hastening the destruction of this great Confederacy of sovereign States, and to thwart their wicked and nefarious purposes, to restrain their iniquity and cause others to arise in their places who will rule in righteousness and save our distracted but beloved country from its impending ruin.

At the April Conference some three hundred and fifty Elders were called to go on missions, all of whom promptly responded and departed to their various fields of labour. The Conference was blessed with rich, seasonable and interesting instructions, and a general good spirit seemed to prevade every bosom. It was numerously attended, and the brethren rejoiced in the unity of the most holy faith, in praise, thanksgiving and worship unto our Father and our God.

Before harvest much destitution was experienced by the masses of the people through the want of provisions, but the commendable liberality exercised by those who were fortunate enough to possess a supply, and the energy of the Bishops in enforcing a rigid economy and distribution to the destitute, prevented any great amount of suffering. We trust that the same generous disposition will always be manifested, in sharing even scanty supplies with the really destitute, so generally practised among this people during the past season. Still we prefer that all should practice that diligence, economy, and obedience so often urged upon them, that the blessings of heaven be not withheld, and that the elements and the labours of the husbandman may be blessed of the Lord, and the earth bring forth in its strength the grain and rich fruits thereof for the sustenance of man.

Notwithstanding these and many other good qualities which characterize this people, still we find too prevalent a disposition to murmur, find fault and complain at the dispensations of an All-wise Providence; a disposition of careless indifference to His counsels, and a dull lethargy which lulls the people into a false security; all of which gives Satan the advantage, darkens counsel, and leads many into a spirit of apostacy. We must remember that we live in a world of sin, wickedness and sorrow, and that the enemy of all righteousness is ever on the alert to destroy the Saints and lead them into temptation, darkness, sin and transgression.

Brethren, we exhort you to awake from this lethargy, to put on the armour of righteousness, of the Gospel of Jesus, and rebuke the adversary and the power of Satan and drive them far from you; to hold frequent converse and communion with your God, that the power of the Highest may rest down upon you, burn in your bosoms, in your families, in your neighbourhoods, cities, counties, and wherever there are Saints of the Most High God; that fearfulness may seize the hypocrite in Zion, and the fire of the Almighty consume the wicked and ungodly from the whole earth. Thus, while the indignation of the Lord is passing over the nations, and we also receive a portion of the chastisement, let us be wise and properly receive the correction, as coming from the hand of a kind Father who seeks the best interests of His children. Let us, hereafter, more fully appreciate our blessings, and now, when a plentiful harvest has again crowned our labours, be wise and practise economy in using and preserving our grain, that no waste nor unwise disposal thereof shall characterize our acts.

We are happy in being able to say that the Indians are peaceful in all our settlements. We have abundantly proven that a friendly interest for their welfare, and a pacific policy are much the most successful in preserving peace, and are gradually leading them to an understanding of the benefits derived from a civilized existence. To reflect their angry words and acts, and kill them for every trivial offence, as is the usual course pursued towards them by the whites, is condescending to their savage and barbarious customs, thus reciprocating their evil deeds. Such a course will never cause them to appreciate the blessings of civilized society, nor influence them to seek its benefits, but will, as all past experience proves, drive them to the opposite extreme, and in addition to their own, cause them to imbibe the vices, without the virtues of civilization. Therefore let us, in all our intercourse with them, exhibit a superior understanding, a larger comprehension of right, forbearance and honour. Be just, brethren, in your dealings with them; no matter what course they may pursue towards you, never retaliate a wrong, but always exhibit a firm determination to do right and seek to palliate their conduct and conciliate their feelings.

This course steadily pursued must, in due time, induce them to yield their savage barbarity, wild customs and vicious course of life, to the dictates of superior wisdom, and raise them to a higher degree in the scale of human existence. It has already had an effect in this direction, sufficient to encourage us in our efforts to bring them to a civilized, not to say a Christianized, life. They must be civilized; must learn to plough, sow, plant, harvest, build houses, and make fences; must learn mechanism as well as agriculture; their minds will then become sufficiently expanded to receive Gospel light, and the principles pertaining to their salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of our God.

Remember, brethren, that they are the remnants of Israel, and although they may apparently continue for a time to waste away and sink deeper and deeper into the depths of sin, misery, and woe, that unto them pertain the promises made to faithful Abraham, and they will be fulfilled. Be diligent, therefore, to do them good, and seek in all of your intercourse with them to bring them back to a knowledge of the Lord God of their fathers. Preserve yourselves from their savage ferocity; never condescend to their level, but always seek to elevate them to a higher, purer, and consequently, a more useful and intelligent existence.

In our intercourse with the world we find that we have more to do with the poor and those of low estate, and we might say of low worldly esteem, than those of any other class. This only affords another of those strong testimonies of the Lord Jesus in behalf of this being his people, his Church, his kingdom. Truly, "the poor ye have always with you," and it behoveth us to learn them how to live, how to combine their elements, that they also by their own exertions may draw support from Nature's great storehouse, which is ample for all. Yes, learn them to live, and place them, by your intelligence and charity, in a position to earn or in some laudable manner obtain a living by their own exertions. Calculate and contrive for them, and encourage them by leading on and exhibiting objects ahead.

We direct the attention of the Bishops and their assistants more particularly to this subject, as it devolves upon them to minister in temporal things. In Israel, as in the world, there are many rulers, but few with the feeling of fathers to the people. Be fathers to the people, ye Bishops, and lead them on, step by step, until they shall wax strong in the knowledge of things, both temporal and spiritual, pertaining to the kingdom of our God.

This is a peculiar people; they have already become very great, with all the elements for prosperity and rapid advancement. We have before us the examples of the nations of the world; we witness their prosperity, their pride and arrogance are made sensible of their power and their oppression, and know their foul corruption, profane pretensions, and hypocrisy; are acquainted with their systems of poor-houses, poor-farms, prisons, houses of correction, asylums and hospitals, and with their misery and degradation.

In the heterogeneous mass of a population hastily thrown together from every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, let us pursue that course which comprises the elements of a nation's prosperity, greatness, and glory, and spurn the course which engenders the above disastrous results. Avoiding the tracks which grinds the face of the poor to elevate the rich, let us bestow our charity not so much to feed the hungry and clothe the naked, as to cause them to feed and clothe themselves, and lead the people to practise virtue, to walk in the paths of honesty and truth, not so much by the fear of punishment, prisons, and penalties, as by implanting in their bosoms an abiding and ever increasing love for those pure principles which induce to honour, prosperity, salvation, and exaltation in this life, and which will clothe them with the riches of eternity in the life to come.

Build school-houses instead of jails, and make our religion effective in dispensing with the use of courts and jurors, prisoners and prisons; have no lawyers, because there is no litigation; no doctors, because there are no sick; no hospitals or asylums, because there are no invalids. The Saints of the Most High God should sustain themselves by their industry, economy, and sobriety; their health by their virtue, prudence cleanliness, faith and observances of the holy ordinances; and their morals by the love they bear to their God and their holy religion. They should be united that they may be powerful, and enjoy the blessings of peace and quietness at home and abroad.

Notwithstanding the efforts that have been made to manufacture iron and to make sugar from the beet, as yet no available results have been realized; yet we expect to continue our efforts until these objects are fully accomplished. It is believed that every obstacle in the way of making iron will be removed, when steam can be brought to supply the place of the water power which frequently fails in the time of need. We have an engine here now that is of sufficient size to furnish the requisite power; if the Company make use of this, through its aid we hope to be fully supplied with that useful and indispensable article, iron.

We have been delayed in making sugar mainly through the failure of the beet crop for the last two seasons, the grasshoppers destroying the seed last year to such a degree that sufficient seed could not be raised for this year's sowing. We trust, through the blessing of the Lord, that no failure of the kind will again thwart our wishes, and that we shall soon be able to furnish, from the beet, sugar sufficient for home consumption; we are sanguine that this can be done, and it is our purpose to continue our labours in this enterprise until it is fully accomplished.

Considerable quantities of leather are now manufactured in this Territory, though not quite sufficient to supply the wants of the people; the same may be said in relation to the manufacture of many other articles, such as hats, jeans, linsey, flannel, blankets, shawls, &c.; but we are mainly deficient in supplying ourselves with cotton and linen goods, and are quite negligent in raising cotton and flax.

The territory furnishes localities suitable for raising both those commodities in great abundance, and it is our earnest desire that those acquainted with their culture should make it their business, until our markets are fully supplied therewith. Also raise indigo, hemp, make ropes, cords and thread, and extract oil from the seed of the flax and cotton, and from the castor oil bean. And let our brethren who have the means, bring on cotton and woollen machinery, that we may be enabled to manufacture our own goods, as fast as we shall be able to supply ourselves with the raw material; also bring the best selections of horses, cattle and sheep.

Cultivate the thorn, osage, orange, and meskete for hedges, the cottonwood and locust for ornament, and, in suitable locations, for wood and timber, which they make rapidly, and the mulberry for silk. Be forward and cultivate all kinds of fruit and other seeds and grafts; plant trees, shrubbery, vines, &c., for ornament and use; cultivate the best varieties, including grapes, currants, gooseberries, strawberries, the various kinds of grasses, indigo, madder, and everything calculated to cheer and gladden the heart, delight the eye, and make pleasant and agreeable the homes of the Saints.

In the vicinity of Las Vegas a very extensive and rich vein of lead ore has been discovered, and is now being successfully worked by our enterprising citizens. Judging from the description, it is the most extensive vein of galena ever discovered, and specimens of the portions being mined for smelting yield a large per cent of lead. From this prolific source we shall soon be abundantly supplied with lead, and we wish our manufacturers of lead, and we wish our manufacturers of lead pipe, sheeting, white and red lead, and other useful articles made from that metal, to prepare themselves, as soon as practicable, to supply all such articles from our own resources.

Let those report themselves to us in person, or by letter, who are acquainted with working in lead, iron, coal, or boring therefor; who are acquainted with raising or manufacturing cotton, flax, and hemp, and with making oils, nails, steel, glass, &c., that we may classify our labour and bring forth from the native elements those things which contribute to the benefit of man.

We say unto all our mechanics, press onward in your labours; be not disheartened, but continue to supply the community with your wares and fabrics, with leather, boots, shoes, hats, caps, muffs, robes, soap, candles, glue, shoe pegs, saleratus, alum, saltpetre, pitch, tar, turpentine, oil, furniture, and labour-saving machinery. Let the farmers encourage the mechanics with their best patronage, and let each promote their own by seeking their brother's interest.

Fathers, learn your children to practise industry; teach your sons agriculture or some useful mechanical trade.

Mothers in Israel, you are also called upon to bring up your daughters to pursue some useful avocation for a sustenance, that when they shall becomes the wives of the Elders of Israel, who are frequently called upon missions, or to devote their time and attention to the things of the kingdom, they may be able to sustain themselves and their offspring. Learn them to sew, spin, and weave; to cultivate vegetables, as well as flowers; to make soap, as well as cakes and preserves; to spin, colour, weave, and knit, as well as work embroidery; to milk, make butter and cheese, and work in the kitchen, as well as in the parlour.-Thus will you and your daughters show yourselves approved, and prove helpmeets in very deed, not only in the domestic relations but in building up the kingdom.

Very creditable was the exhibition of home productions at the Annual State Fair, which came off on the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd of October, but we trust it will be far exceeded another year. I encourage a commendable rivalry, and excite an emulation for the general good.

Owing to the irregularities of the eastern mail, our agents and correspondents will duplicate their letters by way of San Pedro, California, each winter. And we caution one and all that, unless they personally attend to the mailing of their letters and documents, the duplicates, as was the case last season, though plainly directed, will not be forwarded as ordered. We gave our eastern agents the same instructions last year, and they complied therewith, so far as mailing duplicates with the proper directions, but originals and duplicates came in the same mail sacks in the spring, evidencing that some Post-masters are as indifferent in regard to the performance of their duties as some mail contractors are of theirs.

We cannot close this Epistle without congratulating ourselves, the Saints and the inhabitants of this wide spread Territory, with the general health of the people, the prosperity which attends our efforts, the quietness and peace everywhere predominant. No record of crime enlivens the court yards and jails; no convictions and sentences of court send, to desolate homes, anguish and despair; nor yet do unblushing offenders walk our streets unpunished, requiring the aid of a Vigilance Committee to rid our Territory of their unwelcome presence.

Fortune, or rather Providence, has indeed favoured us by spreading before the eager gaze of the world's cupidity the talismen of wealth, the hope of earthly riches, at a distance from these sequestered vales, and placed mighty barriers between-though we inherit the most uninviting portion of the earth, we feel happy that the temptations of gold and this world's power beckon their votaries and seekers to another bourne, from whence no such travellers find inducements to return, leaving us to enjoy in these peaceful retreats that quiet and freedom from the wicked and ungodly, which we have so earnestly sought.

When such characters find themselves in our midst, the barren prospects for any considerable degree of success, and the glitter of gold a little farther on, soon relieve us, our courts, and criminal calendar, of their hated and unwelcome presence. Never before were the Saints so favourably situated to cleanse the flock from the half-hearted and apostate spirits and the imps of Satan, who follow after us only to destroy. One or two seasons, and they begin to feel their way out, rightly judging that this is no place for them. Their corrupt desires, intentions, and acts, are soon made manifest and the inducements to remain with a righteous people are too few.

Therefore, while we gather, like the net which was cast into the sea, from every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, of every kind, we also sift them out like the winnowing of wheat upon the summer's threshing floor. We have sought peace and freedom from the power wicked and designing men, and measurably have found it. We have put forth our hand to gather out the honest in heart from among the nations, and are rapidly accomplishing our object. We ale attempting to build up cities, towns and villages unto the most High God, pure and holy in His sight, and surely expect, through His aid and blessing, to be successful.

When we look upon the advancing hosts of Israel, and consider their rapid improvement in faith, knowledge, good works, influence, power, and constantly accumulating numbers we feel to thank the lord for His goodness, even Him who hath brought forth salvation and caused light to spring up upon the earth. We feel grateful that we have been permitted to live in this day and generation, in which the Great Jehovah has seen proper to re-establish His authority upon the earth, and to re-confer the holy and eternal Priesthood upon the children of men.

We feel grateful that we have the privilege of witnessing the stately steppings of the Almighty among the nations, the goings forth of His word with power, the fulfillment of the words given by inspiration in ancient times, and the fulfillment of the words given by the living Oracles in our midst; that He has spoken from the heavens; that messengers, angels and legates from His throne have broken the silence that has intervened since the mission and dispensation of the only begotten Son of God, Jesus of Nazareth, and reopened a communication with His children upon this His earth, organized again His Church and Kingdom, and endowed it with all the authorities, ordinances, gifts, sacraments, blessings, privileges, power, and glory pertaining thereunto.

We rejoice that the words which have gone forth from the ancient Prophets, and from Jesus, Joseph, and the Apostles, do not return void, neither are like sounding brass or tinkling cymbals; for behold, the lord of hosts, through the faithfulness, energy, and perseverance of His servants, has faithfully warned and is warning the people. In the spirit of meekness and humility have they declared the Gospel unto them, wherefore are their skirts clean of their blood, and they are left without excuse before the lord, to reap the reward of their iniquity, to experience the calamities which are abroad in the earth, to feel the wrath, the withering, bitter anguish which the justice of a justly incensed and offended Creator will pour out upon them. They have set at naught the words of His servants, scoffed at and held them in derision; have trodden upon the young and tender plant which the lord Almighty has planted, and done despite unto the words of life and salvation which He has caused to be proclaimed in their ears. They have ignominiously slain His Prophets and wasted away His people, His faithful Saints, whose blood cries unto Him from the ground for vengeance.

Their long, hypocritical players, lip-service, pretended piety and idolatrous worship, have become an abomination before Him; wherefore will He proceed to bring upon them the judgments which have been foretold by His servants the Prophets, and great will be the desolation thereof. Their great and mighty nations, empires, and kingdoms, with all the pride, pomp and power thereof, will be broken and crumbled in pieces, and come to nought. Their cities will become a howling waste, a solitary place, wherein shall be found the wolf and the vulture, and no man shall be found an inhabitant therein. Yea, verily, He will empty the earth of the wicked, and those who work abominations in His sight, so shall the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of our Lord and His Christ, so shall the Lord prepare the way for His coming, and reign upon the earth.

Let the Church, therefore, prepare as a bride to receive her bridegroom; let the Saints have on their wedding garments, and have their lamps well supplied with oil, trimmed and burning; let all things be made ready for the reception of our Saviour and Redeemer, even our lord the Christ. Let all the Saints throughout the world live their religion, that they may be worthy to enjoy his presence, and have converse with the angels of our God; let them gird up their loins and step forth in the power and might of Elijah's God to do battle in this great cause, and armed with High Heaven's panoply, even the armour of salvation and the helmet of righteousness, go forth conquering and to conquer, until the gospel shall be sounded to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, and the pure in heart, the meek of the earth, the Israel of our God, be gathered out from the wicked nations and brought to inherit and worship under their own vines and fig trees, and learn of Him whose glory will rest upon His Temple as a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL. G. S. L. City, December 10, 1856.
