James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To President Orson Hyde and Bishops and Saints, April 28, 1866

1866-April 28-Brigham Young's Dixie of the Desert, H. Lorenzo Reid, c1964, pp. 160-161.

On April 28, 1865, Brigham Young, knowing of the dangers to Mormon settlements in central and southern Utah from Indian attacks, wrote letters to President Orson Hyde and the Bishops and Saints in Sanpete, Sevier, Piute, Wasatch and Summit Counties; and to President Erastus Snow and the Saints in Iron, Kane and Washington Counties. The two letters are on file in the Church Historian's Office in Salt Lake City. The document reproduced below is a shortened or edited version of one of the letters.

TO PRESIDENT ORSON HYDE and the Bishops and Saints in Sanpete, Sevier, and Piute, Wasatch and Summit Cos., and President E. Snow and the Saints in Iron, Kane and Washington Counties.

Dear Brethren:

The recent occurrences in your counties, and the threatened repetition of these scenes, prompt me to write this epistle.

To save the lives and the property of the people of your counties from the marauding and blood thirsty bands which surround you, there must be thorough and energetic measures of protection taken immediately.

Many of your settlements, at the present time, are too weak to successfully resist attack, or to prevent their stock being driven off by bands of Indians, however contemptible, who may choose to make a descent upon them. These small settlements should be abandoned and the people who have formed them should, without loss of time, repair to places that can be easily defended, and that possesses the necessary advantages to sustain a heavy population. There should be 150 to 500 good and efficient men in every settlement. * * * At all points where the settlements are maintained, good and substantial Forts, with high walls and strong gates should be erected and the people should move into them.

In sending your stock on to the range, they should be placed in charge of armed herdsmen, and there should be enough of them to ensure safety, and the safety of the herd.

When it may be necessary for wood, lumber, or poles to be hauled, one or two persons should not venture into the canyons; but a company should be formed who, well armed themselves, should be accompanied by an armed escort. Before they enter any place where there is the least danger of attack, cautious men, who can creep as close to the ground as an Indian, should proceed them and reconnoiter, and while the men are at work procuring their load, there should be other vigilant men stationed in commanding positions to maintain guard, and to give warning if danger should approach.

These precautions should be observed strictly in the cultivation of your fields, and upon every occasion when you may have to perform any labors that requires you to leave your Forts.

When settlements are abandoned measures should be taken to bury the house-logs and fence poles, to prevent their destruction by Indians. Holes can be dug sufficiently deep in which to put the logs and poles; and as they are buried, cover them with dirt, so that if the torch be applied they will not burn.

The careless manner in which men have traveled from place to place, frequently in parties of one, two or three, and at times too, when it was well known that the Indians were hostile, should be stopped, and nobody should be permitted to venture out from home and from the protection of the Forts unless accompanied by a sufficient number of men to make traveling safe.
