James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To the Presidents, Bishops and Saints, January 9, 1867

1867-January 9-DN 16:12 (January 9, 1867)

The Message is a call for capital to establish domestic manufacturing in the Great Basin.

TO THE PRESIDENTS, Bishops and Saints Generally.

BRETHREN:-We wish the Capitalists in your community to use their means for purchasing Machinery-for manufacturing purposes-which will best meet the growing wants and necessities of the people of this Territory; and if the Saints residing in the settlements over which you preside want dry goods and groceries, let them select brethren in whom they have confidence, and place the means in their hands and send them to purchase goods in the eastern States.

If machinery for working up the wool grown in this Territory were more plentiful, the people would manifest a much greater interest in taking care of their sheep than they do at present, for when it costs the people more to grow their wool and manufacture it than it does to buy cloth, we cannot expect them to employ much of their time and means in raising sheep; but let those brethren who are able, bring forward the wool carders, spinners and power-looms, and sheep raisers will multiply, and the great profits which will be realized on the manufacturing of the raw material may be retained by those whose interest it is to build up the kingdom; whereas, if the people do not improve the present opportunity and obey this counsel, aliens to the government of God will possess themselves of that which the Almighty intended his Saints to enjoy.

Cease paying the exhorbiant prices demanded by disinterested persons and our enemies for all imported articles, and hundreds of thousands of dollars may be saved annually by the Saints, and the revenue which has heretofore enriched those who have no interests with us, may be devoted to the building up of the kingdom of God which we, as Saints of the Most High, have covenanted before heaven to do all in our power to accomplish, and woe unto this people if they violate those covenants. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, DANIEL H. WELLS.
