James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To the Presiding Elders and Saints, April 20, 1867

1867-April 20-Original document in the Church Historians Office, Salt Lake City.

Establishment of Telegraph lines will bring the Saints into immediate communication with the First Presidency.

TO THE PRESIDING ELDERS AND SAINTS of the places where there are, or where they wish to have, telegraph stations and operators:

DEAR BRETHREN:-

The Telegraph line has not been established for the purpose of speculation, but to meet the wants of the people. On reflection, it must occur to you,, that, in order to make it a success, the people must assist in bearing the financial burdens of the line. To expect us to meet the continued demands of all the operators and furnish all the materials to keep the line running, would be asking entirely too much. The line may not support itself for some time to come. Every Saint will readily admit, that, for the people, remote and near by, to be in immediate communication with the Presidency of the Church, is a blessing and privilege beyond the consideration of dollars and cents. Suppose we were to assume the rents of all the offices, the support and pay of the operators, and to furnish the materials needed in every office; the burden would be too heavy; and it does seem that every public-spirited man will view the matter in the same light. After a while, when the line pays, the liabilities will be assumed by the President and Directors; but until then, we should all bear a part, and be thankful for being in so close communication with the sources of important counsel and information; let the emergency be great or small.

Such places as Cove Creek, where there is no settlement, we will have to support the station, and build, for the safety of the operator, a stone Fort and also place therein other persons to sustain the place against Indian attacks, and that the line may be preserved intact. Such small place as Kanara should be helped in sustaining the operator, by Harmony and places immediately benefitted by the close proximity of the office. It is desirable that the operators, one and all, should regard themselves as missionaries,-on important missions-which, if they honorably fill, will reflect to their present and future credit, as other missions do. The people, by a little reflection, will no doubt comprehend the situation and readily help by sustaining the operators until such time as the line will sustain itself. Should there be a settlement where the people are unwilling to support the operator, you will please let us know, and we will remove the office to a place where it will be appreciated. Respectfully, your Brother in the Gospel, BRIGHAM YOUNG.
