James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Letter to Bishop Hunter, March 10, 1868

1868-March 10-Original document in Church Historians Office, Salt Lake City.

Plans are outlined for the "Church Train" for 1868 in this Message. For an excellent discussion of the "Church Train" method of bringing Saints across the Plains see Chapter 20 of Gustive Larson's Prelude to the Kingdom pp. 216-227.

LETTER TO BISHOP HUNTER.

DEAR BROTHER:

In consideration of the great number who anticipate immigrating to this Territory from Europe and the United States during the ensuing season, it is deemed necessary to send 500 teams to the terminus of the U. P. R. R., each team to consist of one wagon and four yoke of oxen, or their equivalent in strength in either mules or horses. They should start from this city about the 15th of June.

It is well known that the Union Pacific Railroad is now prepared to convey passengers and freight upwards of five hundred miles west of Omaha, on the Missouri River. With these great facilities for transportation, there are some inconveniences which must be provided for; viz: A depot should be formed at a spot deemed most suitable near the terminus of the Railroad, where provisions may be stored, and which will afford good camping facilities for our immigrants. We do not anticipate purchasing provisions and other supplies for the people in the Eastern market, but purpose sending means of subsistence with the teams which will meet them at the terminus of the U. P. R. R., hence it will be necessary for the inhabitants of the Territory to make donations of the bounties with which they have been so liberally provided.

We hope not less than 5,000 Adults will cross the Plains this season, en route for this Territory. To feed this vast number of people will require large quantities of Flour and Beef, which may be apportioned among the trains, and be easily driven to the outfitting point. We would recommend that dried fruit, bacon, cheese, vinegar, beans, pickles, peas and dried corn be gathered up and sent with our teams, which articles will prove very beneficial to the people, and no doubt cause a decided improvement in their health and comfort.

The people of this Territory have an abundance of these articles, and if their attention be called to the fact that they will prove conducive to the health of the immigrant, they will take pleasure in supplying the wants of their brethren who are journeying hitherward.

Immediate steps should be taken to provide the above supplies and we shall expect you and your counsel to superintend these matters in accordance with former instructions on similar occasions. BRIGHAM YOUNG, HEBER C. KIMBALL, DANIEL H. WELLS.
