James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

By-Laws of the United Order, August 20, 1874

BY-LAWS OF THE UNITED ORDER

SECTION I.

The fiscal or business year of this Company shall commence on the first day of in each year, and shall terminate on the day of

SECTION II.

All meetings of the stockholders of this Company, whether regular or special, shall be held in the Company's office in, unless some other place be designated by the Directors; Notice of which, stating the time, place and object thereof, shall be given by the Secretary of the Company, by publishing the same for at least ten days prior to such meeting.

SECTION III.

The stockholders owning not less than one-third of the capital stock, may at any time call meetings, notice of which shall be given as prescribed in the foregoing section. If at any such meeting so called a majority of the stock is not represented, either in person or by written proxy, such meeting shall be adjourned from day to day, not exceeding three days, without transacting any business; and if within said three days, stockholders having at least a majority of the stock do not attend, and participate in such meeting, then the same shall be dissolved.

SECTION IV.

A regular meeting of the Board of Directors shall be held at o'clock on the in each month, at such place as the Directors shall from time to time prescribe, which may be continued or adjourned at the discretion of the Board, a majority of whom shall be a quorum to do business.

SECTION V.

The President or any three Directors may at any time call special meetings of the Board, due notice of which shall be given, of time and place, to the Directors personally, or by publishing the same for at least three days prior to the holding thereof.

SECTION VI.

It shall be the duty of the President to sign all deeds, bonds, notes, and other writings obligatory, to which the Company is a party, when such writings shall have been approved by the Board or the Executive Committee. He shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Directors and of the Stockholders, and in cases of a tie, shall have the casting vote. In the absence of the President, or when, for any cause, he is unable to discharge his duties in person, one of the Vice-Presidents shall exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties of the President; the Vice-Presidents shall have precedence in the order in which they are respectively designated in the order of their election. When the President and both the Vice-Presidents are absent from any meeting of the Board or the Stockholders, a President pro tem. shall be elected by and from among the members thereof.

SECTION VII.

The Secretary shall, unless by the Board otherwise ordered, make out a statement at the end of each year, showing the financial condition of the Company and lay the same before the Board at their next regular meeting. He shall have a general supervision of the accounts of the Company, and shall have sole custody of the corporate seal, and affix the same to all instruments required to be sealed, and perform such other duties as shall be required of him, by the Board of Directors.

SECTION VIII.

It shall be the duty of the Treasurer of this Corporation to receive and safely keep all moneys, valuables, evidences of value, and other property deposited or entrusted with him by the Board, and to disburse the same on warrants issued by the Secretary, countersigned by the President. He shall preserve the vouchers in support of all disbursements by him made and shall keep accurate and complete accounts of all money or other property received and paid out, and of all transactions appropriately belonging to the duties of his office, in books prepared for that purpose; which shall at all times be open to the inspection of any member of the Board. He shall render, at the end of each fiscal year, or often if required by the Directors, a statement of the receipts and disbursements during the preceding year, and present the same to the Board at its next general meeting thereafter, and shall do and perform such other duties as shall be required of him by the Board of Directors.

SECTION IX.

The Board of Directors shall elect from their number an executive committee of three, whose duty it shall be to attend to the business of the Company, subject always to the control and direction of the Board. They shall appoint, either from their own number or from among the stockholders, two or more appraisers, whose duty it shall be to assess the value of all property to be bought by or turned into the Corporation, provided, in case of dissatisfaction with such appraisal, an appeal may be had to the Board of Directors, or other appraisers may be added for that case.

SECTION X.

The Secretary of the Company shall keep, in a book provided for that purpose, a correct copy of the proceedings of each meeting of the stockholders, as well as of the Board of Directors. Such record shall show the name of each Director present at such meeting of the Board and the name of any Director voting against any proposition, whenever such Director shall desire the same placed upon record. He shall also keep a book, labelled "Book of Stockholders," containing the names of all persons alphabetically arranged, who are or shall be stockholders in this Company, showing their place of residence if known, the number of shares of stock held by them respectively, the time when they became owners of such shares, as also the time when they may have ceased to be stockholders, which books, during the office hours of this Company, shall be open for the inspection of stockholders.

SECTION XI.

A certificate of stock shall be issued for fully paid up shares, and shall be signed by the President, and countersigned by the Secretary, and shall express upon its face its number and date of issuance, the number of shares for which and the name of the person to whom it is issued. No transfer of stock shall be made when a certificate thereof has been is sued, until such certificate is properly endorsed and returned to the Company. In case of the loss or destruction of a certificate of stock a duplicate thereof may be issued, provided a sufficient indemnity bond against loss or damage to the Company, by reason of the finding such lost certificate, be first approved by and filed with the Secretary.

SECTION XII.

This Company will not be the recipient of a trusteeship for personal property, unless it has an active duty to perform in connection therewith, with full right, power and authority to exercise and carry out such trust, as in its judgment, it may deem for the best use and benefit of the beneficiary thereof; nor will it be a mere passive trustee for real property, except the grantor thereof make provision for just compensation for all labor and duties by it performed in carrying out the object and design of such trust; and it is distinctly understood and agreed by this Company and the party or parties making such deeds, his or their heirs or assigns, and this clause in effect shall be incorporated into every deed of trust to this company, that all expenses and costs incurred in protecting the legal title thereto, or other labor connected therewith, including the labor of making and executing the deeds of the same, shall be paid by the beneficiary of the trust; and that for such expenses, this Company shall have a lien on such property for the security thereof.

SECTION XIII.

When this Company is called upon or required to exercise an active power, connected with the duty of trusteeship, and this provision shall be in substance incorporated into every such deed of trust, it shall not be liable, accountable, or in any way responsible for the rents, issues, profits or losses of such property so long as it allows the beneficiary of such trust to have and hold control over the same; but in consideration of its agreement to have and exercise such trusteeship, it shall have the right, power and authority to, at any time, take possession of such property, and out of the rents, issues, and profits thereof, apply the same, in its discretion, to the maintenance of the beneficiary of such trust, his heirs or assigns; but in case the beneficiary of such trust shall wish to sell his interest in connection with, or separate from the legal title, he shall first get the written consent of this Company; and in case he fails to do so, and sells or attempts to sell his interest in such property, or in case of his insolvency or legal judgments against him or them, then said Company shall have the right and power, at its option, to sell and dispose of such property on such terms, and in such manner as it may deem expedient, and out of the proceeds of such sale, apply the means arising therefrom, to the maintenance and support of the beneficiary of said trust, his heirs or assigns, or it may, in its discretion, pay the whole of said proceeds to said beneficiary, in which event its liability ceases. And it is distinctly understood that the said trustee shall, in all trust property, have the option to purchase the same at the lowest market value, whenever the beneficiary thereof is desirous of selling his interest therein.

SECTION XIV.

This Company will not be the recipient of any trusteeship, unless the property so to be conveyed is free from all incumbrances; nor will it accept the trusteeship unless the beneficiary of such trust or the grantor will sign and endorse these by-laws.

SECTION XV.

These by-laws may be amended, altered, or repealed at any general meeting of the Board, by a two-thirds vote thereof.
