James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Instructions to Members of the United Order, August 20, 1874

INSTRUCTIONS FOR MEMBERS OF THE UNITED ORDER

For numerous reasons, obvious to the reflecting, it has been deemed best to organize the various Branches of the United Order in accordance with the laws of our Territory, as they afford us ample scope for carrying out plans for our more prosperous temporal welfare in learning and practising the best methods for living, letting live, and helping to live, until we can become self-sustaining, and all enjoy the necessaries and comforts of life; also that we may be better able to sustain our operations against aggressions, whether internal or external.

The brethren were instructed that the first "articles" were only for the time being, and that we should proceed under them until we had time to prepare others in accordance with our laws. They are now prepared as briefly and plainly as possible, with a hope that they will be satisfactory, as we feel assured they will be, when understood.

In our farming operations, cleanly and thorough tillage and the best varieties of seeds are specially recommended for producing the most satisfactory results.

The use of oxen on farms and in most of our team work is advised, because we deem it the most economical.

Plowing, planting, sowing, irrigating, haying and harvesting can be most profitably conducted under as extensive a combination as each locality will permit, and under the direction of the most competent persons. The most improved implements of husbandry should be provided as speedily and extensively as possible; and whenever combining our field operations leaves a surplus of mowers, reapers, thrashers, wagons, plows, &c., &c., they should be properly taken care of until they are needed or can be disposed of.

Good and sufficient storehouses should be prepared for grain, and sufficient hay properly stacked and otherwise secured and shelters made for humanely caring for stock during winter, so that none be lost.

When surplus fain or other products are to be disposed of, let it be done by or through committees appointed for that purpose, which committees will correspond with and be advised by the committee or secretary of the Central Branch of the United Order in Salt Lake City, so that sales may not conflict in different Branches of the Order. The proceeds of such sales should be deposited with the treasurer of the Association to which they belong, and be safely kept by him until otherwise directed by the Board.

When surplus potatoes cannot be profitably fed to stock or marketed, they should be made into starch.

The best varieties of white corn should be raised in suitable localities, and mills constructed for making it into samp.

Mustard, broom, corn, hops and sorghum should be raised in sufficient quantities to supply home demand.

Inasmuch as some continue the use of tobacco, and as it is good for sick cattle, and when planted in orchards is said to be a preventive against the codling moth, it is recommended that enough be raised to at least supply our own wants.

All fruits should be carefully gathered at maturity, and each cared for in the method best suited to its kind, that all may be most healthful in their use, the surplus be in the best possible condition for market, and no inferior or badly conditioned fruits offered for sale, as such fruits are injurious to health, damage the repute of our excellent varieties, and consequently militate against the extensive and rapidly increasing interests of fruit raisers.

When hay and straw are stacked the work should be well done, and the stacks, so far as practicable, either thatched or covered with cheap movable roofs; and all straw and chaff should be carefully saved.

Our situation renders it advisable, so far as we may be able, to keep on hand a supply of bread-stuff sufficient for from three to seven years.

As rapidly as possible the finest varieties of grapes for raisins should be added to those already in our southern settlements, and all our markets supplied with the best of raisins. So far as wine and brandy are produced, pains should be taken that they be of the purest and best qualities, and vessels and storage cellars should be prepared for keeping the wines in the best condition.

In raising stock it is well to keep in mind that those most adapted to the locations and purposes of the producers afford the most satisfaction and profit; and that inferior varieties, particularly scrub horses, are to be got rid of as fast as practicable, in favor of better breeds.

It is also well to keep in mind that both humanity and profit require that all stock be properly cared for in winter as well as summer, that such as cannot be so cared for be disposed of, and that young and surplus stock be summered, as fully and invariably as possible, on ranges inaccessible in winter. Among the different breeds of cattle, the Devons are reputed to make the best work oxen, and are also said to make good milch cows and beef cattle.

To attain a self sustaining position, to the fullest extent our resources and climate will permit, it is requisite that more attention be paid to manufacturing as extensively and variedly as our wants may require. Much cloth of excellent quality is now made in our Territory, but the quantity comes short of supplying the people, though wool continues to be sent abroad. Such sale is obviously very unwise, for it curtails an essential branch of manufacture in the extent it could and would aid trade and agriculture, sustaining outside labor to the detriment of our own. So also in leather; our hides are exported, while we import leather and the articles manufactured from it, throwing idle or into other employment our tanners and many of our shoemakers. So far as tannic acid should fail to be supplied from our red pine bark and oak and sumac shrubs, it would be cheaper to import the deficiency in a concentrated form than to sell our hides to distant markets and import leather. In short, our financial comfort and prosperity require that we give our agricultural and trading interests the powerful aid of manufactures as rapidly and fully as possible, until we can produce a full home supply of all required classes of fabrics made from wool and leather, all our furniture, farming machines and implements, and wood work and wooden ware of every description, hats, caps, bonnets, brooms, buttons, molasses, and everything within our capability, from time to time, for advantageously producing all we can consistently desire.

So far as we may lack timber suitable for our purposes, it is much wiser to import such timber than the manufactured articles; and in the meantime, as fast and extensively as possible, take steps for raising the black walnut, ash and other valuable timber trees adapted to our several localities.

Due attention should be given to saving all rags suitable for making paper, that we may be able to print our school and all other books on home-made paper.

One important key to our success is dispensing with all vain and other unwise expenditures, restricting our expenses within our means, and using those means in the most judicious manner.

In wet weather and where minerals keep the soil damp and cold, wooden-bottomed shoes, iron shod or leather soled for durability, are recommended both for health and economy. And while leather continues scarce, it is advisable to use strong cloth, so far as practicable, for uppers for leather-soled shoes, especially for women and children and the light wear of men.

Wisdom dictates that we do not receive into the Order property that we can not properly care for.

It behooves all to all times cultivate and practise frankness and fairness in all our business conduct and conversation, that the fullest confidence may exist that each is diligently laboring to promote the welfare of all, and by so wise a course the more speedily attain the beneficial results we have in view. Let every member so live as to all times enjoy the Spirit of the Lord for guidance in all labors and duties.
