James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Rules that should be observed by Members of the United Order, August 20, 1874

RULES THAT SHOULD BE OBSERVED BY MEMBERS OF THE UNITED ORDER.

RULE 1st.-We will not take the name of the Deity in vain, nor speak lightly of His character or of sacred things.

RULE 2nd.-We will pray with our families morning and evening, and also attend to secret prayer.

RULE 3rd.-We will observe and keep the Word of Wisdom according to the Spirit and meaning thereof.

RULE 4th.-We will treat our families with due kindness and affection, and set before them an example worthy of imitation; in our families and intercourse with all persons, we will refrain from being contentious or quarrelsome, and we will cease to speak evil of each other and will cultivate a spirit of charity towards all. We consider it our duty to keep from acting selfishly or from covetous motives, and will seek the interest of each other and the salvation of all mankind.

RULE 5th.-We will observe personal cleanliness, and preserve ourselves in all chastity by refraining from adultery, whoredom and lust. We will also discountenance and refrain from all vulgar and obscene language or conduct.

RULE 6th.-We will observe the Sabbath day to keep it holy in accordance with the revelations.

RULE 7th.-That which is not committed to our care we will not appropriate to our own use.

RULE 8th.-That which we borrow we will return according to promise, and that which we find we will not appropriate to our own use but seek to return to its proper owner.

RULE 9th.-We will as soon as possible cancel all individual indebtedness contracted prior to our uniting with the Order, and when once fully identified with said Order will contract no debts contrary to the wishes of the Board of Directors.

RULE 10th.-We will patronize our brethren who are in the Order.

RULE 11th.-In our apparel and deportment we will not pattern after nor encourage foolish and extravagant fashions, and cease to import or buy from abroad any article which can be reasonably dispensed with, or which can be produced by combination of home labor. We will foster and encourage the producing and manufacturing of all articles needful for our consumption as fast as our circumstances will permit.

RULE 12th.-We will be simple in our dress and manner of living, using proper economy and prudence in the management of all entrusted to our care.

RULE 13th.-We will combine our labor for mutual benefit, sustain with our faith, prayers and works, those whom we have elected to take the management of the different departments of the Order and be subject to them in their official capacity, refraining from a spirit of fault-finding.

RULE 14th.-We will honestly and diligently labor, and devote ourselves and all we have to the Order and the building up of the kingdom of God.
