James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Editor, Woman's Exponent, September 8, 1875

1875-September 8-Woman's Exponent, Sept. 15, 1875

According to both Jenson (Encyclopedic History, p. 958) and Edward W. Tullidge (Women of Mormondom, 1877, p. 520) the Woman's Exponent was established June 1, 1872. Tullidge says that Eliza R. Snow was the president of the publishing company and that "Mrs. Emmeline B. Wells is the practical editor." According to Jenson Louisa L. Greene (Richards) was editor from 1872 to 1876, and that Emmeline B. Wells succeeded her as editor in August, 1877. This reprimand of President Brigham Young was directed seemingly at both the author of the article who was also the president of the publishing company and at the editor, Mrs. Richards, for re-publishing one of the speculative doctrinal writings of Eliza R. Snow. Perhaps here we have a parallel case to that of Orson Pratt a decade earlier. Eliza R. Snow accepted the reprimand as had Orson Pratt.

EDITOR, WOMAN'S EXPONENT:

SALT LAKE CITY, 8th Sept., 1875. EDITOR WOMAN'S EXPONENT:

In your issue of Sept. first, I notice an article written by Miss E. R. Snow, entitled "Mortal and Immortal Elements of the Human Body," republished from No. 13, Vol. 2, of your Journal. The cause assigned for its reproduction in your paper is, that "Saints and strangers were so interested" in its statements, and it had been so often called for that republication was decided upon.

I sincerely regret that this demand should have arisen. I had hoped that after its first publication it would have slept and never been awakened; but the fact of its having been so repeatedly called for, places me under obligations to correct the minds of the Latter-day Saints in relation to the doctrine contained therein.

On some future occasion when I have time I may possibly take up the article in detail, but at present shall simply say, as the prophet Joseph Smith once told an Elder who asked his opinion of a so-called revelation he had written,-"It has just one fault and that one fault is, it is not true." BRIGHAM YOUNG, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
