James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To the Bishops and Members, October 25, 1876

1876-October 25-Copy of original document in Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City

With the St. George Temple nearing completion the First Presidency here call for the closing of the Endowment House in Salt Lake City and the building of additional Temples in Salt Lake City, Logan and Manti. For additional background and History of these four Temples in Utah see: N. B. Lundwall, Temples of the Most High, 1965.

TO THE BISHOPS AND MEMBERS of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Residing in the various Settlements throughout these Mountains:

BELOVED BRETHREN AND SISTERS:

The Temple at St. George, Washington County, Utah Territory, rapidly approaches completion. Already some portions of it are in a condition to be used, and in a few weeks we expect to be administering ordinances therein for the living and the dead. The General Conference of the Church was adjourned on the 8th instant to hold its next session at 10 A.M. on the 6th of April in the Temple at St. George. We hope the entire building will be completed by that time and that we shall be able to dedicate it to the Lord, our God. In the days of our poverty, and while we had no Temple in which to administer ordinances for the dead and to give endowments and to perform sealings and other ordinances for the living, the Lord permitted us to erect an Endowment House in this city. This we have used for many years, and many ordinances have been administered therein; but there are other important ordinances which have not been, and cannot be, administered, except in a Temple built and dedicated to the Most High for that purpose. Such a Temple we now have so far completed at St. George that we can commence attending to these ordinances there. The mind of the Spirit to us has been that we should, for the present at least, discontinue in the Endowment House in this city the work of baptisms for the dead, of giving endowments and of sealing, and that, hereafter, these ordinances should be performed in the Temple, or the Temples that shall be built. This announcement we have made to the Saints. They have been profoundly moved thereat. They are aroused to action. They now begin to appreciate how precious are the opportunities they have had. Never before has there been such an anxiety displayed for the privileges of the Endowment House. The prospect of it being closed causes the people to think of their baptisms, endowments and sealings. They now perceive, as probably they never did before, how convenient it would be to have a Temple completed in this part of the Territory. This would save them the lengthy journey to and from St. George. The want of Temples at other convenient points to which the Saints can repair to receive their ordinances will now be felt at other places besides Salt Lake City. Especially will this be the case where persons wish to marry. The Lord has taught us how important it is that our marriages should be solemnized according to the laws He has given, in holy places, where wives can be joined to husbands for time and all eternity. What Latter-day Saint can be satisfied with any marriage or authority less than this? Which of them, if he understands the laws of God, can feel indifferent as to whether his wife shall be his for eternity or for time only; or whether his children shall be born in the covenant and be legal heirs to the priesthood or have to become such by adoption? It is for these and other ordinances that we are commanded of the Lord to build Temples. We are now abundantly able to build them, and in them should the ordinances be administered which have been acceptable only in the days of our poverty in other places. At an holy altar in the Temple of the Lord can ordinances be administered to those who are deemed worthy which they cannot receive elsewhere.

We feel led to say to the Latter-day Saints throughout these mountains: Let us arise and build Temples unto our God at such places as He shall designate, into which we and our children can enter and receive those blessings that He has in store for us. Let the Bishops of the settlements in Washington, Kane, Iron, Pi-ute, Beaver, Millard, Sevier, Sanpete and Juab Counties call the people of their Wards together and ascertain from them how much each one is willing to subscribe in labor and means, monthly, quarterly, or annually, towards the erection of a Temple at Manti, Sanpete County. Let the Bishops of the Wards in Utah, Wasatch, Summit, Salt Lake, Tooele, Davis, Morgan, and Weber Counties call the people of their Wards together and ascertain from them how much each one will donate in labor and means, monthly, quarterly, or annually, towards the completion of the Temple in this city. Let the Bishops of the various Wards in Box Elder, Cache and Rich Counties in Utah Territory, and in the Counties of Bear Lake and Oneida in Idaho Territory, call public meetings and learn from the people what each one is willing to do, monthly, quarterly or annually, towards the erection of a Temple at Logan, Cache County And at these meetings the amount each person shall subscribe should be placed opposite his or her name, so that what can be depended upon may be known in writing. Each Bishop can then make a statement over his own signature to the President's Office of the amount of labor and means that his Ward will furnish in the aggregate and that he will be responsible for.

In proposing the erection of new Temples, it is not expected that the work now being done upon the Temple in this city by individuals and by the various quorums shall cease. The labor upon the Temple here will continue to be pushed forward by those now engaged in it until sites are selected for, and work shall be commenced by the different quorums upon, other Temples. These Temples which we now propose to build will not be costly structures. They will be for Endowment purposes, and can be easily and quickly erected by the people from whom the labor is required. You will perceive, by the anxiety of the Saints to avail themselves of the privilege of the Endowment House in this city, and the manner in which they are now crowding here, how necessary and desirable it is that these buildings should be speedily completed, so that the facilities for sealing and the administration of other ordinances should be placed within the reach of all who are worthy of them without their being compelled to travel to and from St. George to the Temple there. When the Saints were required to build the Temple at Kirtland, Ohio, they were few in number and par in means; at Nauvoo, also, when the Temple was erected there the Saints were not numerous, and their circumstances, as contrasted with ours in these valleys, were those of great poverty. But in rearing those Temples the people were greatly blessed. The Lord increased their substance, provided ways of deliverance from their enemies, and bestowed gifts and knowledge upon them which are beyond all earthly price. So it will be now, if we will arise in the majesty and strength of our calling as the people of God, and build these Temples with willing hearts and liberal hands, the Lord will pour out His blessings upon us to an extent we have never heretofore known. Our children will multiply and increase in faith, and though Satan may rage, as he and his servants always do when the work of building Temples is being urged forward, yet we will prosper and grow stronger and stronger until the redemption of Zion shall be fully accomplished. Peace be with you, and the Lord bless you. BRIGHAM YOUNG, JOHN W. YOUNG, DANIEL H. WELLS,

First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

JOHN TAYLOR, WILFORD WOODRUFF, ORSON PRATT, Sen., F. D. RICHARDS, GEORGE Q. CANNON, BRIGHAM YOUNG, Jun., JOSEPH F. SMITH, Of the Twelve Apostles.

Salt Lake City, Utah Territory, 25th October, 1876.
