James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Letter to Elder John Morgan, June 27, 1877

1877-June 28-The Life and Ministry of John Morgan, by Arthur Richardson, pp. 130-131.

This letter of Brigham Young to John Morgan, an L.D.S. missionary in the State of Georgia is most interesting for the light it throws on the plans for expansion of the Mormon colonization. John Morgan had evidently written directly to Lot Smith on the Little Colorado in Arizona about the possibility of the Georgia Saints joining that colony. Brigham Young learned of this request through a third party and wrote to John Morgan instructing him as to the inadvisability of the Arizona settlement and suggested that Church colonization now should perhaps expand into New Mexico or western Texas.

LETTER TO ELDER JOHN MORGAN

Salt Lake City, U. T. June 28, 1877. Elder John Morgan Dirt Town, Georgia Dear Brother:

Through the "Deseret News" and from other sources we occasionally hear of your labors and ministrations amongst the people of Georgia, and are happy to learn that a measurable degree of success has attended your efforts to spread the truths of the everlasting Gospel in that State. A day or two ago we received a letter from Elder Lot Smith, in which he says:

"I have received through bro. L. H. Hatch a letter from Elder John Morgan, now laboring in the State of Georgia. He writes that a company of Saints will emigrate by rail from that section this fall as far as the terminus of the railroad (Texas Pacific), in the State of Texas. From that point to this part of the country they intend to travel with wagons, and have requested us to send to the terminus from 18 to 20 wagons and from 10 to 15 yoke of oxen to help them out here." The Saints located in the new settlements in the Little Colorado river are not in a position to render you the aid you ask, neither do we think there will be any need for it. As Zion is constantly growing so must we extend our settlements, and we are of the opinion that it would be well for the Saints from Georgia and other Southern States when they take the road which it is stated your company will travel) to locate in some favorable spot in the western portion of Texas, or in New Mexico, which of these two regions you may decide on will perhaps depend on the means of transportation you have at your command. Your Company may be able to bring a few wagons and some harness with them, and we imagine could purchase near the end of the railroad track Spanish mules at very low rates, with shoes. They could move slowly forward until a suitable location was discovered. In choosing such a one there are several considerations that should be entertained. It is very desirable that the spot selected should be a healthy one, with an abundant supply of water which can be taken out at little cost for irrigation purposes. It would please us if it were situated near the homes of some of the tribes of the Lamanites, over whom our brethren and sisters could wield an influence for good, and to teach the ways of life eternal as well as the arts and industries of this life. The friendship and cooperation of these people would also be found of great advantage to the new settlers through their knowledge of the country and its productions.

We should be pleased to have you more fully acquaint us with your intentions; the probable number of your Company and the date you intend to start.

Praying the Lord to bless you abundantly with the wisdom of His Holy Spirit and to give you much joy and success in your labors, I remain, Your brother in the Gospel, BRIGHAM YOUNG
