James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Letter on Death of President Brigham Young, August 29, 1877

1877-August 29-MS 39:634 (October 1, 1877)

This document, written by his two counselors the day of his death, announces the passing of resident Brigham Young. The two Apostles to whom it was written were absent on missions in England.

LETTER to Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith announcing the death of President Brigham Young.

Salt Lake City, Aug. 29, 1877 Elders Orson Pratt and Jos. F. Smith

Dear Brethren,-It is with feelings that no words can express, that we have to convey to you the tidings that our beloved and revered President has left us for that brighter and better world that lies beyond this mortality. His spirit departed from his mortal tabernacle at one minute after four this afternoon. We are thankful beyond the power of speech, that he died in his own home, surrounded by his wives, his children and his relatives.

The Saturday and Sunday before last the President accompanied by several of the brethren immediately associated with him, held two days' Conference at Brigham City, when a Stake of Zion was organized. On the Sunday afternoon, he delivered his last discourse here upon the earth. He appeared to be enjoying excellent health, but was somewhat tired through traveling and the numerous meetings that he there attended. He returned to Salt Lake City on Sunday evening, and appeared, from that time until Thursday night, to be in the enjoyment of more than his usual amount of health, strength and vitality. On Thursday evening he attended the meeting of the Bishops in the Council House. The meeting was crowded, the evening warm, and the ventilation poor. The President spoke for some little time, instructing the Bishops and Teachers with regard to their duties in visiting the Saints and keeping the Wards in order. After the meeting, he rode some little distance around town, accompanied by Elders Jos. E. Taylor and Geo. Reynolds. The former he conveyed to his home in the 13th Ward. He then appeared to be in his usual health, though the change from the very warm air of the crowded meeting room to the cooler atmosphere outside was very noticeable, as a cool breeze had sprung up. After he returned home, he retired to rest by himself. About 11 o'clock at night he began to be sick and continued to get worse. He was seized with violent vomiting, purging and cramping. His family and friends did their utmost, by every known means, to alleviate his suffering, and we had none of us any idea at that time, nor until within a short time previous to his dissolution, that he was going to be taken from us; our faith was strong that he would yet remain with us many years, to bless and lead Israel. His attack of cholera morbus was succeeded by one of inflammation of the bowels, to which he gradually succeeded.

At 8 o'clock on Monday night, a number of the brethren met and prayed for him. Prayers were continued every hour of the day, from 10 o'clock yesterday morning, and during the night and to-day, and until the hour of his release, at the Endowment House in this city; as also prayers were constantly offered up in the Temple of St. George, and in other places throughout these Stakes of Zion; but our petitions were of no avail, it has pleased the Lord to take him unto Himself, and to his infinite wisdom we bow, though in sorrow, realizing that all things work together for the good of those who love him and seek to be submissive to his will.

Amid our deep affliction, our hearts are lifted in thankful praise to God that he has, through 33 years of unceasing persecution, preserved the life of our beloved President; and not withstanding the powers of darkness have sought his life, and endeavored to harrass and subdue him, yet he did live, through the blessing and power of Israel's God, to see the day when not an indictment or prosecution prevailed in the least degree against him; and upon his own bed, surrounded by the members of his family and his faithful brethren, he in peace went to sleep, and joined the blessed throng of faithful brethren who had gone before him.

Joining with you in prayers that Zion may rise and shine, and the work of God continue to prosper, we remain your brethren in the Gospel, JOHN W. YOUNG, DANIEL H. WELLS.
