James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Instructions to Quorum of Apostles, Presidents of Stakes, Bishops and Elders, February 23, 1878

1878-February 23-Original document in L. John Nuttall Papers, Brigham Young University Library, Special Collections.

As indicated in the note to the Message of President Brigham Young of July 11, 1877 which appears earlier in this volume, one of the final acts of President Young's administration was the setting up of more extensive Stake organizations in the Great Basin. The task was not completed at his death.

The opening remarks of President John Taylor in this meeting with the Apostles, Stake Presidents, Bishops and Elders of the Church indicate the increasingly important role that Stake Presidents were now to play in the governing of the Church under the direction of the First Presidency and Quorum of Twelve Apostles.

This document lays clearly before the Stake Presidents their duties and operating philosophy. It is also an excellent treatise on the role Church officers and members are expected to play in political and temporal affairs of the communities in which they live. The instructions are still timely.

These instructions once again provide the evidence of the prophetic insight which has characterized all of the Presidents of the Church. They certainly project the coming storm and political upheaval that lay immediately ahead of the Church. That storm had already begun to break, as indicated in President Taylor's reference to political affairs in Tooele County. (See Doctor's dissertation, Utah State University, 1958, by James R. Clark, "Church and State Relations in Education in Utah 1847-1957" for a more complete discussion.)

Before the administration of President John Taylor was over at his death in 1887 the storm would mount in increasing fury and the battle lines would be drawn over the very issues and principles so clearly enunciated in these Instructions.

First there would be the battle over the settling of the estate of Brigham Young which had begun almost with his death in August, 1877 and would be culminated, in October, 1879.

Then there would be the increased tempo of the polygamy issue which had arisen at least as early as 1862 but was to break with fury following the passage of the Edmunds Act in 1882. The end of this volume of Messrs will not see the end of that battle, but the reader will perhaps want to come back again to these Instructions of February 23, 1878 as he follows the increasing tempo of the storm that broke over the leadership and membership of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the late 1880's. For further background for the period of the Apostolic Presidency, 1877-1880, see CHC 5:519-619.

INSTRUCTIONS to Quorum of Apostles, Presidents of Stakes, Bishops and Elders, at a meeting held in the office of President John Taylor.

Present of the Quorum of Apostles, J. Taylor, O. Pratt, E. Snow, L. Snow, F. D. Richards and J. F. Smith and D. H. Wells; Presidents of Stakes, M. Thatcher, J. R. Murdock, W. R. Smith, W. G. Smith, C. Petersen, Franklin Spencer, W. W. Cluff, A. K. Thurber, F. M. Lyman, L. John Nuttall, A. O. Smoot, Abram Hatch, D. H. Peery and A. M. Cannon; also Bps. Hunter, Hardy, Burton and Preston; and Elders T. Callister, J. S. Heywood, H. G. Boyle, J. E. Taylor, G. W. Sevy, Jas. Z. Stewart, S. S. Smith and Geo. Reynolds.

Hymn: Come all Ye Sons of God &c. Prayer by Elder F. D. Richards President Taylor, after a few opening remarks to the presidents of Stakes, said, To-day we occupy exactly the same position as did the First Presidency when Joseph the prophet was on the earth, so far as relates to the Stakes of Zion, but not to the whole Church. In the days of Joseph there were two Stakes organized; one in Kirtland, the other in Zion. Over one of these he presided, but he also presided over the entire Church throughout the world, whilst you, my brethren, simply preside over the various Stakes. I find on examining the book of Doctrine and Covenants that the presidents of Stakes are referred to as the heads of my Church, saith the Lord. I feel that I am meeting with the heads of the Church as they are styled in this revelation, and I understand that the presidents of Stakes are placed in their several stakes to govern and control all matters pertaining to the Kingdom of God, and to preside over all the officers of the Church therein. It is an office that required the greatest faithfulness and fidelity toward God, that they who hold it may do his will and be governed thereby in all things; and not be controlled by their own likes and dislikes, whims and fancies. It is the right of those holding this position to obtain the word of God with regard to the duties of their presidencies that they may more effectually carry out His holy purposes. None of the callings or positions in the priesthood are intended for the personal benefits, emoluments and fame of those who hold them, but are expressly given to fulfil the purposes of our Heavenly Father and build up the Kingdom of God upon the earth. We are not to assume to be lords over God's heritage; but with all our powers, we are to seek to understand the will of God, and then carry it out; and see that it is carried out by those over whom we have the charge. God requires this at our hands, and He expects that we should act disinterestedly as His friends, and in the interest of His Church upon the earth; and whilst these motives control our actions we shall have the Holy Spirit of God to lead us; if we do not do so, we shall not. In our positions we are called to set an example, worthy of all men's imitation, to cultivate in our lives the principles of righteousness, honesty, purity, truthfulness and integrity. There is one point I wish to speak of. We believe in the freedom of the human mind, and accord to all men freedom of action; on the other hand, we do not believe in the right of any man to do wrong, to rebel against God, or to trample upon His priesthood, and whilst we all of us expect others to respect the priesthood, held by ourselves, we should also respect the same priesthood in others. Are we not the representatives of God? I so understand it. And if so, we are not the representatives of our own ideas and motives; being God's representatives we should be of one heart and one mind; and, when we act, we should act as a unit. For God says, Without ye are one ye are not mine. And while I respect other men and other men's opinions, I must not permit them to trample upon the rights that belong to God, nor must I take my own course, but that one which God marked out. Of late, there has been a visible division of sentiments in election matters in this City and elsewhere. True, it is written, There must needs be an opposition in all things; again, it is written, It needs be that offences come, but it is added, Woe be to those by whom they come. Let us be careful we do not enter into opposition, nor be found among those by whom offences come.

Do we not live in a Republican government and have the right to vote as we please? Yes, and go down to hell as we please. If we ask God's protection and guidance, and in answer to our prayers, he does protect and guide us, have we not the right to say, and say it with all our hearts, Thy will be done and not ours; and when we find out His will, is it not our highest privilege to fulfil it? We presidents ought to be most gentlemanly, kind and courteous in our communion with all men, and set an example of all that is noble and generous in our lives, and feel that we are for God in His Kingdom; and whilst we ask His assistance, let us be willing to obey His laws.

President Taylor then referred to the Spirit and feeling that existed amongst the people at the last election, at Salt Lake City, and of the opposition manifested on that occasion. He said many of the people were extremely ignorant, and because of their ignorance, God would be merciful unto them. There were men on that occasion claiming to be High Priests, Seventies and Elders who descended to the most contemptible trickery to deceive their brethren-trickery of such a kind-that respectable Gentiles would be ashamed of it. Elders of Israel ought not to descend to the low, groveling ways of the world, but stand upon the immutable principles of truth, justice and integrity. Does the Priesthood sanctify trickery? No, it does not. I heard of one man who gave one of the brethren a ticket to vote at the late election; he told him that it was the right ticket; another brother, more honest than he, standing by, said to the man, That is not the right ticket that has been given you. The brother, on examination, found that he had been deceived, and turning round to the first man said, Why, that man is the president of my quorum! If I had stood in that president's place, I should have wanted the earth to swallow me up. Such men scarcely realize that they are fighting against God and His cause.

We are placed upon the earth to be men of integrity-to be true men in every sense of the word. It is not with us hush-a-by baby on the tree top, but we have to be awake-to be alive. God has committed into our hands the principles of righteousness, and He expects us to carry them out; to be whole-souled in His service, to unite Israel by our teachings and example, and to give the adversary no opportunity of hindering us. There are places where it seems there might be some little difficulties regarding election matters. In Tooele, they are learning by experience the results of division. They had no representative in the Legislature. The man elected had gone to California. They had lost their quota of School appropriation. Their County Superintendent had not reported and had run away. The county was becoming involved in debt and taxes were increasing. These things arose from the ignorance of some, the carelessness and wickedness of others, but the results were identically the same. It is our privilege, our duty to protect the interests of God upon the earth. And we need not go to the devil to ask his help either. For little was the help we should get from him. In those places and Stakes where the opposition is gaining ground through the opening of mines and so forth, it would be well to fill up with people from our over-crowded City, and with the fresh emigration. He wished the presidents and bishops to do their duty in this respect, and search out desirable locations and have them occupied by Latter-day Saints. In Juab and Summit counties there was a prospect of a large increase in the outside population, and it would require all our energy to govern these matters to the building of God's kingdom, but the word of the Lord, through His prophets, would most assuredly be fulfilled. As sure as God lives, those who will not take their swords again, their neighbors will have to flee to Zion for safety, while the weight of the burden upon our shoulders is to prepare Zion for that day, and establish her in righteousness, truth and purity. At present we can scarcely govern a few miserable Gentiles and apostates, but the time must come when we shall judge the world: it is our duty now to prepare for that day.

It has been my feeling, all the day long, to accord liberty of thought and action to all men; but it is not my prerogative to barter away the rights of God and His priesthood. While Prest. Brigham Young was alive, there were some things in which my views differed from his, but did I ever permit them to stand in the way of my doing the will of God? No, I submitted my will to the will of God. When I was at St. George, last winter, President Young spoke to me, and I believe, some others of the Twelve, with regard to the Deseret Alphabet. He said he knew that through our tradition and education we were opposed to it, but if we would help him he would carry it through. I acknowledged that in my feelings that I was not favorably disposed towards it; but I said, Prest. Young, if you will tell me that it is the mind and will of the Lord that it should be adopted, I will back you up to the utmost of my influence and ability: and I wish to say to my brethren that I don't want them to be scared of one another, but let us present our ideas to each other and adopt the best ones. Let us have free intercourse one with another, and converse on doctrine and principle, and upon all things in which the Kingdom of God is interested as pointed out in the revelation which says: "And I give unto you a commandment, that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom; Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the Gospel, in all things that pertain unto the Kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand; Of things both in heaven and the earth, and under the earth; things which have been seen, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land, and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms, that ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you." (D&C LXXXII, 77-81.) I am always willing to swap bad ideas for good ones.

President Taylor instructed the brethren with regard to the Melchisedec and the Aaronic priesthoods, and on the duties of the agents that were being appointed to represent Bishop Hunter in the various Stakes of Zion. A more complete report of these instructions will be found in the various minutes of the Council of the Quorum of the Apostles. After speaking of the two priesthoods and manifesting their relation to each other, He showed that the Aaronic was subject to the Melchisedec and was denominated the Lesser Priesthood. (Bp. Hunter made a remark to the effect that the Bishops are ordained to be High Priests.) Prest. Taylor replied, There are many high priests in the Church, holding various positions; but it is of your office as bishop I am now speaking, and not of the High Priesthood. You do not hold your bishopric alone by virtue of the High Priesthood, but you are ordained high priests, and are then set apart to act as bishops; nor do you preside over the bishopric by virtue of your high priesthood alone but because you have been called and set apart to that office, to preside over all the bishops throughout the world.

Elder Joseph F. Smith notified the brethren that the Endowment House would be open on the 2d and 4th Thursdays of each month, for those persons designated in Prest. Taylor's Letter of Instructions, and added, several items of advice for the Presidents to give to those coming forward to receive their blessings.

The subjects of divorce and marriage were also talked over, President Taylor counseling the brethren to discourage divorces and effect reconciliations wherever possible. Prest. Taylor requested the brethren to use due diligence in collecting P. E. Fund indebtedness. He added, "We ought, in all our affairs, to aim to bring about a union in temporal affairs-an honest, straightforward union. We have got to be one in temporal things, as sure as God lives, if we build up His Kingdom.

The Presidents of Stakes were requested to use due diligence in collecting and forwarding the required reports for the forthcoming annual conference. Hymn: Praise God from whom all blessings flow, &c. Dismissed by Elder Lorenzo Snow.
