James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

The Blessing of Children, April 15, 1878

1878-April 15-MS 40:235-236 (April 15, 1878)

While the immediate subject of this Message is aimed at the correction in the practice of some Church members in blessing or giving their children names at home instead of in a Church gathering, it lays down again a fundamental principle of Mormon doctrine in the statement: "No man is authorized to teach to the Church new or advanced doctrines except the Presidency thereof."

This sentence from this Message might well serve as the note or commentary for not only this Message, but also for the Messages of April 17, 1878 dealing with Excommunications and the one of October 30, 1878 dealing with the publications of Edward W. Tullidge.

THE BLESSING OF CHILDREN. It has been intimated to us that some of the Elders have been teaching ideas concerning the blessing of children that we deem to be incorrect. If we are not misinformed it has been taught that there was no need of parents bringing their infants before the Church to be blessed by the Elders, but it were better for the father to attend to this rite at home, for if he did not he he lost a very great privilege as well as a right to, and power over his children that he might otherwise retain. This is not so. We have nothing to say against a father blessing his children, the genius of the Priesthood being primarily patriarchal, with God himself the great Father of us all at the head. Indeed we claim that every man holding the Melchisedec Priesthood is a patriarch in his own home, with the right to bless all his children and grandchildren, even all the fruits of his loins. Nor do we object to the father taking his babe on the eighth day and giving it a father's blessing. But we do not think that this privilege whether exercised or unimproved, should interfere with our obedience to that law of the Lord wherein it is stated (New Edition Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. 20, verse 70, page 117) "Every member of the Church of Christ having children, is to bring them unto the Elders before the Church, who are to lay their hands upon them in the name of Jesus Christ and bless them in his name." Outside of the all important fact that this is a direct command of Jehovah, and as such should be studiously complied with without hesitancy or objection, we think quite a number of excellent reasons can be adduced to prove that this command is attended with beneficial results to babe and to parents, who by bringing their child before the Church manifest their faith in the sight of their brethren and sisters, in God's word and in his promises, as well as their thankfulness to him for increasing their posterity and for the safe delivery of his handmaiden. The child is also benefited by the united faith and responsive prayers of the assembled Saints, which faith seals the "more sure word of prophecy" pronounced upon the head of the child, as it also gives more abundant power to the officiating High Priest or Elder to manifest the good pleasure of the Lord with regard to it. And again the blessing is thus given in the presence of the Church recorder, and there is much less likelihood of the record being omitted or errors entering therein, then there would be should the rite be attended to at home. In this as in all other things the path of revelation is the path of safety. The nature of the work of the Lord, the spirit and genius of his Church, founded upon the rock of his revealed word, compels us to admonish the brethren to have great care, lest in giving expression to their private opinions they advance theories opposed to the revealed word and will of the Lord. In this is no man justified. No man is authorized to teach to the Church new or advanced doctrines except the Presidency thereof. Light comes from the head, and to that point must the members of the Church look for knowledge and wisdom and doctrine and principle. Did every man holding a portion of the Priesthood have the right to advance doctrines for the acceptance of the Church, it would bring chaos, our name would be Babylon, and it could no longer be said that "God's house is a house of Order;" we should be like the rest of the world, one man's opinion would be as good as that of another; there would be no rallying point, no recognized authority, no head; on the contrary we should be weak indeed. Then let us not stray from well defined landmarks. If, in the providence of God, and the growth, increase and development of his kingdom, we need further light and intelligence on doctrine, it will be given to us, and it will come through the proper and duly appointed authority. JOHN TAYLOR, In behalf of the Council of the Apostles.-Deseret News.
