James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Letter to John Morgan, July 19, 1878

1878-July 19-The Life and Ministry of John Morgan pp. 180-181.

This letter to Elder John Morgan from John Taylor contains instructions for the emigration of Saints from the Southern States to Colorado or New Mexico rather than to Utah at this time. With conditions developing politically in Utah at the time it was wise. Also the matter of climate was a deciding factor.

LETTER TO JOHN MORGAN Salt Lake City, July 19, 1878. Elder John Morgan, Rome, Georgia Dear Brother: The pleasing account, given in your last communication, of the zealous labors of yourself and brethren in that vast tract of country over which you are spread, afforded us many pleasing reflections, and we trust that by the blessing of the Lord the same spirit of faithful energy will remain with you that if you do not succeed in adding many to the Church you will at least warn the people of the day of salvation, and be rewarded by that answer of a good conscience, the realization that you have done your duty. We also trust that your healths may be preserved in the trying temperature of the Southern States that you may not be cut short in your usefulness by the ills to which our mortal tabernacles are so subject.

Your proposal to forward this season's emigration to Colorado or New Mexico meets with our approval. In Pueblo we understand our people are doing well temporally, and perhaps others would be as fortunate, and probably by an increase of numbers and increase of spiritual strength would also be developed. With regard to the land selected in Conejos Co., we have but one fear and that is that it is somewhat too cold for southern folks, but although it may be cold it will do for a temporary stopping point at any rate. Bro. Peterson, (we understand from Bro. Stewart who has just returned home) is now with them; we trust his influence, experience in western life &c, will be of great value in aiding and strengthening the Saints. We presume you correspond with him and with others of the new colony, if not, we suggest it would be a source of comfort to the people there for you to do so. With regard to loaning them some Church cattle we should be pleased to do so, if we understood how to get them there. It seems to us that it would cost more than they are worth to send them so long a distance, but perhaps some idea has been presented to your mind that has not to ours, and if you have any feasible plan to suggest, we shall be happy to adopt it.

We will instruct Pres. Jos. Young to be looking up some good missionaries for you, so that when your requisition arrives, we may have the men where we know where to find them.

With general news I shall not trouble you as almost everything of interest appears in the columns of our local papers. My health and that of the brethren of the Council generally is good. Bro. Cannon has returned to us, vigorous and hearty, but little fatigued with the arduous labors that being delegate from the leading Territory.

With kindest remembrances to Bros. Williams, Cowley, Barnett, Johnson and all the rest of the Utah Elders laboring with you, and with continued prayers for your welfare and the success of your labors, I remain, Your Brother in the Gospel, JOHN TAYLOR

Pres. Taylor would like a copy of the tract you have lately published.-GR
