James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Circular from the Twelve Apostles, April 16, 1880

1880-1884 1880-April 16-DN 29:184 (April 21, 1880)

This Circular issued by the presiding quorum of the Church and signed by John Taylor, "In behalf of the Council of Apostles" was issued to Presidents of Stakes and Bishops in the Church to put into operation the features of the Jubilee Year as announced in the October General Conference of the Church. The Circus is self-explanatory. For additional background see: CHC 5:589-594; RCH 3:8-11; also the 1880 April Jubilee Conference Report.

CIRCULAR FROM THE TWELVE APOSTLES. SALT LAKE CITY, U. T., April 16, 1880. To the Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of the Several Wards: Dear Brethren.-During the annual Conference begun in this city on the 6th inst., the Trustee in Trust, with the unanimous approval of the Apostles and Counselors, deemed it a fitting opportunity, on the 50th anniversary of the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and at the close of the Year of Jubilee, to propose remitting some $800,000 or one-half of the indebtedness to the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company, by the worthy poor who are struggling with adversity, unable to pay, and with but little prospect of ever being able. This very liberal proposition was cordially sustained by the unanimous vote of the vast congregation, composed of authorities and members from all regions of our settlements.

That these remissions may be applied in the wisest manner possible, the Bishops of the several Wards are hereby respectfully requested to at once proceed to learn who of those indebted to the P. E. Fund Company they may deem entitled to the benefit of the aforenamed remissions, and write down names, ages, year of immigration and P. O. address, with a few of the principal reasons why they recommend a remission, and forward all such recommends to their several Presidents of Stakes.

The Presidents of Stakes are also respectfully requested to at once carefully examine the aforesaid recommends from the Bishops; endorse thereon their approval or disapproval, with or without remarks, as they may please, and forward to the President or Clerk of the P. E. F. Co., Box B, this city, for consideration and final action by the proper authorities here, and their action thereon will be made known to the parties concerned through their Bishop as speedily as may be.

In case a Bishop shall deem it more proper to recommend remitting only a part of an indebtedness, he will recommend accordingly, as aforenamed, specifying the amount.
