James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Delinquent Tithing Remitted, April 16 1880

At the General Jubilee Conference, April 1880, President John Taylor proposed, and the Conference voted, that the deserving poor have their delinquent Tithing remitted throughout the whole church to the amount of one half the total of all delinquencies; under such regulations as shall be approved by the Stake Presidents and the Apostles. The Presidents of Stakes and Bishop's Agents, are therefore respectfully requested to ascertain from the books in the several Wards under their jurisdiction the amount of all such delinquencies and, at an early day, a list of names and the Wards where found, with the amounts recommended for remittal, which should include all delinquencies of persons, generally well disposed, but who, by reason of losses, affliction, helpless families or missionary labors, have been unable to pay, and such amounts of other delinquents as may be deemed right and proper, in accordance with the spirit of the Conference. Should the total amounts so recommended for remission amount to less or more than one half the total delinquency of your Stakes respectively, it will be adjusted and equalized as far as practicable, and a shall be deemed to be just, by the Presiding Bishop, with the approval of the Apostles. The several Agents should consult with Bishops, and make up lists to be submitted to the Stake Presidency, which after such modifications as they deem advisable, should be signed by them and the Bishop's Agents for the Stake, and forwarded to the Presiding Bishop of the Church.

We need not remind you that neither favoritism nor prejudice should influence any one in these matters, but only an earnest desire to make the yoke easy and the burden light.

DONATION OF COWS AND SHEEP. On the suggestion of President John Taylor and his brethren of the Council of Apostles, by common consent, as expressed by the unanimous vote of the Saints in Conference assembled, on April 7th, 1880, one thousand good young milch cows and five thousand head of healthy sheep were appropriated, for the relief of the deserving poor Saints in Zion. Three hundred of the former, and two thousand of the latter were subscribed by the Church, and the remainder as a donation by the several Stakes, as expressed by the vote of the Presidencies of the Stakes and Bishops of the Wards, who were present at the meeting.

In order that a proper apportionment may be determined, the Presidents of the several Stakes are requested to ascertain and report to the Trustee-in-Trust as speedily as possible the number of cows and sheep that will be required to relieve the worthy poor in their Stakes.

A prompt report, giving the names and residences in full of such as the Bishops recommend and whom you can endorse as being worthy and needy, will enable us to determine at once, and inform you of how many head of each it will be necessary for you to furnish. In securing subscriptions, it would be well as far as possible to make, at the same time, distributions as you may think proper.

Being aware of the object of this charitable measure, you will, we feel assured, perceive the importance of being thorough, prompt, and energetic in its accomplishment.
