James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Suggestions for Organization of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations

1880-May-The Contributor 1:191 (May, 1880)

According to Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH p. 650, Young Men's Mutual Associations were begun in the Thirteenth ward, Salt Lake City on June 10, 1875 by Junius F. Wells under "the immediate instruction and direction of President Brigham Young." By 1880, evidently, it had become necessary to clarify the role of this growing Church auxiliary organization. Hence the issuance of these Suggestions by "the Council of Apostles."

SUGGESTIONS for the further organization of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association by the Council of Apostles.

First.-This Institution must not interfere with the priesthood of any of its members; but each individual member must be subject to the quorum of which he may be a member, and to the regularly organized authorities of the Stake with which he is associated.

Second.-Every Stake Organization to be under the authority of the Stake organization of the priesthood in that Stake, and to have for its Superintendent a High Priest selected by the President of the Stake and his Counselors, sanctioned by the High Council of the Stake, and voted for and sustained by the Stake Conference and Associations of the Stake.

Third.-This Stake Superintendent may call two or more persons to his assistance, who may or may not be High Priests. They shall be known as assistants or counselors, and shall be approved by the President of the Stake and his Counselors, sanctioned by the High Council of the Stake, and sustained by the vote of the Stake Conference and Associations of the Stake.

Fourth.-The Twelve may appoint a General Superintendent, from time to time, who may, when convenient, be one of their Council, who shall have the general superintendence of the Stake organizations.

Fifth.-The General Superintendent may direct the action of all Stake Superintendents, and preside over all the officers of the Associations in all the Stakes, and may have two of the Twelve, when convenient, as Counselors; and they may call upon such assistants, secretaries and other help, as may be required. The whole to be under the general superintendence of the Twelve as the presidency. The editor of the CONTRIBUTOR and the paper to be subject to, and under the general direction of, the Superintendent and Council. All books used in libraries, for the use of the Association, to be inspected and approved by the General Superintendent and his Council, and all works containing skeptical, immoral or improper doctrines or principles, to be excluded therefrom.

Sixth.-The General Superintendent and Council to make arrangements for the purchase of books for the libraries and other purposes on the best possible terms; and all profits arising therefrom, after paying the necessary expenses, to go for the use and benefit of the Associations who may order such books. It must be understood that this Organization is not formed as a separate or distinct Church organization or body of priesthood, but for the purpose of mutual improvement of the members and all connected therewith. JOHN TAYLOR In behalf of the Council of Apostles.
