James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

Railroading in Colorado, October 27, 1880

1880-October 27-Deseret News Weekly, p. 616 (October 27, 1880)

On the last day (October 10) of the semi-annual Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1880 the First Presidency was once again organized with John Taylor as President and George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as counselors.

This notice on railroading in Colorado offers excellent advice on not only the economic aspects of contract work on building of railroads but also on the moral and spiritual problems involved in this type of work at that time.

RAILROADING IN COLORADO. To presidents of Stakes and their Counselors, and the Bishops of Wards and their Counselors, and to the Latter-day Saints generally:

We understand there has been considerable feeling aroused in various settlements by reports which have come from Colorado respecting the terms upon which labor can be obtained in grading the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad, and many inquiries have been addressed to us and the Apostles upon this subject, as to whether it would be advisable for men and teams to leave this Territory and go there, to perform the work of grading. The distance to the point where the labor is to be performed is about 450 miles, and the journey to and fro with teams will occupy at least six weeks. The counsel which has been given to the brethren generally in this northern country upon this subject is, that the distance is too great, and the weather at this time of year too uncertain to make this labor remunerative to those who engage in it, and that it is not advisable for the brethren to go there.

One or two companies, however, have been organized at points south, under the direction of Boards of Trade, who have sent their agents in advance to make contracts, and to examine carefully the route contracted for, and to do everything necessary to prepare the way for companies to follow them. This has been done at a modern percentage, barely enough to cover the actual expense. The one or two companies who have thus organized have gone or will go under the direction of some man or men who will preside over them, and who will carry with them in their camps the observances of our religion. Under such circumstances, even if money is not made, at least good habits will be maintained, and our young men will thus be preserved from many of the contaminating and destructive influences which prevail in railroad grading camps.

We think it would be very imprudent for single parties, or for a few individuals, to go off in mixed companies to work on this railroad, as however much profit might be made from the labor, the probability is that the parties themselves who go would receive more injury to their morals than any amount of money could compensate them for.

We hope the brethren in authority will use their influence with the Latter-day Saints, and counsel them upon these matters. Wisdom would suggest that our young men especially should not be exposed to the temptations and the wickedness that abound at such points.

The Twelve Apostles will visit the various Stakes as soon as practicable, and from them counsel can be obtained as to the best method to be adopted in relation to this matter. Your Brethren, JOHN TAYLOR, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
