James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

An Epistle to the Presidents of Stakes, High Councils, Bishops and other Authorities, May 1, 1882

1882-May 1-Original pamphlet in Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City.

This message indicates that President John Taylor was continuing his practice of calling Stake Presidents to his office periodically for meetings of instruction. In this Message the First Presidency review the instructions President Taylor had given to the Church in the April, 1882 General Conference and also to the Stake Presidents in a meeting in his office on April 11, 1882 following the Conference. The Message deals with the necessity of lines of authority in the Church being followed in temporal as well as spiritual affairs. It also calls for cooperation and patronization of Mormon merchants, but not to the exclusion of other merchants. The Message indicates that revelation should be sought and obtained in temporal as well as spiritual affairs.

AN EPISTLE to the Presidents of Stakes, High Councils, Bishop and other Authorities of the Church SALT LAKE CITY, U. T., MAY 1st, 1882. Dear Brethren: I wish to say something in regard to our financial position, associated with the various Stakes. At a recent meeting of the Presidents of Stakes, held in my office, I made some general remarks relative to our policy, arising from some instructions given by me at the late general Conference, namely, that it was much better for our own people to do our trading than to have outsiders do it. The following is the gist of my observations on this subject at Conference:

"President Taylor then said that there had been some remarks made during Conference about our dealing with those not of our people; that while we wished to be liberal when men manifested a spirit of hostility against us, it became us, as wise and prudent men, to take care of ourselves. Co-operation had been talked about considerably, from time to time, as being a stepping-stone to something that would yet be more fully developed among the people of God, namely, the United Order. We had no example of the United Order strictly in accordance with the word of God on the subject. Our co-operation was simply an operation to unite us together in our secular affairs, tending to make us one in temporal things, as we were one in spiritual things. A feeling had been manifested by some of our brethren to branch out into mercantile business on their own account, and his (the speaker's) idea, as to that, was, if people would be governed by correct principles, laying aside covetousness and eschewing chicanery and fraud, dealing honestly and conscientiously with others as they would like others to deal with them, that there would be no objection on our part for our own brethren to do these things; that it was certainly much better for them to embark in such enterprises than our enemies. Because in putting money into the hands of our enemies, we placed ourselves, to that extent at least, in their power to do us injury, which, it would seem from past experience, they were not, as a general thing, slow to do. We believed in being generous, hospitable and kind, but when our generosity was abused, as it had been so flagrantly of late, it behooved us to be cautious in our movements. The old adage, 'Self preservation is the first law of nature,' was applicable to us, especially under the present circumstances. Those that were wise and had good judgment would understand. Our cooperative institutions generally had done very well in subserving the interests of the people; and if other institutions should be introduced in the various stakes by wise, honorable, just and honest men, who had at heart the spirit of co-operation, and who practised the principle and carried it out, there would be no objection to their calling upon the people to sustain the same principle in anything that they might introduce by way of financial enterprises among themselves. It was far better for our people to do these things, and themselves derive the benefits arising therefrom, than to employ their enemies to do it for them. But men who embarked in financial enterprises, expecting the patronage of the people, should be honest and honorable men, who would deal fairly and uprightly with their patrons, and be men who lived their religion. An honorable Gentile was preferable to a dishonorable 'Mormon,' because the latter hypocritically made use of his religion as a means of fleecing the people. The present co-operative and other institutions in which the people were interested paid their tithing, to help to meet the requirements of the Church; and any other institution, the business of which was conducted in accord with the spirit and principles of our faith, we would sustain; otherwise, we would not; for, if people would not sustain cooperation themselves, we would not sustain them, it mattered not under what name or guise it was carried on. In those affairs they should consult the Stake authorities."

At the meeting in my office above referred to (Tuesday, 11th April, 1882), I made some further remarks on this subject, the leading features of which are as follows:

"With regard to our mercantile affairs, there were none of us but believed that the Zion of God would be built up, the Kingdom of God established and the government of God obtain among the righteous, and that the wicked would be overthrown, and the will of God be done on earth as in heaven. It was for us to keep this in view and govern ourselves accordingly.

"President Taylor deprecated the feeling of selfishness that existed, and called upon the brethren to put it from themselves and to contend against it in their several stakes; but it was necessary that they themselves should be free from it, in order to contend against it successfully. He that possessed the elements of eternal life was rich, ten thousand times richer than the man who was grasping after the things of the world and the praise and honor of men. Our co-operative enterprises were started to unite and cement us closer together, and much good had been accomplished in that way.

"Under existing circumstances, it had been thought best to throw open the field of trading, under proper restrictions, but that we should do all we could to confine it as much as possible in the hands of our own people, who were honorable and upright, and good Latter-day Saints. All should be subject to the principle of co-operation, and not recede a particle from it; but we should put our own business people in the place of outsiders, and sustain them, inasmuch as they sustained the principle of cooperation themselves by acting honorably in their dealing, paid their tithing and donations, were willing to be counselled and advised, and had at heart the interest of the work of God. But you, yourselves, ought to be examples in such things. There was no going back on the principles of co-operation; it was not standing still, but moving on, and it would continue to move on; and, in the name of Israel's God, Israel would continue to move on, and no power could prevent it. The day would come when the dishonorable, and those who sought riches at the expense of the principles of our holy religion, would be rooted out and have no place among us. God would elevate us and place us on high among the nations, and the kings of the earth would yet, as prophesied of, come to gaze upon the glories of Zion."

These are matters of considerable importance to the Latter-day Saints, as they enter into all our secular affairs, especially those of a mercantile nature, and are among the leading features connected with the building up of the Kingdom of God upon the earth. While we are in a state of incipiency and just beginning to launch out in our mercantile and manufacturing interests, we wish to have these principles, as well as everything else, in strict subserviency to the laws and government of the Kingdom of God, for, while that extends great liberality and personal freedom in all our acts, it nevertheless exacts an undeviating submission to, and a course of action in strict accordance with, the laws, institutions and regulations which govern that kingdom. It must be remembered here, that it is not the kingdom of the world, the kingdom of man, or anything of an individual character, but it is under the inspiration and direction of the Lord, and must be subject to His law, rule and government. If it is the Kingdom of God, it certainly cannot be the kingdom of man; and, being the Kingdom of God, it demands our allegiance and obedience and conformity to its law and requirements in all things. As in the Church of God, there is an order which is beautiful, harmonious and effective in all its operations, and which already is spoken of highly by statesmen and politicians as being more far-seeing and comprehensive than anything else that exists on the earth, and excites the jealousy of demagogues, it must be remembered that this organization came from God, and that He, not man, is the author, director and counsellor in regard to all the affairs of the Church government.

We are trying to build up a kingdom, which, as before stated, is the Kingdom of God; if it is not that, it is nothing; if it is that, then we require the same guidance and direction from our Heavenly Father, in regard to all of our secular affairs pertaining to the management and direction of everything that concerns our material interests and mercantile and manufacturing operations, and in preserving the rights and liberties of our people and of all people that come under our jurisdiction. In doing this, we want to ponder well the path of our feet, and be very careful in regard to every step that we take, lest we adopt principles which are at variance with the broad and comprehensive views of our heavenly Father, pertaining to our liberty and to the liberty and rights of all men; and, while we seek to accord certain rights and privileges to individuals, that we be very careful that we do not trammel nor fetter others who have like privileges with us. We must ever remember, as the sun shines for all, and the breath of heaven is free to all, that the earth, air and water should be as free to and within the reach of all, and that we should do nothing that will circumscribe the universal liberty of universal man. But while we accord to all this perfect liberty, which is granted freely by our heavenly Father, we must never forget that this general liberty is subject to principles, rules and government; that it is under the guidance and direction of our heavenly Father, and of those to whom He commits His authority and who are His legitimate representatives; and that if He introduces principles and develops theories, ideas, and laws, He has a perfect right to claim the honor of such organization, such principles and such developments. If the Lord is to be our judge, our king and our lawgiver, He looks for and has a right to expect an acknowledgment of His prescience, wisdom and intelligence, as well as a cheerful and unwavering submission to His will and law, and an acknowledgment of His authority. If as the cycles of time roll on, the nations, governments and rulers are weighed in the balance and found wanting; and if, in the overthrow of nations and the dissolution of existing systems and dynasties, the Lord introduces a system of laws, governments and organizations, He will expect to dictate in all matters pertaining to the welfare of His people on the earth and the building up and establishment of a righteous kingdom, namely, the Kingdom of God.

We are yet in our infancy and comparatively in an immature state in relation to all of these matters, and it is requisite that we be very careful as to any steps that we take pertaining to them. We are emerging from the plans, systems, theories and principles of Babylon. It is difficult for us all at once to throw off all our old usages, and, in consequence of our previous education, to inaugurate a system which shall be perfect in all its parts. In fact, we are at present dependent upon them, more or less, for many of the comforts, necessaries and luxuries of life, and we are just emerging from our embryotic state, in a chrysalis condition. Whilst striving to reach a higher plane, and adapt ourselves to the institutions of heaven and the laws of God, we are all the time in danger of dragging into our systems the pernicious views and practices of the Gentiles, of engrafting them into the tree of life, and amalgamating them with the pure principles which emanate from God.

In consequence of these things and of the covetousness and dishonesty of man, it was found impracticable, under the auspices and direction of the Prophet Joseph, to introduce and carry out the law of God in regard to secular matters. We have been progressing for half a century, have had many experiences, which, if properly comprehended and appreciated, ought to serve to exhibit to us the futility of trusting to all outside operations, as such have proved unreliable, and to teach us to know and feel, that in God alone can we trust, and on Him only can we rely for our guidance and direction in all temporal as well as spiritual things.

The organization of our Stakes is a step in the right direction to assist us in the management of our temporal as well as our spiritual affairs. And while we find them useful in all matters pertaining to the Church and in regulating and manipulating all things pertaining thereto in their jurisdiction, we shall find them as useful, when under proper influence, in assisting in the management and control of our secular affairs. But in this, as in Church matters, there must be an entire absence of individuality, covetousness and selfishness, and we must operate, under God, in the interests and for the benefit of all with whom we associate; for we are building up a kingdom that will stand for ever, that will command the respect and esteem of all peoples; the greatness of which will be acknowledged to the ends of the earth, and whose head will be Jesus Christ, to whom every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess, to the glory of God the Father; but by force or coercion of any kind, but because that kingdom will be manifestly the best, purest and most elevated, and more in the interests of humanity, and will command the respect, admiration and obedience of universal man.

There has been a good deal of talk about the United Order, and about Co-operation. These things are very imperfectly understood at the present time, and in our emergence from the world, with its customs and habits, we find it extremely difficult to adjust and regulate our temporal affairs. When the perfect law of God shall be instituted, a state of things very much more perfect than that which we now have will be introduced; and, while every man will be expected to hold himself, and every thing that he has, subject to the law of God, and in the starting out will give a strict account to men appointed to that office of all his affairs, when he has done this, he will have awarded to him by those authorities that portion which the wisest counsels shall dictate; and then will have appointed to him a stewardship, for the management of all his own affairs, placed under his jurisdiction, wherein he will have the free exercise of his own will and judgment, subject, of course, to all legitimate and necessary counsel. If he requires more means than he possesses, for the carrying out and accomplishment of any project he may have in view, he can draw such means from the public treasury. If he makes profits, large or small, he returns the means that he obtained from the treasury, and reports his profits; and so much thereof as is considered wisdom is placed in the treasury, together with the original; and thus he and all men act without restraint in the interest of and for the welfare of all.

This is a simple outline of how things will exist with regard to some of these matters, when the law of God shall be fully carried out. Our relations with the world, and our own imperfections prevent the establishment of this system at the present time, and therefore, as was stated by Joseph in an early day, it can not yet be carried out. But cooperation and the United Order are a step in the right direction, and are leading our brethren to reflect upon the necessity of union as one of the fundamental principles of success in temporal things, as well as in spiritual things; and, indeed, as one of the essentials pertaining to permanent prosperity. For the Lord hath said, "If ye are not one, ye are not mine." What do we infer from this statement? We can infer only this, that, if we are not one, we are not of the Lord in spiritual things; and, further, if we are not one in temporal things, we are not the Lord's. In proportion as there is a lack of union in either temporal or spiritual things, just so far is there a lack of those principles of prosperity and progress, and of that harmonious co-working which are essential to the establishment and building up of the Kingdom of God on the earth. We must at least have unity among the Saints in temporal as well as spiritual things, before we shall be able to command the respect and esteem of all good Latter-day Saints, and of the high-minded and honorable men of the earth, the respect of our own selves, and the approval of our heavenly Father.

But, to return to our Stakes. I stated that it was much better for our own people to do our own trading than for that class of outsiders who are our avowed enemies to do it. I further stated that we expected that our mercantile or trading men would be honorable men, who would deal justly and righteously with the people, would be subject to counsel, and would place themselves under their Presidents and those who held rule in their Stakes. Need I say here, that while that is the case with regard to Bishops, High Councilors and other Stake authorities, and the people in the several Stakes, it is quite as necessary that the Presidents of Stakes and their Counsellors should place themselves under the direction of the legitimate authority that presides over them; and that all people and Presidents and other officers in the various Stakes, as well as the Twelve and the First Presidency of the Church, should place themselves under the guidance and direction of the Almighty for the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our king, the Lord is our lawgiver, and He shall rule over us.

With a policy of this kind strictly carried out, we shall lay the foundation of a kingdom that is free, liberal and generous, and that will extend itself to all peoples and all nations, until all shall acknowledge the rule, government and dominion of God. There have been indications in some Stakes of a desire to control their own secular affairs, independent of any other authority. This is an erroneous policy, for there is no such system associated with the Kingdom of God. The same system, carried out, would lead to disintegration and disunion, to the severance of all the bonds of union which cement and bind the Saints together. If we had not a union which would cement the Stakes together, each Stake would set up a separate and independent form of its own, each would separate itself from the head, and confusion and anarchy would be the result. Let us follow the reasoning of such men to its legitimate results. If, according to the theories of some men, the Presidency of a Stake and the authorities thereof have a right to direct affairs in their own interests alone, in regard to mercantile and secular affairs generally, independent of the presiding authorities, and irrespective of the interests of others, then, on the same ground, which they would scarcely like to admit, the Bishops in every Ward and the officers of that Ward have just the same right to ignore the Presidency and other general authorities of the Stake in their operations. Then, if the Presidency and Bishops possessed these powers, why not the Priests, Teachers and Deacons, by natural sequence? Then, to follow out the same principle, why not every individual take his own way? This would be the natural result of that course of proceeding. This would be the effect of taking a false departure in Stakes, and it would necessarily lead to disintegration, to anarchy and to a disruption of all those principles and relations that harmonize, cement and unite the Saints of God.

Take it the other way-the people listen to their Priests, Teachers and Deacons; the Priests, Teachers and Deacons follow the counsels of their Bishops; Bishops are placed under the direction of the Presidents; the Presidents under the direction of the First Presidency; the First Presidency seek the guidance of the Almighty; and then the Twelve, the High Councils, the High Priests, Seventies, Elders and all operating in their several spheres, in the interests of Israel, under the direction and guidance of the properly constituted authority, and each at the same time under the guidance of the Almighty, and we have a system that is as perfect as the universe, directed of the Almighty, subject and obedient to the laws, as the planetary system and all worlds are subject to the laws by which they are governed. These are principles which are after the order of nature, and are as invulnerable as the throne of God, that will continue and rule while eternal ages roll. JOHN TAYLOR,

President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We concur in the above, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH Counsellors in the First Presidency.
