James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

To the Seventies, April 13, 1883

1883-April 13-Original Document in Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City.

This document with the instructions formulated and adopted by the First Presidency and then presented to the Council of the Twelve Apostles and the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies on April 14, 1883 and then presented to the Lord for His approval or disapproval is a classic example of revelation by spiritual confirmation.

Note the opening sentence of the revelation: "What ye have written is my will, and is acceptable unto me:

Joseph Fielding Smith, Church Historian, ECH, p. 182, writes of the original organization of The Seventy in 1835: "This was another step toward the completion of the ministry and perfect development of the latter-day work. Each step came in its turn, and in like manner the doctrines of the kingdom were unfolded, here a little and there a little, until the perfect organization was established on earth."

The organization of the Seventy by revelation in 1883 was one more step beyond what had been done by revelation in 1835.

For further discussion and background see: CHC 6:106-108; Seventy's Course in Theology, First Year Book.

TO THE SEVENTIES. The following instructions were presented at a meeting of the First Presidency of the Church and the Councils of the Twelve Apostles and the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies, on Saturday, April 14th, 1883, and were approved by unanimous vote of said meeting: Salt Lake City, U. T., 13th April, 1883.

To the Councils of the Twelve Apostles and Seventies:

We desire the Twelve to confer with the First Presidents of the Seventies and request them to fill up, organize and set in order the various quorums of the Seventies, as contemplated in the following instructions, and also to aid them in the selection of a suitable man to fill the vacancy in the Council of the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies, occasioned by the death of Elder John Van Cott, and would suggest the propriety of selecting one from among the Scandinavian brethren to fill this position. Your brethren in the Gospel, JOHN TAYLOR, GEO. Q. CANNON, JOS. F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Salt Lake City, U. T., April 13, 1883.
