James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 2 ( 1965)

On the Organization of the Seventies, April 13, 1883

ON THE ORGANIZATION OF THE SEVENTIES.

In the organization of these quorums in October, 1844, there were ten quorums, each provided with seven presidents, which presidents constituted the First Quorum of Seventies, and of which the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies were members, and over which they presided. But as the Seventies have greatly increased, these regulations will not apply to the present circumstances; and furthermore, the First Quorum, according to the present organization, has not acted in a quorum capacity, but it would seem there are duties devolving upon its members, as a quorum, that may require their official action.

The First Quorum of Seventies may be composed of the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies, and the senior president of the first sixty-four quorums. These may form the Seventy referred to in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and may act in an official capacity as the First Quorum of Seventies.

The senior presidents of the other quorums, over and above the sixty-four, may meet with the First Quorum in their assemblies in any other than an official capacity; but in case of the absence of any of the members of the First Quorum, they can act in the place of such members with the First Quorum during such absence, in any cases of importance that may arise.

The headquarters of the different quorums, and the records thereof, may be distributed throughout the various Wards and Stakes, under the direction of the First Seven Presidents, as the number of the Priesthood residing in such localities may seem to justify, and any vacancies that may exist, either in the presidency or membership of the different quorums can be filled by the ordination of persons residing in the locality in which the respective quorums are organized.

Any of the members or presidents of other quorums who are in good standing may have the privilege of joining the quorum located in the district in which they reside; but in such cases they should first obtain a certificate as to their standing in the quorum from which they desire to withdraw; to obtain which it would only be necessary to procure a certificate of their good standing from the Bishop of the Ward to which they belong, provided their names are found upon the record of their quorum as in good standing.

The presidents of the quorums residing in the district where their respective quorums are organized shall have a general supervision of all the Seventies residing in their district.

In all cases where members of quorums are called in question, a majority of their respective quorums will have jurisdiction in all cases involving their standing in the quorum, but in case there is not a majority residing in the district where the quorum is organized, or in the case of scattered members, the members present should investigate the matter and report their findings to the First Seven Presidents. Any complaints regarding the presidents of quorums should be made to the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies, who may suspend such presidents, if their conduct seem to justify it, pending the action of the First Quorum. Any presidents or members from whom fellowship has been withdrawn by the quorums, should be reported to the High Council having jurisdiction.

The Seventies, when abroad, if anything should occur requiring their supervision, in the absence of other authorities, may act upon the case of any delinquent belonging to the Seventies, and should report their decisions to the First Seven Presidents of the Seventies. Your brethren in the Gospel, JOHN TAYLOR, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
