CHAPTER I.

Early incidents of my life—Providential care over me—Marriage—Hear the Gospel, and embrace it—Signs follow—Opposed by relatives—Predict my Father's baptism—My Father Healed in answer to prayer.

CHAPTER II.

Arrival at Nauvoo—My first interview with the Prophet Joseph—Some first impressions of the character of the gathered Saints—Go east on an important mission—Death of the Prophet—Return to Nauvoo—Providential circumstance on the journey.

CHAPTER III.

Sidney Rigdon strives for the guardianship of the Church—He urges his claims at the Conference—Brigham Young, President of the Twelve, and others of the Quorum appear in the stand—A remarkable testimony that the mantle of Joseph had fallen upon Brigham Young—Persecutions of the Saints—Baptism of my Parents—Preparations for the exodus—Sickness—A Methodist comforter—Answer to prayer—Harvest of Quails—Miraculous incidents on the journey to Utah.

CHAPTER IV.

Locate in Tooele Valley—Indian troubles—Escape death by an Indian, by following the warning of the Spirit—Hunting Indians—Sudden aversion to shedding their blood—Decide to protect them at the risk of my life—Sent again to hunt and kill Indians—Testimony that the Lord did not want me to kill them, but to carry peace to them—A dream and its fulfillment.

CHAPTER V.

Mission to Southern Utah—Locate at Harmony—Remarkable Prophecies of Heber C. Kimball fulfilled—Indians Harvesting—Indian "Medicine man"—Indian woman healed under our administration—Accompany a hunting party—A fight for a squaw, in which I am compelled to take part—Sickness—Take my family to Southern Utah—Build a fort on the Santa Clara—Rain in answer to prayer—Counsel from President Young—We refuse to administer to the sick until they are washed—A sick boy dies, and the Indians grow mad and threaten us—We follow and pacify them.

CHAPTER VI.

Retributive justice to the Indians—We gain influence by it—The Lord gives the Indians testimonies of the truth—War between two bands of Indians—A woman burned to death from revenge—Promptings of the Spirit—Stolen horses recovered—Government among the Indians—Appointed president of the Indian mission—Visit of Apostle George A. Smith—United States army on its way to Utah—Elder Smith's advice to the Saints—Mountain Meadow massacre.

CHAPTER VII.

President Young requests me to pilot a company to California—Save a white man from being tortured by the Indians—Indians determined to kill the company—I pacify them—Elders Ira Hatch and Dudley Leavitt sentenced to be killed by the Mohaves—Elder Hatch softens their hearts by offering a prayer—Allowed to escape on foot.

CHAPTER VIII.

President Young's Indian policy—Expedition to Los Vegas and Colorado Rivers—Suspicious steamer in the Colorado—Learn its purpose—Go after a load of lead—Our horses stolen—Eat poison cactus—Led by the Spirit providentially.

CHAPTER IX.

Visit to Salt Lake City—Interview between Elder George A. Smith and Governor Cumming—Elder Smith urges an investigation of the Mountain Meadow massacre—Governor Cumming objects—Appointed sub-Indian agents—Nearly killed by a fall from a tree—A remarkable vision—First mission to the Moquis—Description of their towns, customs and traditions—Some of the Brethren remain with them—Difficult journey home—Moquis prediction.

CHAPTER X.

Second trip to the Moquis—Two Elders left to labor with them—Lack of success, owing to traditions of the Indians—Third mission to the east side of the Colorado—George A. Smith, Jr., shot by the Navajoes—Very trying experience—The wounded man dies in the saddle, while traveling—Forced to leave his body unburied—Bitter reflections.

CHAPTER XI.

Arrival at Spaneshanks' camp—His friendly spirit—Return home—Journey in the winter to recover the remains of George A. Smith, Jr.—Destitute condition of my family.

CHAPTER XII.

Many Saints called to settle Southern Utah—Destructive flood on the Santa Clara—Narrow escape from drowning—Another visit across the Colorado—A new route—Moquis Indians pray for rain—Their prayers answered—Three Indians return with us—Their devotion and reverence—They visit Salt Lake City.

CHAPTER XIII.

The Moquis visitors taken home—Singular presentiment of my Indian boy—The route south of St. George taken the second time—Cataract Canyon—The lost Moquis and the "medicine man"—Meeting with the brethren who had been left at the Moquis towns—Explorations about the San Francisco Mountains—Return home—Great suffering with thirst—My Indian boy dead and buried, as he had predicted he would be.

CHAPTER XIV.

Change in the spirit of the Indians—Some insight into their privations and trials—They threaten hostilities—Difficulties with them settled—A kind, peaceful policy the best—Visit to the Moquis towns—The people are invited to live with the Saints—Their objections to removing—Hostile attitude of the Navajoes—Return home—Suffering with thirst—A providential supply of water—Dr. Whitmore killed—Severe sickness—Healed in answer to prayer.

CHAPTER XV.

Travels among the Indians—Watching the frontiers—Trip to the Moquis towns—Great raid of the Navajoes—A good opportunity lost of recovering stolen stock—Skirmishes with Raiders—A peaceable agreement with the Navajoes desirable—Visit of President Young to Kanab.

CHAPTER XVI.

Visits among Utah Indians—Meet Major Powell—Employed to accompany him—Council with the Shi-vwits—Major Powell's description of it.

CHAPTER XVII.

Journey to Port Defiance—Interesting visit among the Moquis towns—Arrival at Fort Defiance—General council of the chiefs of the Navajoe nation—Great peace talk—Return home—Treaty of peace in one of the Moquis towns—Stolen sheep recovered for a Navajoe.

CHAPTER XVIII.

Moquis Indians destroy many Navajoes—An Oriba and his wife accompany us home—Peace talk with the Piutes—A dream and its fulfillment—Tuba's prayer—Choog, the Indian prophet—His prediction—Fatal fire in Kanab.

CHAPTER XIX.

Visit of Tuba and his wife to the Washington factory and flouring mill—Many Navajoes come to trade with our people—Take Tuba and his wife home—More talk about the death of Young George A. Smith—Saints called to settle in Arizona—They become discouraged and return to Utah—Navajoes murdered in Grass Valley—War imminent—Sent to settle the difficulty—Two miners accompany me—Indians call a council.

CHAPTER XX.

Indians assemble—The council lodge—Accused of lying to the Indians—Informed that I must die—Privilege granted the Smith Brothers of escaping—They refuse to desert me to save their lives—Violent speeches—Young Indians eager for revenge—Interpreters afraid to speak—Indians propose a compromise—350 head of cattle and horses demanded—I refuse to pay for a crime the "Mormons" never committed—They threaten to burn me—My coolness creates a favorable impression—An agreement—We regain our liberty.

CHAPTER XXI.

Smith's version of the trying ordeal—A graphic description from a Gentile standpoint—Explanation.

CHAPTER XXII.

Start home—Meet emigrants to Moancoppy—Visit Presidents Young and Smith—Return to meet the Indians—Providence favors me—Hastele fails to meet me—Return home—Moancoppy mission broken up—Sent with D. D. McArthur to establish a trading post—Hastele visits Kanab, and starts to the Sevier to learn about the murder—I stay at home—Testimony that I should accompany him—Indian Discernment—Hastele is satisfied.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Visit Port Defiance—Mr. Daniels, inspector of Indian agencies—His prejudice against the "Mormons"—Mr. Trewax, the preacher—Peace talk—Mission re-established.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Company start to visit the Arizona settlements—Disaster in the Colorado—Bishop Roundy drowned—Explore a new route—Promise fulfilled—Visit settlements—Severe experience on homeward trip—Assurance of approval from President Young—Trip across the Colorado in search of a criminal—Moquis ceremonies to bring rain—Conclusion.
