Four Views oF the end times

Amillennialism Postmillennialism Dispensational Historical Premillennialism Premillennialism

physically? Will Jesus return Yes Yes Yes Yes

After a 7-year After tribulation;

When will Jesus Anytime; a detailed

return? time frame is not After the millennium. tribulation; before before the

important.

the millennium. millennium.

No, they are events

Do the rapture

separated by either

and second

coming of Christ Yes Yes 7 years (pre- Yes

tribulation rapture)

occur at the

or 31 /2 years (mid-

same time?

tribulation rapture).

The tribulation Tribulation is either

Will there occurs any time the first-century

be a great Christians are Jewish-Roman War or Yes Yes

tribulation? persecuted or the ongoing conflict

wars and disasters between good and evil

occur. prior to millennium.

raptured before the will go through

Will Christians suffer and endure Yes, Christians will Yes, Christians are Christians are either Yes, Christians

suffer during the persecution until called to share the tribulation (pre- the tribulation and

tribulation? Jesus returns; gospel, and tribulation tribulation rapture) endure suffering and persecution persecution will will occur when that or 31 /2 years into

increase in the end. gospel is opposed. the tribulation (mid- for the cause of Christ. tribulation rapture).

Will there No, the millennium No, the millennium Yes, after the 7-year Yes, after the tribulation, Christ

be a literal refers to the refers to a period tribulation, Christ will will return and

1,000-year reign of Christ in of peace when the return and reign for reign for 1,000

millennium? the hearts of his gospel reaches all 1,000 years. years. believers. people.

Who is saved? Christians only Christians only Christians only Christians only

Is the modern

state of Israel

relevant to the No No Yes No

prophecies in

Revelation?

When was this Well-known by May have been Became popular The earliest view of the end times,

view most held? the ad 300s. It popular in the ad in the 1800s. emerging at the

throughout the became widespread 300s and 400s, Has increased in end of the first

400s. Continues to ad perhaps earlier. Less popularity. century. be accepted today. popular today.

346 This is just one page from Rose Guide to the End-Times Prophecy, is an easy-to-understand overview. It helps ©2012 Rose Publishing. You may print

you go through the key portions of Scripture and explains different ways that Christians have interpreted them. 10 copies, but do not post on the internet

Simple charts and illustrations help you see the whole picture. ISBN 9781596364196. Save $5 on your $25 or send via email.Your friends may sign up

for Free Rose Bible eCharts & Newsletters

order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

777XEndtimes_Sec4_070111.indd 346

10/18/11 11:32:33 AM

Four Views of the End Times

DVD Series

This six-week study shows four different Revelation

time lines and tackles Dispensational Premillennialism,

Postmillennialism, Historic Premillennialism, and

Amillennialism. For each view, Four Views of the End Times

includes a definition, supporting Scriptures, a time line of

the view’s popularity, and a sampling of Christian leaders

supporting that view.

Book 9781596364127

Temple

Pamphlet

The full-color, glossy 12-panel pamphlet covers the

Tabernacle in the wilderness to the Temple. built by King

Solomon, Zerubbabel, and Herod’s Temple, the one Jesus

knew so well. Each of the Temple furnishings are explained

in detail, as well as their functions, purposes, and the

meanings they have for believers today.

End-Times Prophecy

Pamphlet 9781596360013

Jesus talked a lot about the end of time and his second

coming. These are key teachings that every Christian

Rose Guide to The Temple

should know. So why don’t they? is an easy-to-

Book

Rose Guide to the Temple is a full-color overview of the

understand overview. It helps you go through the key

Temple, with more than 100 images, charts, diagrams,

portions of Scripture and explains different ways that

photos, and illustrations, many of which have never published

Christians have interpreted them. Simple charts and

before. Rose Guide to The Temple is a clear and easy-to-

understand examination at the temple and contains clear

illustrations help you see the whole picture.

plastic overlays and stunning posters that no other Temple

guide has. It covers the span of time from Abraham to

Book 9781596364196

modern day.

Book 9781596364684

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
