Jeffrey R. Holland, However Long and Hard the Road ( 1985)

1

For Times of Trouble

No one in mortality is spared the pain and sorrow and difficulty that are inevitable in a fallen world. We all have our share of troubles, and sometimes it may seem we have more than our share. But we must try to remember that our "afflictions shall be but a small moment," and if we "endure it well, God shall exalt [us] on high." Faithful Latter-day Saints in every generation should still sing with their pioneer ancestors—all is well, all is well.

We all ought to be concerned about a problem that is universal and that can, at any given hour, strike anyone anywhere. I believe it is a form of evil. At least I know it can have damaging effects that block our growth, dampen our spirits, diminish our hopes, and leave us vulnerable to other more conspicuous evils. I know of nothing that Satan uses quite so cunningly or cleverly in his work on a young man or woman. I speak of doubt (especially self-doubt), of discouragement, and of despair.

I don't wish to suggest that there aren't plenty of things in the world to be troubled about. In our lives individually and collectively, there surely are serious threats to our happiness. I watch an early morning news broadcast while I shave and then read a daily paper. That is enough to ruin anyone's day, and by then it's only 6:30 in the morning. Inflation, energy, jogging, mass murders, kidnappings, unemployment, floods. With all of this waiting for us, we are tempted, as W. C. Fields once said, to "smile first thing in the morning and get it over with." But my concerns are not the national and international ones. I would like to focus on those matters which do not make headlines in the New York Times but which may be quite important in our personal journals. I am anxious about the problems with our daily lives and loves and finances and futures; about our troubles concerning our place in the scheme of things and the value of our contribution; about our private fears regarding where we are going and whether we think we will ever get there.

I wish at the outset, however, to make a distinction that F. Scott Fitzgerald once made: "Trouble has no necessary connection with discouragement—discouragement has a germ of its own, as different from trouble as arthritis is different from a stiff joint." We all have troubles, but the "germ" of discouragement, to use Fitzgerald's word, is not in the trouble; it is in us—or to be more precise, I believe it is in Satan, the prince of darkness, the father of lies. And he would have it be in us. It's frequently a small germ, hardly worth going to a doctor for, but it will work and it will grow and it will spread. In fact, it can become almost a habit, a way of living and thinking, and there the greatest damage is done. Then it takes an increasingly severe toll on our spirit, for it erodes the deepest religious commitments we can make—those of faith, hope, and charity. We turn inward and look downward, and these greatest of Christlike virtues are damaged or at least impaired. We become unhappy and soon make others unhappy, and before long Lucifer laughs.

As with any other germ, a little preventive medicine ought to be practiced in terms of those things that get us down. There is a line from Dante that says, "The arrow seen before cometh less rudely." President John F. Kennedy put one aspect of the same thought into one of his state of the union messages this way: "The time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining." The Boy Scouts say it best of all: "Be prepared." That isn't just cracker-barrel wisdom with us; it is theology. "And angels shall fly through the midst of heaven, crying with a loud voice . . . Prepare ye, prepare ye." (D&C 88:92.) "If ye are prepared ye shall not fear." (D&C 38:30.) Fear is part of what I wish to oppose. The scriptures teach that preparation—prevention, if you will—is perhaps the major weapon in our arsenal against discouragement and self-defeat.

Of course, some things are not under our control. Some disappointments come regardless of our effort and preparation, for God wishes us to be strong as well as good. We need to drive even these experiences into the corner, painful though they may be, and learn from them. In this too we have friends through the ages in whom we can take comfort and with whom we form timeless bonds.

Thomas Edison devoted ten years and all of his money to developing the nickel alkaline storage battery at a time when he was almost penniless. Through that period of time, his record and film production company was supporting the storage battery effort. Then one night the terrifying cry of "Fire!" echoed through the film plant. Spontaneous combustion had ignited some chemicals. Within moments all of the packing compounds, celluloids for records, film, and other flammable goods had gone up in flames. Fire companies from eight towns arrived, but the heat was so intense and the water pressure so low that the fire hoses had no effect. Edison was sixty-seven years old—no age to begin anew. His daughter was frantic, wondering if he was safe, if his spirit was broken, how he would handle a crisis such as this at his age. She saw him running toward her. He spoke first. He said, "Where's your mother? Go get her. Tell her to get her friends. They'll never see another fire like this as long as they live." At five-thirty the next morning, with the fire barely under control, he called his employees together and announced, "We're rebuilding." One man was told to lease all the machine shops in the area, another to obtain a wrecking crane from the Erie Railroad Company. Then, almost as an afterthought, Edison added, "Oh, by the way. Anybody know where we can get some money?"

Virtually everything we now recognize as a Thomas Edison contribution to our lives came after that disaster. Remember, "trouble has no necessary connection with discouragement—discouragement has a germ of its own."

To those who are trying hard and living right and things still seem burdensome and difficult, I say, take heart. Others have walked that way before you. Do you feel unpopular and different or outside the inside of things? Read Noah again. Go out there and take a few whacks on the side of your ark and see what popularity was like in 2500 B.C.

Does the wilderness stretch before you in a never-ending sequence of sand dunes? Read Moses again. Calculate the burden of fighting with the pharaohs and then a forty-year assignment in Sinai. Some tasks take time. Accept that. But as the scripture says, "They come to pass." They do end. We will cross over Jordan eventually. Others have done it—and so can we.

Are you afraid people don't like you? The Prophet Joseph Smith could share a few thoughts on that subject. Has health been a problem? Surely you will find comfort in the fact that a veritable Job has led the Church into one of the most exciting and revelatory decades of this entire dispensation. President Spencer W. Kimball has known few days in the past thirty years that have not been filled with pain or discomfort or disease. Is it wrong to wonder if President Kimball has in some sense become what he is not only in spite of the physical burdens but also in part because of them? You can take courage from your shared sacrifice with that giant of a man who has defied disease and death and who has shaken his fist at the forces of darkness and cried when there was hardly strength to walk, "Oh, Lord, I am yet strong. Give me one more mountain." (See Joshua 14:11-12.)

Do you ever feel untalented or incapable or inferior? Would it help you to know that everyone else feels that way too, including the prophets of God? Moses initially resisted his destiny, pleading that he was not eloquent in language. Jeremiah thought himself a child and was afraid of the faces he would meet.

And Enoch? This is the young man who, when called to a seemingly impossible task, said, "Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?" (Moses 6:31.) But Enoch was a believer. He stiffened his spine and squared his shoulders and went stutteringly on his way. Plain old ungifted, inferior Enoch. And this is what the angels would come to write of him: "So great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course; and the roar of the lions was heard out of the wilderness; and all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him." (Moses 7:13.)

Too little, too late, inadequate Enoch—whose name is now synonymous with transcendent righteousness! The next time you are tempted to paint your self-portrait dismal gray highlighted with lackluster beige, just remember that so have this kingdom's most splendid men and women been tempted. I say to you, as Joshua said to the tribes of Israel as they faced one of their most difficult tasks, "Sanctify yourselves: for tomorrow the Lord will do wonders among you." (Joshua 3:5.)

There is, of course, one source of despair more serious than all the rest, one that is linked with poor preparation of a far more serious order. The opposite of sanctification, it is the most destructive discouragement in time or eternity. I speak of transgression against God. It is depression embedded in sin.

Here the most crucial challenge, once you recognize the seriousness of your mistakes, will be to believe that you can change, that there can be a different you. To disbelieve that is clearly a satanic device designed to discourage and defeat you. We ought to fall on our knees and thank our Father in heaven that we belong to a church and have grasped a gospel that promises repentance to those who will pay the price. Repentance is not a foreboding word. It is, after faith, the most encouraging word in the Christian vocabulary. Repentance is simply the scriptural invitation for growth and improvement and progress and renewal. You can change! You can be anything you want to be in righteousness.

If there is one lament I cannot abide, it is the poor, pitiful, withered cry, "Well, that's just the way I am." If you want to talk about discouragement, that is one that discourages me. I've heard it from too many people who want to sin and call it psychology. And I use the word sin to cover a vast range of habits, some seemingly innocent enough, that nevertheless bring discouragement and doubt and despair.

You can change anything you want to change, and you can do it very fast. Another satanic suckerpunch is that it takes years and years and eons of eternity to repent. That's just not true. It takes exactly as long to repent as it takes you to say, "I'll change"—and mean it. Of course there will be problems to work out and restitutions to make. You may well spend—indeed, you had better spend—the rest of your life proving your repentance by its permanence. But change, growth, renewal, and repentance can come for you as instantaneously as they did for Alma and the sons of Mosiah. Even if you have serious amends to make, it is not likely that you would qualify for the term "the vilest of sinners," which is the phrase Mormon used in describing these young men. Yet as Alma recounts his own experience, it appears to have been as instantaneous as it was stunning. (See Alma 36.)

Do not misunderstand. Repentance is not easy or painless or convenient. It is a bitter cup from hell. But only Satan, who dwells there, would have you think that a necessary and required acknowledgment is more distasteful than permanent residence. Only he would say, "You can't change. You won't change. It's too long and too hard to change. Give up. Give in. Don't repent. You are just the way you are." That is a lie born of desperation. Don't fall for it.

The Brethren used to announce at general conference the names of those who had been called on missions. Not only was this the way friends and neighbors learned of the call, but more often than not it was the way the missionary learned of it as well. One such prospect was Eli H. Pierce. A railroad man by trade, he had not been very faithful in the Church, "even had my inclinations led in that direction, which I frankly confess they did not," he admitted. His mind had been given totally to what he demurely called "temporalities." He said he had never read more than a few pages of scripture in his life, that he had spoken at only one public gathering (an effort that he says "was no credit" to himself or those who heard him), and he used the vernacular of the railroad and barroom with a finesse born of long practice. He bought cigars wholesale—a thousand at a time—and he regularly lost his paycheck playing pool. Then this classic understatement: "Nature never endowed me with a superabundance of religious sentiment; my spirituality was not high and probably even a little below average."

Well, the Lord knew what Eli Pierce was and he knew something else. He knew what Eli Pierce could become. When the call came that October 5, 1875, Eli wasn't even in the Tabernacle. He was out working on one of the railroad lines. A fellow employee, once he had recovered from the shock of it all, ran out to telegraph the startling news. Brother Pierce writes: "At the very moment this intelligence was being flashed over the wires, I was sitting lazily thrown back in an office rocking chair, my feet on the desk, reading a novel and simultaneously sucking on an old Dutch pipe just to vary the monotony of cigar smoking. As soon as I had been informed of what had taken place, I threw the novel in the waste basket, the pipe in the comer (and have never touched either to this hour). I sent in my resignation . . . to take effect at once, in order that I might have time for study and preparation. I then started into town to buy [scripture]."

Then Eli wrote these stirring words: "Remarkable as it may seem, and has since appeared to me, a thought of disregarding the call, or of refusing to comply with the requirement, never once entered my mind. The only question I asked—and I asked it a thousand times—was: 'How can I accomplish this mission? How can I, who am so shamefully ignorant and untaught in doctrine, do honor to God and justice to the souls of men, and merit the trust reposed in me by the Priesthood?"'

With such genuine humility fostering resolution rather than defeating it, Eli Pierce fulfilled a remarkable mission. His journal could appropriately close on a completely renovated life with this one line: "Throughout our entire mission we were greatly blessed." But I add one experience to make the point.

During the course of his missionary service, Brother Pierce was called in to administer to the infant child of a branch president whom he knew and loved. Unfortunately the wife of the branch president had become embittered and now seriously objected to any religious activity within the home, including a blessing for this dying child. With the mother refusing to leave the bedside and the child too ill to move, the humble branch president with his missionary friend Eli retired to a small upper room in the house to pray for the baby's life. The mother, suspecting just such an act, sent one of the older children to observe and report back.

There in that secluded chamber the two men knelt and prayed fervently until, in Brother Pierce's own words, "we felt that the child would live and knew that our prayers had been heard." Arising from their knees, they turned slowly only to see the young girl standing in the partially open doorway gazing intently into the room. She seemed, however, quite oblivious to the movements of the two men. She stood entranced for some seconds, her eyes immovable. Then she said, "Papa, who was that man in there?" Her father said, "That is Brother Pierce. You know him." "No," she said matter-of-factly, "I mean the other man." "There was no other, darling, except Brother Pierce and myself. We were praying for the baby." "Oh, there was another man," the child insisted, "for I saw him standing [above] you and Brother Pierce and he was dressed in white." Now if God in his heavens will do that for a repentant old cigar-smoking, inactive, stern-swearing pool player, don't you think he'll do it for you? He will if your resolve is as deep and permanent as Eli Pierce's. In the Church we ask for faith, not infallibility. Here are five things to remember when trouble strikes. They are among the most fundamental truths of a gospel-centered life.

I heard the story once of a young man who left a small western town to travel east. The details of the story I have probably missed, but the personal impact the message had upon me is still reverberating. He had never traveled much beyond his little hometown and certainly had never ridden a train. But his older sister and brother-in-law needed him under some special circumstances, so his parents agreed to free him from the farm work in order to go. They drove him to Salt Lake City and put him on the train—new Levi's, not-so-new boots, very frightened, and eighteen years old.

There was one major problem and it terrified him. He had to change trains in Chicago. Furthermore, it involved an overnight layover, and that was a fate worse than death. His sister had written and carefully outlined when the incoming train would arrive and how and where and when he was to catch the outgoing line, but he was terrified.

And then the young man's humble, plain, sun-scarred father did something no one should ever forget. He said, "Son, wherever you go in this church there will always be somebody to stand by you. That's part of what it means to be a Latter-day Saint." He stuffed into the pocket of his son's calico shirt the name of a bishop he had taken the time to identify from sources at Church headquarters. If the boy had troubles or became discouraged and afraid, he was to call the bishop and ask for help.

Well, the train ride progressed rather uneventfully until the train pulled into Chicago. And even then the young man did pretty well at collecting his luggage and making it to the nearby hotel room that had been reserved for him by his brother-in-law. But then the clock began to tick and night began to fall, and faith began to fail. Could he find his way back to the station? Could he find the right track and train? What if it was late? What if he was late? What if he lost his ticket? What if his sister had made a mistake and he ended up in New York? What if? What if? What if?

Without those well-worn boots ever hitting the floor, that big raw-boned boy flew across the room, nearly pulled the telephone out of the wall, and, fighting back tears and troubles, called the bishop. Alas, the bishop was not home, but the bishop's wife was. She spoke long enough to reassure him that absolutely nothing could go wrong that night. He was, after all, safe in the room, and what he needed more than anything else was a night's rest. Then she said, "If tomorrow morning you are still concerned, follow these directions and you can be with our family and other ward members until train time. We will make sure you get safely on your way." She carefully spelled out the directions, had him repeat them back, and suggested a time for him to come.

With slightly more peace in his heart, he knelt by his bed as he had every night of his eighteen years and then waited for morning to come. Somewhere in the night the hustle and bustle of Chicago in the 1930s subsided into peaceful sleep.

At the appointed hour the next morning he set out. A long walk, then catch a bus. Then transfer to another. Watch for the stop. Walk a block, change sides of the street, and then one last bus. Count the streets carefully. Two more to go. One more to go. I'm here. Let me out of this bus. It worked, just as she said.

Then his world crumbled before his very eyes. He stepped out of the bus onto the longest stretch of shrubbery and grass he had ever seen in his life. She had said something about a park, but he thought a park was a dusty acre in a western town with a netless tennis court in one corner. Here he stood looking at the vast expanse of Lincoln Park with not a single friendly face in sight.

There was no sign of a bishop or a meetinghouse. And the bus was gone. It struck him that he had no idea where he was or what combination of connections with who knows what number of buses would be necessary to get him back to the station. Suddenly he felt more alone and overwhelmed than at any moment in his life. As the tears welled up in his eyes, he despised himself for feeling so afraid—but he was, and the tears would not stop. He stepped off the sidewalk away from the bus stop into the edge of the park. He needed some privacy for his tears, as only an eighteen-year-old could fully appreciate. But as he stepped away from the noise, fighting to control his emotions, he thought he heard something hauntingly familiar in the distance. He moved cautiously in the direction of the sound. First he walked, and then he walked quickly. The sound was stronger and firmer and certainly it was familiar. Then he started to smile, a smile that erupted into an audible laugh, and then he started to run. He wasn't sure that was the most dignified thing for a newcomer to Chicago to do, but this was no time for dignity. He ran, and he ran fast. He ran as fast as those cowboy boots could carry him—over shrubs, through trees, around the edge of a pool.

Though hard to you this journey may appear,

Grace shall be as your day.

The sounds were crystal clear and he was weeping newer, different tears. For there over a little rise huddled around a few picnic tables and bundles of food were the bishop and his wife and their children and most of the families of that little ward. The date: July 24. The sound: A slightly off-key, a cappella rendition of lines that any LDS boy could recognize.

Gird up your loins; fresh courage take;

Our God will never us forsake;

And soon we'll have this tale to tell—

All is well! all is well!

It was Pioneer Day. The gathering to which he had been invited was a 24th of July celebration. Knowing that it was about time for the youth to arrive, the ward members had thought it a simple matter to sing a verse or two of "Come, Come, Ye Saints" to let him know their location.

Elisha, with a power known only to the prophets, had counseled the king of Israel on how and where and when to defend against the warring Syrians. The king of Syria, of course, wished to rid his armies of this prophetic problem. "Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host: and they came by night, and compassed the city round about. . . . They compassed the city both with horses and chariots."

If Elisha was looking for a good time to be depressed, this was it. His only ally was the president of the local teachers quorum. It was one prophet and one lad against the world. And the boy was petrified. He saw the enemy everywhere—difficulty and despair and problems and burdens everywhere. With faltering faith Elisha's youthful companion cried, "Alas, my master! how shall we do?" And Elisha's reply? "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them."

"They that be with us?" Now, faith is fine and courage wonderful, but this is ridiculous, the boy thought. There were no others with them. He could recognize a Syrian army when he saw one, and he knew that one child and an old man were not strong odds against it. But Elisha's promise was: "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them." Then Elisha turned heavenward, saying, "Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see." And, we are told, "the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha." (2 Kings 6:14-17.)

In the gospel of Jesus Christ we have help from both sides of the veil. When disappointment and discouragement strike—and they will—we need to remember that if our eyes could be opened, we would see horses and chariots of fire as far as the eye can see, riding at great speed to come to our protection. They will always be there, these armies of heaven, in defense of Abraham's seed. We have been given this promise from heaven:

"Ye are little children, and ye have not as yet understood how great blessings the Father hath in his own hands and prepared for you; and ye cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will lead you along." (D&C 78:17-18.) "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, . . . and mine angels [shall be] round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.) "The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and the riches of eternity are yours." (D&C 78:18.)

Yes, "we'll find the place which God for us prepared." And on the way,

We'll make the air with music ring,

Shout praises to our God and King;

Above the rest these words we'll tell—

All is well! all is well!
