Jeffrey R. Holland, However Long and Hard the Road ( 1985)

5

Borne upon Eagles' Wings

All of us feel limitations of one kind or another. These might be emotional or social or physical or cultural, but we all have feelings of inadequacy and we all feel we have made some mistakes. A visitor's experience inside a prison gives a rare view of the result of such extreme mistakes, while providing a poignant reminder of other kinds of bondage we inflict on ourselves. We ought to learn from these penalties that are imposed and rise above them to true freedom.

It was unlike any other commencement or baccalaureate exercise I had ever attended. There were forty-four graduates, all male. They did not have traditional academic robes or caps or gowns. Their attire, to a man, was light blue denim shirts and dark blue denim trousers. The ceremony was not held in a fieldhouse or a stadium or even a lovely auditorium. The exercise was held in a modest interdenominational chapel at the Utah state prison. The graduating class consisted of forty-four men who had successfully completed a year's course of Bible study sponsored by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints but open to all who cared to come and participate. These forty-four represented more than a dozen different religions, and, of course, many of them had no formal religious affiliation at all.

A delightfully cordial and capable inmate conducted the exercises. He immediately warmed the group to the event. About half were pleasantly and appropriately called "outsiders." He said he wanted the outsiders particularly to appreciate that he was in prison even though he had hired one of the biggest criminal lawyers in America: "It was only after I was through with the trial that I fully understood that designation," he said. "He thought he was a lawyer and I think he's a criminal."

The opening prayer was given by a young man who seemed like a boy and looked like a boy and surely had not yet begun to shave. He gave there, according to the chaplain, the first verbal and public prayer he had ever given in his life. He was frightened to death, but it was a prayer of the heart, and you would need to have been there and to have heard it to appreciate it fully. He was in the prison for ten years to life on an armed robbery charge. The closing prayer was given by a man who was, I suppose, forty-five or fifty years old—a pleasant, slightly chubby man who looked as if he should have been somebody's uncle and undoubtedly was. He was in for a life term on second-degree murder.

The choir sang, among other numbers, the Hammerstein-Romberg song "Stouthearted Men." The looks on their faces and the feeling in their voices said something about stouthearted men that I had never understood before. I don't think any two of them crossed paths on the same note at any given moment during the rendition. But it was a choir of angels. When they sang, "Give me some men who are stouthearted men, who will fight for the rights they adore; / Give me ten men who are stouthearted men, and I'll soon give you ten thousand more," they knew something about rights that had been adored and lost, that were adored all the more because they had been lost, and that perhaps were desired more greatly because someday they might return.

A young man who was now on the outside had come back to get his certificate and to encourage his colleagues. He said something that I wrote down. He looked out to his colleagues and said, "Guys, the perspective in prison is really bad. Things really look better on the outside. Try to remember that." Then he turned to the outsiders, to the friends and families who had come in, and said, "You people are a light in a dark place. If it were not for love like yours, we would not be able to get from where we are to where we need to be."

He was followed by another delightful young man who couldn't have been more than twenty years of age. He had been in and out of prison very quickly—only eight months and then probation. He talked about what it was like to be back out, to be holding a job, dating girls, going to church, and trying to live a moral and law-abiding life. He turned to friend and stranger alike and said, "Please understand that those of us at the halfway house need faith and prayers too. We have reentered a world of temptation."

The inmate who conducted the service concluded with some emotion in his voice and tears in his eyes. "This is the most auspicious occasion of our year," he said of this graduation service. "It is better than Christmas. It's better than Thanksgiving. It's even better than Mother's Day. It's better because we're enlightened, and that's as close as we come to being free."

Then the gates clanged behind my wife and me and we went home. But I have never forgotten the experience and the impressions I had that evening. One thought I had profoundly impressed upon me is that God is just. Alma said, "What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:25.) Paul said to the Galatians, "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Galatians 6:7.) If we sow thistles, we shouldn't plan to get strawberries. If we sow hate, we must not expect to reap an abundance of love. We get back, in kind, that which we reap, but we reap, somehow, always in greater quantity. We sow a little thistle, and we get a lot of thistle—years and years of it, big bushes and branches of it. We never get rid of it unless we cut it out. If we sow a little bit of hate, before we know it we've reaped a lot of hate—smoldering and festering and belligerent and finally warring and malicious hate.

A prophet of the Old Testament, Hosea, warned all of us to be careful lest we learn personally something that I think my friends at the state institution understood more fully than I had: "They have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind." (Hosea 8:7.) God is just. We really do reap what we sow.

Then I had the comforting idea that my first thought wasn't as painful as it sounded. However frightening it may be to realize that all of us have sinned, however frightening it may be to contemplate a just God, surely it is infinitely more frightening to contemplate an unjust God.

A basic principle of Latter-day Saint doctrine is that in order to go forward, we have to know that God is just. Joseph Smith's Lectures on Faith give a basic list of attributes God must have (which we know he does have) in order for us to have faith in him, principles that give us the courage to believe that it will be well with us if we obey his commandments. One of those Godly attributes is justice. We would not have the faith to live righteously or to love better or to repent more readily if we did not think that justice would count for us, if we thought that God would change his mind midstream and tell us there was another set of rules in force. Because we know that God is just and would cease to be God if he were unjust, we have the faith to go forward knowing we will not be the victims of whimsy or caprice or a bad day or a bad joke.

A third thought came to me. How grateful I was that, in addition to being just, God is able to be merciful also. After Alma had established with Corianton that God has to be just, he then stressed that that same God would be merciful as well, and that mercy would claim the penitent. (See Alma 42.) That concept meant a bit more to me because I had just been where they added i-a-r-y to that word. Alma gave me encouragement: mercy could claim the penitent. I decided that if those men had to go to the penitentiary to take advantage of the gift of mercy, if somehow by going there they were repenting and finding the gospel of Jesus Christ or the scriptures or the power of the Atonement, then their imprisonment was worth it. We should all go to the penitentiary, or to the bishop, or to the Lord, or to those whom we have offended or to those who have offended us. Our own little penitentiaries are all around us. If acknowledgment of that is what it takes to make us truly penitent, to enable us to lay claim to the gift of mercy, then we must "serve our time."

I know it isn't easy to go back and to undo and to make a new beginning, but I believe with all my heart that it is easier to begin anew than it is to go on believing that justice will not take its toll. As Elder Richard L. Evans was fond of saying, 'What's the use of running if you're on the wrong road?" A favorite British scholar said, using the same metaphor, "I do not think that all who choose wrong roads perish; but their rescue consists in being put back on the right road. A [mathematical] sum [incorrectly worked] can be put right; but only by going back till you find the error and then working it fresh from that point. [It will] never [be corrected] by simply going on. Evil can be undone, but it cannot 'develop' into good. Time does not heal it. The spell must be unwound." (C. S. Lewis, The Great Divorce, New York: Macmillan Co., 1973, p. 6.) God is just, but mercy claimeth the penitent, and the evil can be undone. There is some repenting to be done in every life, and we ought to be about it.

One thing we ought to repent of is our own ignorance. There are little cliches we learn early in our lives, most of which I dislike; some of them I really dislike. I think number one on my list is "Sticks and stones will break my bones, but names will never hurt me." Names do hurt. I'll take sticks and stones any day. Second to this are the cliches "Ignorance is bliss" and "What I don't know won't hurt me." Those two are realty dangerous. In fact, I believe that nothing will hurt us more than what we don't know.

Plato said, "It is better to be unborn than untaught, for ignorance is at the root of all misfortune." Samuel Johnson said, "Ignorance, when voluntary, is criminal, and a man may be properly charged with that evil which he neglected or refused to learn how to prevent." (Italics added.) But I don't want to talk just about Plato's books and Sam Johnson's books. We ought to read those works, but we must read the word of God. At one time in the history of the Church in this dispensation, the entire church was indicted for not doing so. In 1832, in a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord declared:

"I now give unto you a commandment to beware concerning yourselves, to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life. For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God. For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ." (D&C 84:43-45. Italics added.)

The first rung of this ladder that brings us the Spirit of Christ is the word, and to disregard the word—especially the Book of Mormon—is to cut off that light which is Spirit. "Your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received . . . even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given." (D&C 84:54, 57.)

Can we, like these early Saints, also be accused of taking this book lightly? Some of us treat it as if it were just another book—let it gather a little dust, or use it to press the rose from Mary Jane's wedding, or use it as a doorstop in the hallway, or do almost anything with it but read it. I believe we will be indicted for the darkness we incur and that we will owe penitence in this life or the next for that which we fail to learn, especially that which we fail to learn from the Book of Mormon. President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that "no member of this church can stand approved in the presence of God who has not seriously and carefully read the Book of Mormon." (Conference Report, October 1961, p. 18.)

Too often we are also in servitude to our own bodies. Paul said, I delight in the law of God after the inward man: but I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity." (Romans 7:22-23.) I don't mean just the dramatic sins—the anger that leads to murder, or the passion that leads to sexual transgression, or the lust that leads to theft. There are more common kinds of bondage than these. The war in the body of someone who is a little overweight that makes him huff and puff by the time he gets to the top of the stairs, the war of the mattress on his back that he somehow cannot shake in the morning so he misses those precious and most inspirational hours of the day, the war of grooming and personal hygiene that could do much for us—all these are restrictive to our freedom if we don't control them. But of course certain limitations are sometimes beyond our control.

Some time ago I met a man I would like to meet again. His name is Henry D. Stagg—Don Stagg to his friends. He went to bed in August of 1965 about the way everybody else goes to bed and about the way he had all of his life. The difference came the next morning when his body awoke and his eyes didn't. He was blind and he was frightened. He went to his doctor, who said, with guarded optimism, "This thing sometimes doesn't last very long, and it might just be an hour or two." Well, the hours stretched into days and the days stretched into weeks and the weeks finally became a month. Don Stagg could think of only one thing, and that was suicide.

To make a long story short, Don Stagg found, in the midst of his experience, what one of the prisoners found; that is, it takes some love to get from where we are to where we need to be. One evening Mrs. Stagg arranged to slip the children past the hospital security. They shuffled into the room, but of course Don did not know who was there. By his own admission, he was surly and despondent almost all of the time, and he didn't want to talk. But then he felt those little hands on his legs and on his arms. The children said, "Daddy, we love you, and we want you to come home. We don't want any other daddy."

Figuratively but not literally, Don had seen a little light in a dark place, so he went home and started to pace off distances in the house. He first paced off the steps from the bedroom to the refrigerator, thinking, "It's one thing to be blind; it's another thing to starve to death." When he had the house mastered, he went out into the neighborhood and then up and down the streets for several miles. He decided that he could do a lot more than he thought he could. About two years after the effects of this disease had taken his sight, he enrolled in law school at the University of Utah. In four years he passed all his courses and the state bar. For one year he worked for the attorney general's office, and now he is in private practice.

Don Stagg is blind and has some limitations and some bonds put upon him by his own body, but he is doing a great deal. He water-skis and he snow-skis and he can play a great game of golf. Now, there are some things he can't do. He cannot see the daughter who has been born to him since he lost his sight. But he believes he will someday.

Life itself—our various cultural and environmental circumstances—can also impose some severe bonds upon us. We may be perfectly healthy, have fine bodies, and even know a good deal about the gospel, but life still may have cast us in roles that we cannot seem to escape. In discussing limitations of birth and circumstances, I remember the very famous story that Elder Marion D. Hanks told me as a missionary:

The famed naturalist of the last century, Louis Agassiz, was lecturing in London and had done a marvelous job. An obviously bright little old lady, but one who did not seem to have all the advantages in life, came up and was spiteful. She was resentful and said that she had never had the chances that he had had and she hoped he appreciated it. He took that bit of a lacing very pleasantly and turned to the lady and, when she was through, said, "What do you do?"

She said, "I run a boarding house with my sister. I'm unmarried."

"What do you do at the boarding house?"

"Well, I skin potatoes and chop onions for the stew. We have stew every day."

"Where do you sit when you do that interesting but homely task?"

"I sit on the bottom step of the kitchen stairs."

"Where do your feet rest when you sit there on the bottom step?"

"On a glazed brick."

"What's a glazed brick?"

"I don't know."

"How long have you been sitting there?"

"Fifteen years."

Agassiz concluded, "Here's my card. Would you write me a note when you get a moment about what a glazed brick is?"

Well, that made her mad enough to go home and do it. She went home and got the dictionary out and found out that a brick was a piece of baked clay. That didn't seem enough to send to a Harvard professor, so she went to the encyclopedia and found out that a brick was made of vitrified kaolin and hydrous aluminum silicate, which didn't mean a thing to her. She went to work and visited a brick factory and a tile maker. Then she went back in history and studied a little bit about geology and learned something about clay and clay beds and what hydrous meant and what vitrified meant. She began to soar out of the basement of a boarding house on the wings of words like vitrified kaolin and hydrous aluminum silicate. She finally decided that there were about 120 different kinds of glazed bricks and tiles. She could tell Agassiz that, so she wrote him a little note of thirty-six pages and said, "Here's your glazed brick."

He wrote back, "This is a fine piece of work. If you change this and that and the other, I'll prepare it for publication and send you that which is due you from the publication." She thought no more of it, made the changes, sent it back, and almost by return mail came a check for 250 dollars. His letter said, "I've published your piece. What was under the brick?"

And she said, "Ants."

He replied (all of this by mail), "What's an ant?"

She went to work and this time she was excited. She found 1825 different kinds of ants. She found that there were ants that you could put three to the head of a pin and still have standing room left over. She found that there were ants an inch long that moved in armies half a mile wide and destroyed everything in their path. She found that some ants were blind; some ants lost their wings on the afternoon they died; some milked cows and took the milk to the aristocrats up the street. She found more ants than anybody had ever found, so she wrote Mr. Agassiz something of a treatise, numbering 360 pages. He published it and sent her the money and royalties, which continued to come in. She saw the lands and places of her dreams on a little carpet of vitrified kaolin and on the wings of flying ants that may lose their wings on the afternoon they die. (The Gift of Self, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1974, pp. 151-53.)

I do not minimize the limitations of our circumstance and our environment and the battle we have in order to overcome them. I know there can be real fetters, but perhaps we can do something about them. For all I know, we may all be sitting with our feet on glazed bricks.

Let me just conclude this thought about various kinds of bondage with one more example. We may be bright and learned. We may be physically fit and fully capable. We may have all of the advantages of circumstance and environment and society. But there is a bondage and a servitude and a limitation that, if we're not careful, may be more subtle and seductive than any of the others. For lack of something else to call it, let me call it the world. May I share with you a few lines on this subject:

For that person striving to live righteously, this mortal existence is a testing time indeed. The faithful are plagued with the temptations of a world that appears to have lost itself in a snarled maze of ambiguity, mendacity, and threatening uncertainty. The challenge to live in the world but not of the world is a monumental one, indeed.

Our second estate is indeed a probationary state. The choices we are called upon to make every day of our lives call forth the exercise of our agency. That we fail so frequently to think and do that which is right is not evidence against the practicality of righteous living. We do not falter and stumble in the path of righteousness simply because we do nothing else, but because too often we lose the vision of our relationship with God. The incessant din and cackling ado of this turbulent life drown out the message which asserts that, as man is, God once was, and that as God is, man may become.

If we will not dance to the music of materialism and hedonism but will remain attuned to the voice of godly reason, we will be led to the green pastures of respite and the still waters of spiritual refreshment. All the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune this world can hurl against us are as nothing when compared to the rewards for steadfastness and faithfulness. It would behoove us all to fix our sights more consistently upon the things which are everlasting and eternal. This world is not our home.

Those lines are from the valedictory address at the Utah state prison graduation exercise I mentioned at the outset. The speaker was about fifty years of age and has been behind bars for more than half of those years. He knows whereof he speaks.

If we had to explain to someone the reasons for our mortal existence, that explanation would have to include something about freedom. An important part of the great council in heaven dealt with freedom and how it would be exercised. The Father's course was one of agency and choice and freedom to err, but ultimately freedom to succeed. As many safeguards as possible, including the revelatory powers of heaven, were brought to enlighten our choices so that freedom would not turn to bondage.

What a fortunate time we live in, because our prophet is not incarcerated. If you took the sum total of religious history in the dispensations down to and including our own, you would probably find the saints in prison much of the time: Israel in servitude or escaping from some Egyptians, Nephites escaping from Lamanites, the Prophet Joseph in Liberty jail, or the rest of us trying to escape from our own fears or our own sins.

One almost wishes he had been in prison so he could talk as Peter and Paul did and have angels come, or as Alma and Amulek did and have the prison walls crumble, or as Joseph Smith did, a prophet who could write what may be the most sublime scriptural literature of our dispensation from the very center of a prison cell. I thank God that we live in such a time as we do, when the president and prophet of our church does not need to live in fear or imprisonment, and when we as a church are not required to go into bondage and into slavery. But there are other kinds of bonds and there are other kinds of prisons.

I believe with all my heart that if we can repent of our sins, if we can be charitable regarding the sins of others, if we can take courage toward our circumstances and try to do something about them, then there is a power, a living Father of us all who will reach down and "bear us as on eagles' wings. "When Moses was called to lead the children of Israel out of Egypt, Jehovah said:

"The cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them. . . . I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt. And Moses said unto God, who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh . . . ? And he said, Certainly I will be with thee." (Exodus 3:9-12.)

And then there were demonstrations of God's commitment to freedom for his children. Sticks turned into serpents and water turned into blood, but that wasn't enough. There were plagues—frogs and lice, hail and locusts—and that wasn't enough. There was darkness, and finally there was death. Then the Israelites were set free from political servitude to pursue a higher freedom if they would. And that challenge remains before us.

Still stretching before you and me is something of a desert and a sea, like a barbed prison wire between our Egypt and our promised land. We're all somewhere in that desert. When that little band of Israelites gathered at the Mount of Sinai, Jehovah said to the sons of Abraham, "Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel; Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself." (Exodus 19:3-4.)

In my life, I have been borne on eagles' wings. I know with all my heart that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that we will stand free for a time, unfettered and unencumbered, and that we will recognize in the marks on his flesh something of his bondage and imprisonment and dying service to us. I know that we must repent of our sins and that God has to be just, but I also take great delight and eternal hope in the scriptural reassurance that where sin abounded, grace did much more abound and mercy claimeth the penitent.
