In February 1832 the Prophet Joseph Smith was working on his inspired translation of the Bible, with Sidney Rigdon as scribe. They had just finished reading John 5:29 about the Resurrection when they received the vision that we now have as section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants [D&C 76]. Of this experience, the Prophet wrote:

“We beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness; …

“And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

“For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

“That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God” (D&C 76:20, 22–24).

Perhaps most of us will not in this life see the Savior. But we can know with certainty, through the power of the Holy Ghost, that he does live and that he loves us. Many members of the Church, of all ages, bear such a testimony.

On the following pages youth from around the world share the most precious gift they can give—their testimonies of the Savior.

“At this season of Christmas, I ponder the Savior’s life and think about the many things he has been through. I know he lives and will always be there to support me. If I face challenges in my life, I just think about him and how I would act if he were standing there with me.”

—Simone Ramsay, Georgetown, Guyana

“In 1994, my father’s work brought us to a place where I experienced rejection and persecution. But as my testimony of Jesus Christ grew, I was filled with love for others. I am thankful to my Savior for the feeling of peace that I now have, although the persecution I faced was difficult. Jesus Christ has healed my wounds, and I desire only to be worthy to serve him and enjoy the privilege of feeling him close to me.”

—Fernando Israel Sánchez Pantoja, Celaya, México

“Jesus Christ not only taught, but he also did what he said. He is the best teacher of all ages. His example of humility, forgiveness, obedience, faithfulness, holiness, virtue, service, and love has increased my admiration and love for him. When I’m lonely, when I am sad and cry over failures, he supports me. No embrace from parents, leaders, or sweethearts can be compared to the feeling of being embraced by his secure love.”

—Lisa Haryono, Kadipiro Surakarta, Indonesia

“It is difficult to put into words how much this Church has changed my life. I have been a member since October 1995, and I still feel with all my heart the joy and happiness that I experienced at the moment of my baptism. The knowledge that God lives and loves us all provides the divine strength I need to withstand evil and temptation. I know that God lives and that he loves us, for he sent his Son, Jesus Christ, who died for us and atoned for our sins.”

—Ylena Yelistratova, Yekaterinburg, Russia

“Until I received mine a few years ago, I had not understood the importance of a patriarchal blessing. But now I constantly read my blessing. I know that I received it because the Savior loves me. I know that I am nothing without the Savior. I know that he lives and that, thanks to him, I will one day find again my father and my brother who have gone to the spirit world.”

—Gaelle Taputu, Mahina, Tahiti, French Polynesia

“I wanted a testimony of Christ and his church, so I decided to pray. Days went by and I had a sudden feeling, a feeling of sureness that the gospel is true. I felt so relieved and so happy that Heavenly Father had answered my prayer.”

—Christine Tabernilla, Muscat, Oman

“Last year my father was injured in an accident. With help from others, we have been able to overcome the financially difficult time that followed. At first I felt resentment toward God. But now I am thankful to him. I am not different from other youth, but I have something different from the others. I know God lives. I wish we experienced only happiness. But because of my testimony, I will accept either happiness or misfortune in life.”

—Kim, Hae-Young, Seoul, Korea

“My testimony helps me greatly in every difficult moment of my life. When I am troubled, I need only look at the precious treasure I have—the gospel of Christ—and I am comforted. All around me, I see the lives of people being transformed through the power of our Heavenly Father.”

—Elder Celio Carneiro Ximenes, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil

“Ever since I was a little girl, I have been very shy. When it comes time to bear testimony in public, it feels as if lions are going to tear me apart. So I am grateful to be able to bear my testimony to the world in this way. I know that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ exist and that Joseph Smith really was a prophet. I know that through reading the scriptures and by keeping the commandments, we will be happy here on the earth and will have a seat in the kingdom of God.”

—Isabel Ahsue Ndongo Macias, Madrid, Spain

“Attending church each Sunday and partaking of the sacrament gives me the strength to overcome the adversary during the week. I know that this life is the time to prepare and follow the example of Jesus Christ. He is the only mirror through which we should look to see ourselves.”

—Tito Geovanny Macías Robles, Machala, El Oro, Ecuador

“I am the only Church member in my family. Sometimes it is hard for me to progress, but the trials strengthen my testimony. I know that God and Jesus Christ live. I know this because they answer my prayers and lead me to them. I am never alone. When I most need them, they are at my side. I love the gospel and am very happy to belong to the Church. I hope that some day I will be sharing with my whole family the joy of membership in the only true church.”

—Lia Hebe Pereyra, Buenos Aires, Argentina

“I have found that accepting the gospel of Jesus Christ can make a big difference in one’s life. It can change a rebellious heart and bring more zest to living. Knowing the purpose of life gives me a new sense of direction, a new hope, and a new beginning in my life. I have never regretted my decision to become a member of this church.”

—Mary Lee Joy Sigayo, Biñan, Laguna, Philippines

“Jesus Christ was and forever will be the perfect example. I know that he was born as a humble child and, though the Son of God, grew up as the child of earthly parents. I know that he experienced much pain and suffering so that we could be saved. I know also that he was the Creator and that even before I was born I had this promise from him: that if I trusted in him during my earthly life and lived worthily, I could return to see him. I desire with all my heart to see him and to thank him face to face for all that he has done to help me return to live with him and with my Father in Heaven.”

—Bianca Estela García Aguilar, Usulután City, El Salvador
