Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Biographies

AaronPPAinsworth, Joseph

Ainsworth, Joseph, a counselor in the Basin Ward Bishopric for nine years, is the son of Joseph Ainsworth and Mary Huff, and was born Jan. 22, 1848, at Woodgreen, Staffordshire, England. He was baptized into the Church Oct. 26, 1862, by James L. Hamilton, his parents being members of the Church when he was born. His ordinations to the Priesthood took place in the following order: Ordained a Teacher in 1877, by Lorenzo Snow; an Elder July 4, 1897, by Thos. C. Stanford, and a High Priest May 8, 1898, by Moroni Pickett. Besides having labored nine years (up to the spring of 1897) in the Bishopric, he has been an active worker and officer in the Sunday school and mutual improvement associations. He married Hannah Maria Hanson, May 15, 1877, and is the father of eleven children, five boys and six girls, nine of whom are living. Elder Ainsworth served as justice of the peace for fifteen years and as a school trustee for about twelve years at Little Wood River, Blaine county, Idaho. By trade he is a carpenter, but has also engaged in farming and other employments. Together with his mother and her family of two sons and one daughter, he emigrated to Utah in 1862, crossing the plains with ox-teams, under many difficulties, owing to the sickness of his mother. He not only walked nearly the entire distance across the plains and mountains, but, being the oldest and therefore the head of the family, had to do the cooking and most of the rough work. Brother Ainsworth took an active part in military affairs in early days, having been a member of the militia in Salt Lake county. In 1866 he did service in Sanpete county during the Indian troubles, and during the Black Hawk war he did a considerable amount of scouting. In 1883, he moved to Little Wood River, Idaho, where he was one of the pioneers, and he has done his full share of work to develop that country into its present splendid condition.
