Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Oldroyd, Archibald Todd

Oldroyd, Archibald Todd, Bishop of the Glenwood Ward, Sevier co., Utah, from 1875 to 1886, was born Jan. 4, 1844, at Glasgow, Scotland, the son of Andrew Todd and Catherine Micklejohn. His father died when Archibald was very young and the mother married Peter Oldroyd which name the step-son also bears. Archibald emigrated with his mother and step-father to Utah in 1853, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Falcon," which sailed from Liverpool, March 28, 1853. He crossed the plains in Appleton M. Harmon's train. The family settled at Manti, Sanpete co., in December, 1853, and spent the winter there, but in the spring of 1854 they assisted in settling Ft. Ephraim, where the mother became widely and favorably known as the first midwife of that infant settlement. At Ephraim, young Archibald was active in all kinds of pioneer work pertaining to the building up of the settlement, and here also he married Mary Anderson, a native of Sweden, by whom he became the father of eleven children. In 1862 he made a trip to the Missouri river after emigrants. In 1864, together with others, he was called to settle the Sevier Valley, and he arrived on the present site of Glenwood in February, 1864. With the exception of the evacuation on account of Indian troubles Glenwood has been his home ever since. In 1882 Bro. Oldroyd yielded obedience to the higher law of marriage by taking to wife Amillicent Jackson, by whom he has had six children. In consequence of this marriage he was arrested on a charge of unlawful cohabitation, and being convicted he served a term in the Utah penitentiary from Oct. 13, 1888, to Jan. 24, 1889. In 1891 he served another term (30 days) for the "same offence." When he emerged from the penitentiary the first time he betook himself to Colonia Diaz, Mexico, where he resided two years. It was on his return to Utah that he was arrested the second time. Bro. Oldroyd has the satisfaction that all his children at the present time are members of the Church and some of them occupying prominent positions. In 1874 (May 24th) Bro. Oldroyd was ordained a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over the Glenwood Ward, which position he held until 1886, when he was succeeded by Herbert H. Bell. When a branch of the United Order was organized in Glenwood, Bro. Oldroyd was chosen as president of the same. During the Indian wars Bishop Oldroyd was very active, being a captain of cavalry in the Utah militia, and he participated in two engagements with the Indians (July 26, 1865, and March 21, 1867) at Glenwood, and took part in several expeditions into the mountains after the savages. When Jens Peter Petersen and wife and Miss Smith of Richfield were killed by the Indians between Richfield and Glenwood, Bro. Oldroyd assisted in loading the bodies of the slain in the wagon and witnessed with horror the terrible conditions of the mutilated corpses. Bishop Oldroyd has been a sample pioneer settler, and from the beginning he has given to the municipality of Glenwood his best efforts-the strength of his youth and manhood. He has held a number of secular positions in the interest of his fellow-citizens, and has always given satisfaction in his end to deal out justice to all. For two terms he served as county selectman, was constable in the Glenwood district, fish and game warden of Sevier co., etc. Otherwise he is a farmer and stock raiser by occupation. Under his direction a successful co-operative store was started in Glenwood, also a grist mill, saw mill and cabinet shop. These were mainly the products of the United Order, which was run successfully in Glenwood for several years under the direction of Bishop Oldroyd.
