Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Petersen, Niels Mortensen (Lynge)

Petersen, Niels Mortensen (Lynge) one of the early converts to "Mormonism" in Scandinavia and a prominent Elder in the Church, was born Nov. 12, 1819, in Albæk, Hjørring amt, Denmark, the son of Morten Petersen and Kjersten Christensen. In 1849 he married Mette Christine Christensen, who became the mother of ten children. While residing at Vester Idskov, where he owned a fine farm, he became a convert to "Mormonism" and was baptized Oct. 24, 1858, by A. P. Fjeldsted. Soon afterwards he was ordained to the Priesthood and became very energetic in spreading the gospel as a local missionary. For a number of years he presided over the Vaar branch and was the means of quite a number of people joining the Church. Being well to do he was also liberal with his means and contributed much toward the temporal support of his co-religionists who were less blessed with this world's goods than he was. He emigrated to Utah in 1862, and paid the fare of quite a number of poor saints. After arriving in Utah with his family Bro. Petersen first located in Pleasant Grove, Utah co., but when the Sevier Valley was opened for settlement he became one of the pioneer settlers of Richfield. He surveyed the Richfield Irrigating canal in 1863-64 and subsequently surveyed most of the canals in the Sevier Valley. Throughout he was one of the most successful men in the whole country in the development of the Sevier Valley. When the settlements on the Sevier were vacated, owing to Indian troubles. Bro. Petersen located temporarily at Ephraim, Sanpete co., but returned to Richfield in 1870, and resided there the remainder of his days. He was the first county surveyor of Sevier county, and when the Sevier Stake of Zion was organized, he was chosen as the senior member of the High Council, which position he held until February, 1898, when he was honorably released. In 1873 he married Johanna, Katrine Jensen, who became the mother of nine children. Bro. Petersen was an active worker and an officer in the United Order. In 1876-78 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, presiding over the Christiania conference a part of the time. For many years he presided over the Scandinavian meetings in Richfield. At a good old age Bro. Petersen passed to his final rest Jan. 14, 1903, at Richfield. Throughout his entire life he was an industrious, modest and unassuming man, always willing to accommodate and serve his fellow-citizens. He was a kind father, an affectionate husband, a good citizen and a faithful member of the Church. He was of a sincere, honest and jovial character, gained influence wherever he went and gained friends on every hand. He was a heavily built man, noted for his extraordinary strength in his younger days, and was throughout a leading and influential citizen, both in his native land and in his adopted country.
