Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Richards, Emily SophiaPPRichards, Emily Sophia

Richards, Emily SophiaPPRichards, Emily Sophia, a charter member of the General Board of the Relief Societies, was born May 13, 1850, at South Cottonwood, Salt Lake county, Utah, the daughter of Nathan Tanner and Rachel Winter Smith. Her father's family were originally from the State of New York, where their progenitors were people of wealth and refinement. The father was a man of rugged character and of pronounced faith in man's spiritual origin and celestial destiny; and the mother, likewise, was of a strong religious nature, possessing prophetic power, vivacious, yet of philosophic endurance in days of trial. It is not surprising therefore, though her early environment lacked the influence which fashionable society invites and approves, that their daughter grew up in grace and graciousness, in knowledge and refinement, partaking as she did of the spiritual element in her devout parents. In her rural home, at the base of the snow-crowned Wasatch mountains, she passed the first six years of her life, developing into girlhood as a flower, blossoming in sweet simplicity and purity, her mind expanding as her soul grew in grace. She was then taken by her parents to Salt Lake City, where teachers of talent and learning had charge of her education. When eighteen years of age, she became the wife of Franklin S. Richards, one of her former schoolmates, now a leading attorney of the State. The date of their marriage was Dec. 18, 1868. Five months later the young couple removed to Ogden, and there the public career of Mrs. Richards began. Her first appointment was to the position of assistant secretary of the Weber County Relief Societies. She had previously been connected with the Relief Societies Salt Lake City. Next she was made president of the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association of Ogden and vice-president of the county organization of the same, serving ten years in that capacity. During this time she made frequent visits to the national capital in company with her husband, who had argued many important cases before the Supreme Court of the United States. There she had the opportunity of attending many woman's conventions, and other interesting meetings held at the seat of the government. In 1885 Mrs. Richards, together with Sisters Emmeline B. Wells, Josephine Richards West and Dr. Ellen B. Ferguson, presented a memorial of the women of Utah to the President and Congress. The anti-Mormon opposition was then at its height and the Supreme Court was hearing the case of the United States vs. Lorenzo Snow. These ladies listened to the entire argument. They called upon Senator Ingalls about the "Mormon" protest against the tyranny and indecency of Federal Officials in Utah, and against their own disfranchisement without cause. Senator Ingalls answered: "I haven't read the petition; I put it into the waste basket; it was too indecent to read". He was then asked: "If it was too indecent for you to read, what do you think about the women, who had to suffer?" They also called upon Senator Edmonds and other statesman and left no stone unturned to impart correct information upon the subject of Utah and her people. Had Congress listened to these ladies' protest against Congress building an Industrial home for "Mormon" women several hundred thousands dollars of public money spent upon that useless institution might have been saved. In 1888 it was deemed desirable to make the Relief Societies and the Young Ladies Associations auxiliary to the National Women's organizations, which was done, and Mrs. Richards was appointed to represent them in the first International Council. Its sessions lasting a week were held at the Albaugh Opera House, in the City of Washington. The event is well described in the following article from the pen of an able newspaper writer of that period: "The leading woman workers of the world were present, and the sessions continued several days, the local papers being filled with pictures and speeches of noted women. Just about that time a committee of Utah men was in Washington urging Statehood on the bases of the constitution formulated and adopted by a convention in Utah in 1887. The Utah admission question was before Congress and it had become a subject of public interest in Washington, being discussed pro and con in the papers and in private circles. Just at the time of the Woman's World Convention the Utah question attained its highest pitch, the custom of polygamy and woman suffrage in Utah being at the moment revived in the public mind in the most aggravated form. At this juncture it was announced that a Utah lady would address the World's Convention as a representative of Utah. It was perfectly natural that the immense concourse of people attending the Convention should forecast the character of the lady who should address them as some masculine heroine, who could wield a battleax or any other weapon in behalf of Utah, in keeping with their own exaggerated notions of Utah life. And the lady herself, at the hour she had to appear, could but feel the extreme tension in the public mind; for the morning papers were bristling with denunciations of Utah institutions. There was an ominous pause in the great throng when it was announced from the platform by the presiding officer that the lady delegate would address them. Soon the lady appeared, moving forward among the throng on the rostrum and taking her place beside the narrow reading desk. What an apparition! It was not a feminine Boanerges, not an Amazon, but a delicate, refined lady, trembling slightly under the scrutinizing gaze of the multitude, yet reserved, self possessed, dignified, and as pure and sweet as an angel. Her appearance was a powerful antithesis to their preconceived impressions and the change of feeling in the audience was almost instantaneous. The lady's voice began its utterance on a scale of gently tremous pathos, and without rising into high pitch, its tenderness subdued every whisper until its words reached every ear in the auditory. The tenor of the address was what might have been expected by Utah people, an orderly, scholarly presentation, such as would serve to recite facts and principles and disarm prejudice. It was not the words themselves, but the gently spirit, that, like the morning dawn, went with the words and carried winning grace to every heart. It was wonderful how sympathies were engendered and asperities removed. When the lady concluded, after half an hour's reading there was many a moist eye, and many a listener felt thankful that this gentle appeal had given them a new, more refreshing and more kindly impression of Utah people and institutions. It was the mighty force of the gentle sunlight, that unlocks the iceberg from its moorings and sets it afloat upon the broad ocean. We sat near the speaker, but had never seen her before. We learned afterwards that she was a Mrs. Richards, wife of Lawyer Richards of Salt Lake City." Mrs. Richards herself refers to the occasion as one of the most interesting, not to say critical experiences of her life. Her name, for some reason, had been passed upon the program, and another lady announced, who was to speak upon the Indian question; whereupon, she sent a note to the chairman, asking the cause of the omission. The mistake was at once rectified, and Miss Susan B. Anthony, met Mrs. Richards at the wing and escorted her to the platform with every demonstration of respect. It was feared that the lady from Utah would not be able to make herself heard throughout the hall-other speakers having failed in that regard-but to the general surprise and delight, her clear tones penetrated to the remotest recesses of the building and her speech was a veritable triumph. At an executive session of the same convention of woman, a president and vice-president were appointed to organize suffrage associations in Utah: Mrs. Froiseth, president, and Mrs. Richards, vice-president. A very prominent Southern woman opposed the nomination of Mrs. Richards, saying that "Mormonism" and polygamy were synonymous terms and feeling that the nomination of Mrs. Richards would mean the sustaining of that principle. This was all quite unexpected by the latter, but she responded in a short talk, refuting the statement, and giving the names of several Utah men, including Delegate John T. Caine, saying that they were "Mormons", or Latter-day Saints, but not polygamists. At the close of Mrs. Richards' talk, Miss Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Matilda Joslin Gage and other leading suffragists spoke in favor of her nomination, remarking that when Geo. Q. Cannon sat in Congress, they did not feel, because of his presence there, that they were sustaining polygamy. Upon Mrs. Richards' return to Salt Lake City, Mrs. Froiseth declined to act, saying that suffrage was not good for Utah, and Mrs. Richards thereupon issued the call and organized the associations with Mrs. Sarah M. Kimball as president, herself as vice-president, and Mrs. Emmeline B. Wells as secretary. At the time of the World's Fair in Chicago, Mrs. Richards was appointed president of the Utah Board of Lady Managers. A Chicago paper then said of her: "The president of the World's Fair Board of Lady Managers from Utah is a handsome woman, Utahn by birth, but New York descent. She is Emily S. Richards, wife of Franklin S. Richards, a lawyer in Salt Lake City, who achieved distinction in the law and has argued some very important cases before the Supreme Court of the United States. Not even in metropolitan New York and cultured Massachusetts can the superior of Mrs. Richards be found in originality of work and independence of thought. While in Chicago, she having a certificate to preach, teach and expound the scriptures of the Latter-day Saints signed by the First Presidency of the Church, appeared before the Woman's Branch of the Parliament of Religions and read a paper on "Women of Mormondom". She also appeared before the Worlds Congress of Representative Women and gave a talk on organization. She was vice-president of the California Mid-Winter Fair in 1893-94. Under appointment of Gov. Caleb W. West, she was vice-president of the Board of Lady Managers of the Cotton States and International Exposition at Atlanta, Georgia, in 1895, and was delegate to the Woman's Suffrage Association held at the same place. Sister Richards has a life membership in the National Suffrage Association. She also prepared the memorial and led the victorious campaign for equal suffrage at the time of our Constitutional Convention in the spring of 1895, the president of the Suffrage Association, Mrs. Wells, being absent in Washington. She was elected an alternate to the National Democratic Convention which at Chicago in 1896 nominated William Jennings Bryan for president. She was also appointed a national organizer of suffrage associations and spent several weeks in Idaho, working for equal suffrage in that State. In 1896 she forestalled by private declination the nomination that would have made her Utah's first lady State senator. Among many important positions held by her are those of trustee of the Agricultural College of Utah; director of the Salt Lake City Free Library, director of the National Relief Society; director of the Orphan's Home (appointed upon the recommendation of the First Presidency); president of the Mother's Congress; vice-president of the Press Club; director of the Woman's Club; and president of the Utah State Council of Women which she represented at the recent Suffrage Convention in Washington. In 1904 she was a delegate to the International Fruens Congress held in Berlin, Germany, where she read a paper on the "Political Freedom of the Women of Utah". In 1909 she was a delegate from the National Relief Society to the Convention held in Buffalo, N. Y., for charities and corrections. She was appointed alternate representative of the National Council of Women of the United States in the International Council of Women held in Toronto, Canada, June, 16, 1909, and has served for years as chairman of the Peace Committee of the Relief Society and also as a member of the State Board for Peace and is one of the committee on the celebration of the 100th anniversary of Peace among the English speaking people 1914-15. She is also a worker in the Red Cross Society. Mrs. Richards' powers have increased with the added experience and wisdom of the years. While wrapped up in her public work, she is in no sense "a new woman", in the common acceptance of the term. She seeks not to supplant man in any of his spheres of activity, but views with him in his efforts for the welfare of the race. She is a woman of the good old fashioned type, whose home is her earthly paradise. She is the mother of three sons-Franklin Dewey Richards and Joseph Tanner Richards (both attorneys at law) and William Snyder Richards, who died in infancy. In addition, two daughters have blessed the home, Wealthy Lucile (now Mrs. Oscar Jensen) and Emily, the youngest of the household. To her husband Mrs. Richards is a most congenial companion and for her children she has all of mother love that the heart can hold. Though a leader among women, she is gentle, gracious and refined, possessing the esteem and admiration of her people, and commanding respect in the councils of women through the world. (Compiled chiefly from Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. 4. p. 604).
