Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Shreeve, Thomas Arthur

Shreeve, Thomas Arthur, second counselor to Bishop John Watson of the Ogden Fifth Ward, Utah, was born Feb. 15, 1851, at Norwich. Norfolk, England. The Shreeve family are descendants of two brothers who fled from Germany for religion's sake in the early days of the reformation and settled in the town of Thetford, on the borders of Norfolk and Suffolk, England. One day when Thomas was about twelve years old and was walking alone through one of the pleasant lanes of England, meditating on religious matters, he heard a voice calling him, saying, "Thomas, if you are a good boy, you shall hear and see Prophets". He looked around, but saw no one; yet the incident never left his mind. Soon afterwards the family became acquainted with the "Mormon" Elders and were converted to the true gospel. Thomas was baptized in May, 1864; was ordained a Teacher in 1866 and labored as such in the Norwich branch until 1869, when he emigrated to America. He settled with friends in the Eleventh Ward, Salt Lake City, where by tint of hard saving he was enabled in three years to emigrate his mother and three sisters. The family then settled more permanently in the Tenth Ward, where Thomas attended school and became a member of a literary and debating society and of a dramatic association. In 1875 he was ordained an Elder by William Smith. Later he was ordained a Seventy by Parley P. Pratt, jun. In 1878 he filled a mission to Australasia. After laboring a short time in Australia he went to New Zealand where he organized four branches of the Church and on Christmas day, Dec. 25, 1878, he organized at Papanui, Canterbury, the first Relief Society in the Southern Hemisphere with sixteen members. Some of the incidents of that mission were afterwards published in the "Helpful Visions", one of the Faith Promoting Series. Returning home in July, 1880, he settled at Ogden, where he took an active part in the Fourth Ward Sabbath School. At the Stake conference held in August, 1885, he was called into the Central Board of the Weber Stake Y. M. M. I. A. He was also called to labor as a home missionary. Bro. Shreeve has also served as clerk of the 53rd and the 77th quorum of Seventy. When the Ogden Fifth Ward was organized in May, 1897, he was appointed clerk of said Ward. Subsequently he was chosen as second counselor to Bishop John Watson. Bro. Shreeve's favorite study is the Book of Mormon and his life has been a most busy one.
