Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Stohl, Lorenzo Nelson

Stohl, Lorenzo Nelson, fourth Bishop of the Third Ward, Brigham City, Box Elder Stake, is a son of Ole N. Stohl and Christina Johnson, and was born April 7, 1873, at that place. His baptism into the Church occurred Oct. 15, 1882, at the hands of Ole N. Stohl. At an early age he was ordained a Deacon, and a Teacher Dec. 19, 1891, by Jens Hansen. Next he became an Elder under the hands of Rudger Clawson, Oct. 22, 1894; then a Seventy March 23, 1895, being ordained by Seymour B. Young. In November 1899, Elder Stohl was ordained a High Priest and a Bishop by Rudger Clawson and set apart to preside over the Third Ward of Brigham City. Among his many Church callings, which have been faithfully filled, may be mentioned: Counselor in the presidency of the Deacons' and the Teachers' quorums of his Ward, also assistant superintendent of Sunday schools; for several years he was a home missionary and a Ward teacher in Box Elder Stake, and since 1899 he has acted as Bishop of his Ward. He filled a mission to the Southern States from March 22, 1895, to April 3, 1898, laboring chiefly in the North Carolina conference, first as traveling Elder and later as counselor in the conference presidency. Bro. Stohl's married life began Oct. 24, 1894, when he was united to Vinnie Ralphs, and he is the father of three children. He is a highly successful business man, being president of the first National Bank of Brigham City, director of the Stohl Furniture Co., president and manager of the Brigham City Opera House, and also engaged in the real estate and loan business in Brigham City. He is also one of the six incorporators of a land company which has large holdings of land in Juab county, and has the honor of being a trustee of the Agricultural College, which came to him unsought. He is now president of the board. He was also one of the promoters and organizers of the Beneficial Life Insurance Co. and is its vice-president.
