Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Standing, James

Standing, James, senior president of the 28th quorum of Seventy, was born Nov. 11, 1815, in Lancashire, England, the son of John Standing and Nancy Varley. He emigrated with his parents to America in 1816, and settled near Buffalo, New York, where the family resided about seven years, and then moved to Canada, locating near Toronto, at a place called Boston Mills. James was baptized into the Church in 1837, and migrated the same year with a company of saints to Far West, Missouri, where he passed through all the persecutions that befell the saints in that part of the country. He became also an early settler of Nauvoo, Hancock county, Illinois, and belonged to the famous Nauvoo Brass Band. He was one of the party kidnapped by the mob near Pontoosuc, Hancock county, Illinois, in the summer of 1846, and suffered much in the hands of the lawless gang. Among his fellow-sufferers on that occasion were Phineas H. Young and Richard Ballantyne. Bro. Standing also worked on the Nauvoo Temple, After the exodus from Nauvoo in 1846, he went to St. Louis, Mo., where he married Mary Standing, his second cousin, in 1847. Soon after his marriage he went to Nashville, Tenn., as a stone cutter and assisted in building the State House at that place. In this manner he earned means to buy an outfit for going West. He crossed the plains in Reddick N. Allred's Fifty of Allen Taylor's Hundred. After his arrival in G. S. L. Valley in October, 1849, Pres. Brigham Young assigned him a lot in the 12th Ward, Salt Lake City, and gave him a special mission to work on the Temple. In 1876 he moved to Box Elder county, but returned afterwards to resume his work on the Temple. He also worked awhile on the Logan Temple. In 1879 his son Joseph was killed by a mob in Georgia, while laboring there as a missionary. Bro. Standing was throughout his entire life a very faithful and true Church member and a conscientious tithe payer. He died Jan. 16, 1886, at Collinston, Box Elder county, Utah, and was survived by his wife and seven children, four others having died during his lifetime.
