Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Stevenson, Elizabeth Jane Du Fresne

Stevenson, Elizabeth Jane Du Fresne, a charter member of the General Board of Relief Societies, and the wife of Edward Stevenson (a pioneer of 1847) was born Feb. 8, 1838, in the parish of St. Helliers, Jersey Island, England, the daughter of Phillip Du Fresne and Mary Remon. She was baptized in 1850 by the late Pres. John Taylor. The hospitable home of her parents (the Du Fresne home) was ever open to the "Mormon" missionaries as an abiding place on the Island of Jersey until 1854 when the family emigrated to Utah, crossing the ocean in the ship "Marshfield" which sailed from Liverpool, England, April 8, 1854, and arrived at New Orleans May 29, 1854. During the trip across the plains they experienced the hardships and privations incident to the pilgrimage of these days. The journey was made particularly sad and memorable from the fact that Sister Elizabeth witnessed the laying to rest on the plains of two of her sisters who died from cholera contracted en route. On Oct. 28, 1855, she became the wife of Edward Stevenson. In the days that followed during territorial development Bro. and Sister Stevenson performed their part industriously and religiously, always being found in the fore of every good enterprise of large moment. They experienced the discomforts of the move south and the return to Salt Lake City, in 1858. Hospitality was second nature to Sister Stevenson; her house was always open to the saints upon their arrival in Zion and to all who needed a place of shelter and rest. She was a charter member of the Relief Society of the 14th Ward, Salt Lake City, where she lived from the time of her marriage until two years before her death. Here she acted as a Relief Society teacher for about fifteen years. She was also a diligent worker in the Salt Lake Temple from the time of its opening until she passed to the great beyond. She was a charter member of the General Board of Relief Societies, and in that capacity she traveled much among the women of the Church who will remember her for the words of comfort and encouragement she gave to them. She was faithful and true to the end of life's journey and was literally in the harness when the summons hence was announced. Her demise took place April 25, 1906, at Emery, Emery co., where she had gone at attend a Relief Society conference of the Emery Stake. Her daughter, Elizabeth J. (with her husband) Dr. Charles F. Wilcox and Sister Mattie Harker (her missionary companion) were with her during her last moments. Her remains were brought to Salt Lake City for interment. Sister Stevenson was the mother of eight children, two of whom (Elizabeth Jane and Ezra Thomson) survive her.
