Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Stewart, Benjamin Franklin

Stewart, Benjamin Franklin, one of the original Utah pioneers of 1847, was born Oct. 22, 1817, on the banks of the Ohio river in Jackson township, Monroe county, Ohio, the ninth child and third son of Philander Barrett Stewart and Sarah Scott. His parents were both of sturdy old Massachusetts stock. When Franklin was only six years old his father was drowned, while trying to rescue others. In the spring of 1828, under the direction of their intrepid mother, the family emigrated to Morgan county, Ill., floating about one thousand miles down the Ohio in a flat boat and crossing the State of Illinois by team. In Illinois the family sojourned for same time. Franklin was not able to attend school very much, but through his self efforts and industry he obtained, nevertheless, a good education. In 1837 he married Polly Richardson, of Kentucky origin. this union was blessed with eleven children, six of whom reached maturity. The bridal pair emigrated to Van Buren county, Iowa, where the fulness of the gospel found them, and they were baptized Feb. 2, 1844. Franklin was ordained an Elder on the day of his baptism, and he and his family joined the exiled saints at Keg Creek, Iowa, where he was ordained a Seventy by Joseph Young April 6, 1847. Soon after this he started west with the pioneers under Pres. Brigham Young, to find a place of refuge for the exiled saints. He was one of the seven men left at the Upper Platte Ferry, in the midst of danger and Indians, for the purpose of ferrying the saints, who followed the Pioneers that season, across the river. Here he was over-taken by his heroic wife who came west with the emigrant company led by Abraham O. Smoot. She drove a yoke of oxen the entire distance and cared for her three children. The whole family arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 27, 1847. In 1851 (Sept. 6th) Bro. Stewart married Elizabeth Davis as a plural wife; ten children came from this union, seven of whom reached maturity. Franklin was one of the original settlers of Payson, Utah co., and also one of the founders of Benjamin, which place was named in his honor. He was recognized as a leading spirit in the community, religiously, politically and otherwise. For years he served as a counselor to Bishop John. B. Fairbanks of Payson, and later as presiding Elder at Benjamin. He also served two terms as mayor of Payson; his active and useful life was brought to an untimely close through his being struck by lightning at Benjamin June 22, 1885.
