Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Van Cott, John

Van Cott, John (Vol. 1: 198), descended from the first settlers of Long Island, N. Y., who came from Holland in 1640, and had for ten generations back belonged to the nobility of Holland. His parents were Losee Van Cott and Lavina Pratt (uncle and aunt to Parley P. and Orson Pratt). John Van Cott was the only boy in the family, and when only ten years old his father died after an illness of seven years, leaving his widow and children surrounded with peace and plenty. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized in Nauvoo in 1844 or 1845, twelve years after he first heard the gospel; his sister never joined the Church. In 1835 (Sept. 15th) he married Lucy Sachett, a young lady of a very fine family, who also joined the Church. Together with his wife and mother, he left New York, Feb. 3, 1846, starting for Nauvoo, Illinois. While residing temporarily at Nauvoo in the home of Parley P. Pratt, he contributed $400 in gold to the Temple and also donated to the Church a number of lots which he had purchased in Nauvoo; he received his blessings in the Nauvoo Temple. In the fall of 1846 he left Nauvoo for Winter Quarters, where he spent the winter of 1846-47, having built a one-room log house. Here he became acquainted with Brigham Young, to whom he became greatly attached, their friendship terminating in the marriage of his daughter to the President. In the summer of 1847 Bro. Van Cott, together with his mother, wife and two children (Mary and Martha) left Winter Quarters for the West in Capt. Daniel Spencer's company; he fitted up an extra team and wagon which was driven by a hired man. In this wagon his daughter Martha, then about nine years old, rode across the plains. Bro. Van Cott and his family arrived in the Valley Sept. 25, 1847. Pres. Young sent Bro. Van Cott back to help into the Valley some of the saints, who were delayed on the journey. After his arrival in the Valley, Bro. Van Cott settled in what is now the Farmer's Ward, on the corner of Tenth South street and West Temple street. In 1852 he was called on a mission to England, but in 1853 he was transferred to Denmark as president of the Scandinavian Mission. After his return, he yielded obedience to the law of celestial marriage and took five wives, by whom he became the father of twenty-eight children. At the time of the move in 1858, he was one of the men deputized to remain in the city and set fire to the property, in case the soldiers on their arrival in the Valley should prove hostile. In 1859-62 he filled a second mission to Scandinavia and in 1862 he was chosen as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies. He also served as a member of the House of Representatives, a member of the Salt Lake city council, street supervisor and city marshal. He died Feb. 18, 1883, at his residence near Salt Lake City.
