Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Wells, Emmeline Blanche Woodward

Wells, Emmeline Blanche Woodward, the fourth president of all the Relief Societies in the Church, was born Feb. 29, 1828, at Petersham, Worchester co., Massachusetts, the daughter of David Woodward and Deiadama Hare. The Woodwards came from England in the year 1630. They were of noble Norton extraction and fought at Hastings, Agincourt, Edge Hill and upon other fields of fame. Emmeline's grandfather and her father served respectively in the Revolutionary war and the war of 1812. Her father died when she was four years old, the victim of a runaway accident. Her literary gifts are largely from the maternal side. As a child she was given the best educational advantages to be obtained and was so quick to learn that she graduated when very young. At fifteen she taught school. In 1841 her mother with her younger children, being converted to "Mormonism," was baptized, but "Emmie," as she was called, was away at the time attending a select school for girls, and boarding with a married sister. After the school closed, "Emmie" attended the "Mormon" meetings and was baptized March 1, 1842; six other persons were baptized at the same time. Much excitement prevailed; threats were made by the town authorities, and ministers, judges and others came to the water's edge to forbid the baptism, or learn if she was submitting to it of her own free will and choice. It was a trying ordeal for the young girl, but she told her mother that the crisis was passed and thenceforth she would dedicate her life to the work in which she had enlisted. She has faithfully kept her resolve. In 1843 (July 29th) Emmeline Blanche Woodward became the wife of James Harvey Harris, a son of an influential Elder in the Church, the president of the local branch. The bride was but fifteen years and five months old on her wedding day. The Harris family began their westward journey in April, 1844, the objective point being Nauvoo, Ill. Here Sister Emmeline was deeply impressed at her first meeting with Joseph Smith the Prophet. She was thrilled by his very handshake and received at once a testimony of his divine mission. This was not many weeks before the martyrdom, and she heard him deliver his last sermons and addresses, and noted the wondrous power that accompanied them. Immediately after the Prophet's death her husband's father and mother left the Church and moved from Nauvoo to La Harpe; they wished to take their son and his wife with them, but the young couple refused to go. They were both present at the memorable meeting held Aug. 8, 1844, when the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham in the eyes of the assembled saints. Sept. 1, 1844, Sister Emmeline gave birth to a beautiful little boy, who was named Eugene Henri Harris; the child died Oct. 6, 1844, and the mother who was also brought to the brink of the grave was healed by the power of faith under the administration of Pres. Brigham Young. Nov. 16, 1844, her husband who up to this time had been tender, kind and solicitous, left her, never to return. Sister Emmeline then accepted the offer of a home from a maiden lady, a sister in the Church, by the name of Olive M. Bishop. Early in 1846 she became an exile, together with the rest of her co-religionists, and started for the great West. On the journey her mother was stricken down with fever and ague, due to hardships and exposure on the bleak and rainy plains of Iowa, and died and was buried by the wayside. Her motherless little ones arrived at Winter Quarters, greatly in need of care and attention. There, as at Nauvoo Sister Emmeline taught school. In the year 1848 she came to the Valley with Bishop Newel K. Whitney, to whom she had been sealed as a wife. The Whitneys camped on the site now occupied by the L. D. S. University. A few weeks after her arrival in the Valley, or on Nov. 2, 1848, Sister Emmeline gave birth to a daughter-Isabel Modelena (now Mrs. S. W. Sears, of Salt Lake City). Aug. 18, 1850, another daughter was born-Melvina Caroline (now Mrs. W. W. Woods of Wallace, Idaho). Several weeks later Bishop Whitney died, leaving Emmeline a widow with two babes; she had a staunch friend in the Bishop's first wife, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, and between her and that sainted mother in Israel there always existed a most tender affection. In 1852 Sister Emmeline taught school, and on Oct. 10, 1852, she married General Daniel H. Wells, by whom she had three daughters, Emmeline (born Sept. 10, 1853) Elizabeth Ann (born Dec. 7, 1859) and Louisa Martha, born Aug. 27, 1862). From 1852 to 1886 Sister Wells resided on State Street, a little north of where the Auerbach Department store now stands. While her children were young she devoted herself almost exclusively to home. She sang in the choir at the old Tabernacle and her literary work went quietly on. She was always deeply interested in people, in the culture of the youth and the progress of communities and nations. The advancement of her sex was with her a favorite field. When the women of Utah where enfranchised in February, 1870, she was one of the first to wield the ballot and to recognize in the event one of the indications of a new era. About this time she began to devote herself more to public affairs. In 1873 her writings appeared in the "Women's Exponent," to which she wrote over the nom de plume of Blanche Beachwood. In 1874 she lent occasional assistance in the editorial department and on May 1, 1875, she was regularly installed as assistant editor. Upon the retirement of Mrs. Richards in July, 1877, Sister Wells became the editor of the paper, a position which she filled with significant ability until the present year (1914) when the publication of the "Women's Exponent" was suspended. Early in life Sister Wells became interested in the Relief Society work, the character and purpose of which she well understood through her intimate associations with Mother Whitney, who had been a counselor in Nauvoo to Emma Smith, the first president of the Society. She traveled extensively in Utah and surrounding parts with Eliza R. Snow, Zina D. H. Young and other leading women in the interest of the Society and aided also in organizing young ladies and primary associations. By this time her well known interest in woman suffrage had brought her to the attention of the National Woman's Suffrage Association, and in 1874 she had been appointed its vice-president of Utah. Thenceforth she was destined to be active in duties of a public character. In September, 1876, she received a special mission from Pres. Brigham Young to take the lead with the sisters of the Church to gather and save grain. She responded cheerfully to this call and ever since that time the saving of grain has been one of the important topics of her public instruction. In January, 1879, accompanied by Zina Y. Williams, she attended the National Woman's Suffrage Association, at Washington, D. C., where they presented a memorial to Congress, asking that the children born in plural marriage be made legitimate. In 1882 she and Zina D. H. Young attended the National Suffrage Convention at Omaha, where Sister Wells gave an exhaustive paper on conditions in Utah. Three years later, during the heat of the crusade under the Edmunds Law, she attended another Suffrage Convention, in Washington, and had interviews with prominent members of Congress upon "Mormon" questions. When Zina D. H. Young was chosen, president of the General Relief Society, Emmeline B. Wells became its corresponding secretary, and in 1892, when the Relief Society was incorporated, she was elected general secretary, which position she creditably held until she was elected president in 1910. In 1893, at the time of the World's Fair in Chicago, Sister Wells gave a paper widely copied and quoted upon "Western Women in Journalism," at the Relief Society meeting. In 1895 she represented Utah at the National Woman's Suffrage Association at Atlanta, Ga. Her address upon Utah's prospective admission to Statehood was enthusiastically applauded, and Miss Susan B. Anthony came forward and embraced her on the platform. At the National Council held at Washington, D. C., in February, 1895, she read a paper entitled "Forty Years in the Valley of the Great Salt Lake," which was reproduced in the leading journals. When the people of Utah divided upon party lines in 1892, Sister Wells declared herself a Republican and was selected by that party as chairman of the Utah Woman's Republican league. In 1897 she represented Utah at the National Suffrage Convention at Des Moines, Iowa, and with Miss Anthony and other ladies spoke on the suffrage question before the Iowa legislature in the Senate Chamber. Up to 1899 Sister Wells had never left her native land, but that year she crossed the Atlantic and attended the Woman's International Council and Congress in London. With other delegates she was entertained by Queen Victoria, the Countess of Aberdeen, and other British nobility at various great gatherings. In 1901 she witnessed the inauguration of Pres. McKinley at Washington, D. C. In 1902 she was again in Washington, at the National Woman's Suffrage Convention and the Triennial of the Woman's National Council. She was the first western woman to be elected an officer in that council. Feb. 29, 1912, the honorary degree of Doctor of Literature was conferred upon her by the Brigham Young University, and another honor was bestowed upon her, Oct. 1, 1912, in her being selected to unveil the monument to the Sea Gulls erected on the Temple Block, Salt Lake City. Sister Wells has had a wide experience and done much literary work outside of editing the "Women's Exponent." Besides her many poetical productions on various occasions, she edited "Songs and Flowers of the Wasatch," for the Columbian Exposition and also a book of prose, entitled "Charities and Philanthropies." Her poetic volume appeared in 1896, its general style is suggested by the title, "Musings and Memories," a book of beautiful and tender verse. Sister Well's marvelous memory is an encyclopedia of facts upon any subject on which she is interested and her office and home was for many years a mecca for tourists and visitors in quest of information pertaining to the Latter-day Saints and their institutions. After the death of Bathsheba W. Smith, in October, 1910, Sister Wells was unanimously chosen as president of the Relief Societies of the entire Church, which position she still occupies. Notwithstanding her advanced age, she is still a very busy woman; work seems to be her most congenial atmosphere, her very breath of life. She is honored and revered today by the saints throughout the whole world.
