Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Wentz, Peter Mastin

Wentz, Peter Mastin, the first Bishop of the Timpanogas Ward, Utah co., Utah, was born July 3, 1831, at Canaan Corners, Wayne co., Pennsylvania, the son of Peter Wentz and Mercy Green. He was one of the youngest of the family, having four sisters and three brothers. When about seven years of age, he moved with his parents to Bighamton, Broome co., N. Y. From this time until he was eleven years old his opportunities for education were fair, but then they were seriously interrupted by the death of his mother, which, together with certain financial reverses of his father, caused the breaking up of the home and the separating of its members. The next few years of his life were spent in working for different people, occasionally attending school and serving as an apprentice in a boot and shoe establishment. At about the age of twenty he chanced to hear some of the doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and after a great deal of investigation, he became thoroughly convinced of its truth. There being no organization of the Church in that State at the time he made his way to St. Louis, Mo., where he on Jan. 21, 1855, became a member of the "Mormon" Church, being baptized by Elder Gore and confirmed by Elder Milo Andrus. Shortly afterward (April 9, 1855) he was ordained to the office of a Priest. He was the only one of his father's family to join the Church. In the summer of 1855 he arrived In Salt Lake City, the most of the journey across the plains being made in company with a train of emigrants, some on their way to Oregon, others to California, and one wagon, bound for Salt Lake City. They traveled with ox teams. Many times on the trip Bro. Wentz walked long distances, the conveyances only carrying his luggage. He arrived in Salt Lake City, Aug. 11, 1855. June 13, 1857, he was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the 52nd quorum of Seventy. Later, he was chosen as a president of that quorum. In 1857 he became a resident of Provo and during the latter part of that year he took part in the Echo canyon war. For several years he was engaged in the boot and shoe business at Provo. He spent the summer of 1863 in Montana, trading, mining and prospecting. The following winter he made a trip to California after merchandise. In 1864 (April 20th) at Provo, he married Minerva Boren, daughter of Coleman Boren and Melinda Keller. Their children are as follows: Wells, Leo, Ray V., Charles H., Maud E., T. Frank, Lillian, Lillie M. and Ralph. The time from 1864 to 1867 was spent in making trips to Virginia City, Montana, freighting goods, principally flour. In October, 1871, he was called on a visiting mission to his relatives in the State of New York. He returned home March 3, 1872. In 1876 he was elected a member of the city council of Provo, a position which he held for ten years. He was one of the organizers of the Provo Bench Canal and Irrigation Company. For sixteen years he acted as a director and secretary of this canal company. He was ordained a High Priest on Nov. 8, 1885, by Bishop Wm. B. Preston. On this date also he was called from the Provo Fourth Ward and set apart to act as Bishop on the Provo Bench at the organization of the Timpanogas Ward. He held this position for about eighteen years; then he was released on account of failing health. Bishop Wentz died May 31, 1908, in the Timpanogas Ward, as a faithful Latter-day Saint and highly respected by all who knew him. He was a strong advocate for religion and education. His whole life stood for right and advancement.
