Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

White, Catherine Foutz

White, Catherine Foutz, wife of Samuel S. White (of "Mormon." Battalion fame) was born Dec. 25, 1831, in Richland county, Ohio, the daughter of Jacob Foutz and Margaret Mann. From a biographical sketch prepared, by herself we cull the following. "My parents joined the Church in Ohio, when I was about four years old. The family then moved to Caldwell county, Missouri, and settled within two miles of Haun's Mill. I well remember the evening of the tragedy there, Oct. 30, 1838. On hearing the firing of guns, mother gathered the children together and started for the woods. We called on a Sister Myers who went with us into the woods. About forty of us spent the night in the timber, hiding from the mob. Toward morning some of the brethren made a fire, as the weather was chilly. Soon a messenger arrived, bringing the sad news of the massacre of the brethren. On our way back to our homes, we called at Sister Myers and found her husband mortally wounded. He had crawled on his hands and knees a distance of two and one-half miles. I went with my mother and family to Haun's Mill and saw the dead and wounded. My father was shot through the thigh, but he finally recovered. Although I was only seven years old, the terrible sight of the dead and wounded made an everlasting impression upon me. The following spring (1839) we moved out of the State of Missouri and settled temporarily in Quincy, Illinois. Thence we moved to Commerce (afterwards Nauvoo). I well recollect the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum. I heard them preach while they were alive and saw them in their coffins after they were dead. In the spring of 1846, we left Nauvoo for the West. I remember that while we crossed the Mississippi river one of the oxen yoked to his mate jumped off the boat and swam close to the boat while crossing the river, without pulling his mate into the water. Our family stopped in Garden Grove until the spring of 1847, when we made our way to Winter Quarters and were organized for crossing the plains. We started from the Elkhorn in June. 1847, in Bishop Edward Hunter's hundred. My father (Jacob Foutz) was captain of fifty. After a long perilous journey we arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley Oct. 1, 1847. Here my father died Feb. 14, 1848, leaving my mother with five children to make her living as best she could. I became acquainted with one of the Mormon Battalion boys by the name of Samuel S. White, in the fall of 1848, and I became his wife Sept. 27, 1849. We resided in Salt Lake City until the spring of 1851, when we moved to Pleasant Grove, Utah county, where I have resided ever since. My husband died at Pleasant Grove, Oct. 15, 1900. I am the mother of ten children, namely, Charles S. White, Jacob H. White, Henry Edgar White, Clarissa White, Mary A. White, Isaac Harvey White, Margaret E. White, Alma F. White, Evelyn and Caroline. They were all born in Pleasant Grove, except Charles, who was born at Salt Lake City.
