Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Wilcox, Elizabeth Jane Stevenson

Wilcox, Elizabeth Jane Stevenson, a member of the General Board of the Relief Societies, was born in the Fourteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, the daughter of Edward Stevenson and Elizabeth J. Du Fresne. At the time of her birth the Fourteenth Ward was known as the star Ward of the city and Sister Wilcox has pleasant recollections of going as a child to look on at some of the fine balls given in those early days in said Ward, and of seeing Pres. Brigham Young and many other dignitaries join in the dance in their graceful and happy manner. Sister Wilcox's father was the original owner of the corner lot facing north and east on First South and first West streets, where she was born and reared. From early childhood she has taken an active interest in Church affairs. She acted as a Teacher in the Fourteenth Ward Sunday school from the time she was in her early teens till her marriage, and even after that. She was a member of the Ward choir from her early girlhood, and was also a member of the Tabernacle Choir for a few years. In the Ward Y. L. M. I. Association, she filled the offices of treasurer, counselor and president. In 1881 she graduated from the literary department of the University of Utah. She also taught a district school for a number of years, acting both as assistant and principal. Thus she taught school at East Bountiful, Davis co., one year and in Gunnison, Sanpete co., two years. She was secretary of the Salt Lake County Teachers Association one year. In December, 1884, she was married to Chas. F. Wilcox, who at that time was principal of the Fourteenth District school, one of the most popular schools in Salt Lake City. In 1888 Mrs. Wilcox, together with her two children, accompanied her husband to New York City, where he continued his study of medicine until he graduated from the medical department of the University of New York. For a number of years the wife and mother found it necessary to give most of her time and attention to family and domestic duties, but nevertheless acted as counselor to Sister Julia C. Howe, in the Seventeenth Ward Primary Association. Later she held the office of secretary in the Seventeenth Ward Relief Society for five years, Mrs. Clarissa S. Williams then being the president. In the autumn of 1904 Sister Wilcox was called to act as a missionary with the General Board of Relief Societies and in May, 1906, she was chosen as a member of said board, to fill the vacancy caused by the demise of her mother, Mrs. Elizabeth J. D. Stevenson. At the National Council of Women held at Seattle, Washington, in 1909, she represented the Relief Societies by appointment as a delegate. In the interest of the Relief Societies she has visited most of the Stakes of Zion in Utah, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado and Arizona. Always belong interested in educational matters, she acted as vice-president of the Alumni Association of the University of Utah, for the years 1913-1914. Sister Wilcox is the mother of six children, namely, Charles Frederick, junior, Ramona, Edward S., Clara A., Raymond S., and Mary S.
