Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Williams, ClarissaPPWilliams, Clarissa Smith

Williams, ClarissaPPWilliams, Clarissa Smith, first counselor to Emmeline B. Wells, president of all the Relief Societies in the Church, is the daughter of the late Pres. George A. Smith (Churchman, pioneer, colonizer, historian and statesman) and Susan E. West, pioneer and Temple worker. Her husband, Hon. William N. Williams, is prominently associated with religious, State, educational and financial affairs. Sister Williams was born April 21, 1859, in the Historian's office (which was at that time the residence of her parents) in Salt Lake City, Utah. Her education was obtained in the best schools the Territory then afforded, and she graduated from the normal department of the Deseret University, row the University of Utah, in 1875. Being an apt student and a natural teacher Sister Williams was employed at the age of fourteen as a pupil teacher in a school in the old Social Hall, taught by Miss Mary E. Cook. After her graduation she successfully conducted a private school and also taught in the schools of Iron county and Salt Lake City. She became the wife of Wm. N. Williams July 17, 1877, and have had a large, intelligent and interesting family of eleven children, eight of whom are living-two sons and six daughters. Their children were all born at their present home opposite the west entrance of the Temple Block. The lot on which their home is located, together with the entire block, was settled on by Sister Williams' father, George A. Smith, who was one of the original pioneers of 1847. From her early girlhood, Sister Williams has been an active and faithful Church worker, filling the positions of Sunday school teacher, and first counselor in the first primary organization in the 17th Ward. Later she became actively engaged in Relief Society work, a work which she has continuously and perseveringly carried on. She commenced her labor in the Relief Society at the age of sixteen as assistant block teacher; was secretary and later president of the 17th Ward Relief Society and was assistant secretary of the old Salt Lake Stake organization. At the time of the division of the old Salt Lake Stake, in 1904, Sister Williams was appointed president of the Salt Lake Stake Relief Society. Nov. 7, 1901, she was appointed treasurer and member of the Board of Directors of the General Relief Society. At the April general conference of the Church in 1911 she was appointed first counselor to the president of the Relief Society, Emmeline B. Wells, which position she now holds. She has traveled extensively in the interests of the Relief Societies, having visited many of the Stakes of Zion in Utah, Colorado, Idaho, Oregon, Arizona, California, the Northern States Mission, etc. With Counselor Julina L. Smith, she organized a Stake Relief Society in the Northwestern States Mission. She has also traveled extensively in the interests of the National Council of Women of the United States (with which organization the Relief Society is affiliated) having visited New Orleans, La., and Toledo, Ohio. In May, 1914, she attended the International Council of Women in Rome, Italy, having been elected one of nine delegates from the United States to that conference. At the close of the sessions in Rome (which lasted two weeks) she and her husband toured Italy, Switzerland, France, Germany, England, and Wales. Sister Williams is a charter member of the Daughters of the Pioneers and was the first historian of that organization. She is also interested in patriotic and literary work, being an active member of the society called the Daughters of the Revolution, in which organization she has held the office of treasurer and regent. She is also a member of the Authors Club and served a term as president of that organization. Sister Williams is a devoted wife and loving mother. Her genial and friendly disposition, her pleasant personality and her gentleness instinctively draws everyone to her. On her many trips to various parts of the country she has made thousands of friends who look forward with pleasure to her periodical visits. Bro. and Sister Williams delight in entertaining their many friends from home as well as abroad and their splendid hospitality has been accepted by many.
