Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Scott, Andrew Hunter

Scott, Andrew Hunter, second Bishop of the Provo Second Ward, Utah Stake, was born Aug. 21, 1815, in Middleton, Bucks county, Pennsylvania, .the son of Joshua Scott and Ann Keen. His parents were well-to-do farmers, who occupied their own homestead in Middleton. At the age of eighteen Andrew learned the trade of a tailor, which he followed successfully for many years. In 1838 (Feb. 18th) he married Sarah L. Sleepe, of Vincent town, New Jersey (She was born July 21, 1816, and died Sept. 7, 1900). Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized Sept. 17, 1843, by William I. Appleby, and on Oct. 22, 1843, he was ordained an Elder by Joseph Newton, and called by Jedediah M. Grant to travel and preach the Gospel in Philadelphia and surrounding country. Later, he filled another mission to the southwestern part of New Jersey. In 1845, together with Jedediah M. Grant, he re-organized the Woodstown branch, New Jersey, which had been visited by Sidney Rigdon, who persuaded all the members to follow him as leader and guardian of the Church. After continuing his labors until the fall of 1845, Elder Scott gathered with a company of Saints to Nauvoo, Ill., where he subsequently passed through the mobbings and tribulations that were heaped upon the Saints there. He returned to the East after his family, and remained with them until the spring of 1850, when he started west once more with a part of his family, his wife refusing to come. He located temporarily in Pottawattamie county, Iowa, where he (Jan. 12, 1851) married Sarah Ann Roe, who was born Sept. 24, 1832, and died June 7, 1904. She proved a true and faithful companion to him and was the mother of six sons and five daughters. Elder Scott came to the Valley with his family in 1852 and located at Provo, where he resided continuously till his death. There he became known as a successful farmer and as an importer of sheep. He also commenced the manufacture of woollen cloth to supply his family with clothing, manufactured brooms and engaged in bee raising and silk culture. He is also credited with having planted the first fruit trees in Utah county. In 1859, when the Deseret Agriculture and Manufacturing Society of Utah county was organized in Provo, Brother Scott became a director and one of the most active members of that society. In 1854 (Jan. 5th) he was ordained a Seventy by David W. Rogers and acted as clerk and teacher in the 34th quorum of Seventy until May 10, 1857, when he was set apart as a president of said quorum. In April, 1856, he married Martha Ann North, who bore him seven children. As a military man and a member of the Nauvoo Legion he took part in the Echo Canyon campaign and in military affairs in the territory generally. In 1861 he was ordained a Bishop and placed in charge of the Provo Second Ward, which position he filled with honor and ability about twelve years, or until his death. In 1864 he married Hannah Miller Clark, and in 1866 he went to the Missouri river as captain of an ox-train to bring emigrants to Utah. Bishop Scott was throughout a self-made man and a natural leader in public affairs. He served Provo City without compensation as recorder, assessor, collector and water master for several years; he also superintended the erection of the first County court house in Utah county in 1860-61; he was very active in collecting means and superintending the building of the Provo meeting house. In 1870-73 he gave all of his time to superintending the building of the Provo Woollen Mills. He was ever industrious, liberal and kind to the poor, and always paid a full tithing. He was an early riser, temperate in all his habits and scrupulously honest in all his dealings. During his life he married six wives, by whom he became the father of twenty-three children; he was an indulgent husband and a kind father. Bishop Scott died suddenly at his home in Provo Oct. 11, 1874.
