Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Christensen, James Peter

Christensen, James Peter, first counselor in the Elwood Ward Bishopric, Box Elder county, Utah, is the son of Rasmus Christensen and Anna Petersen and was born at Kappendrup, Hjadstrup parish, Denmark, July 12, 1853. In a brief sketch prepared for this work Elder Christensen writes: "My parents belonged to the Lutheran Church and consequently I was brought up in that faith. In 1864 the Mormon Elders came to our home and presented the Gospel to my parents. My father investigated it and became convinced of its truth. He labored with his family, but with little success, because my mother was bitterly opposed to the new doctrine. At length I became convinced that the Gospel was true and on March 11, 1869, my father and I were baptized into the Church by M. Mortensen. In the spring of 1870 my father suggested that I go to Utah and gather with the Saints, thinking that it might have some influence with my mother, and that my coming here and writing to her and explaining all in truth, as I found conditions here, would cause her to investigate the doctrines. Accordingly on July 11, 1870, I bade farewell to my father, mother, brothers and sisters, and left for Zion. It was the last time I ever saw my mother. She died in her native land June 23, 1875. I arrived in Salt Lake City, Utah, Aug. 10, 1870, and the next day, together with my uncle, I went to Ogden, where I soon obtained work with the farmers. I did not forget to write to my family in Denmark, and my frequent messages had to a certain extent the desired effect, for one year later my father, a sister and a brother joined me in Utah. In 1872 I was ordained a Teacher, and in the fall of 1872 I was called to fill a mission to 'Dixie,' in the interest of the United Order. After a pleasant journey we reached our destination and finally located on the banks of the Rio Virgin river, about five miles east of Washington, where we did pioneer work. In the spring of 1875 I together with several others were released and returned home. I was married to Maria R. Ericson Jan. 17, 1876, being ordained an Elder by Peter O. Hansen the same day. Among the local offices which I have filled I may mention that I have labored in the Sunday school as assistant superintendent. I acted as manager of Ward amusements for fifteen years. For about nine years I served as a counselor in the presidency of the fourth Elders quorum of Box Elder Stake. I was ordained a Seventy by Christian D. Fjeldsted Dec. 7, 1890. On Nov. 24, 1881, I married Gertrude Katrine Gunnerson. During 1897-98 I acted as president of the M. I. A. of Bear River Ward. From October, 1898, to August, 1900, I filled a mission to Scandinavia, where I labored chiefly in the Aarhus conference. On my return home I again took up my work in the Sunday school and M. I. A. On Nov. 30, 1900, I was ordained a High Priest by Prest. Chas. Kelly and set apart as an alternate High Councilor in the Box Elder Stake. At the organization of the Elwood Ward (formerly the Fairview branch of the Bear River Ward), Dec. 16, 1900, I was chosen to be first counselor to Bishop P. M. Hansen. I am still laboring in the two last mentioned positions at the present time."
