Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Beckstead, Alexander

Beckstead, Alexander, a veteran Elder in the Church, was born March 16, 1808, in Williamsburg, Dundas, Canada, the son of Francis Beckstead and Margaret Barkley. His father joined the Church in the early days in Canada, and in 1837 was one of a company of Saints emigrating from Canada to Illinois, Alexander being second assistant captain of the company on the journey. As the company approached the State of Illinois, they were surrounded by a vicious mob and held as prisoners for several days. Finally the mob planned to massacre the entire company, but while they were holding their meeting, all of a sudden the rain began to fall in torrents and the storm became so fierce that the mobocrats were compelled to flee and seek shelter. This interference from the Lord held the mobbers at bay until the following morning, when the Prophet Joseph, who had been notified of their perilous condition, arrived upon the scene with fifty armed men and escorted the company safely to the main body of the Saints. In 1841 Alexander's father died in Adams county, Illinois, after proving himself one of noble character. In 1849 Alexander emigrated to Salt Lake City, arriving there Sept. 15th. He settled in West Jordan, where he resided until his death. He helped to dig the first ditch through which water was taken from the Jordan river (now called the Jordan mill race); was the originator of the Beckstead ditch and helped in many other projects in the upbuilding of the West Jordan settlement. In 1823 (January 25th) he married Catherine Lince, who bore him fifteen children, eight sons and seven daughters. In 1854 (Nov. 18th) he married Keziah A. Petty, who bore him ten children, seven boys and three girls; in 1856 he married Clarrissa Ann Brown, who became the mother of seven children, one boy and six girls. In 1861, 1862 and 1863 he assisted materially in sending outfits back to the Missouri river after emigrants. During the hard times, when flour cost $25.00 per sack, Brother Beckstead, instead of selling his flour, divided it among the poor. He was the main pillar in building the West Jordan meeting house (the old rock building), and finally died at West Jordan Feb. 25, 1870.
