Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Beckstead, Henry

Beckstead, Henry, a veteran Elder in the Church, was born Dec. 4, 1827, at Williamsburg, Canada, the son of Alexander Beckstead and Catherine Lince. He was baptized in the spring of 1837 in Canada and soon afterwards migrated to Missouri, arriving there in time to become subject to the terrible persecutions through which the Saints passed in that State. Gathering with the Saints to Nauvoo, Illinois, he later assisted his father's family to emigrate to Utah in 1849. They arrived in the Valley in September and settled at Farmington, Davis county. In 1851 Henry settled at East Weber, at a place now known as Uintah, where he laid out plans and took out the first water for irrigation purposes from the Weber river. He also assisted to erect a fort at that place in 1853. In 1854 he removed to Ogden, where he became sheriff. In 1856 he was called to go east to help in the belated hand cart immigrants and the following spring he was called to go to the Devil's Gate to bring supplies to the brethren who had been stationed there. In 1857 he participated in the expedition to Echo canyon, serving in the first cavalry, which went out to meet the Johnston army. He was also a member of Lot Smith's company at the time the government wagons were burned and the cattle stampeded. During the "move" in 1858 he went as far south as Provo, where he left his family and returned to Ogden in the fall, to which place his family also returned later in the season. He came to South Jordan in 1861. For a number of years he acted as a minute man and was captain of a cavalry company during the Black Hawk war. He took an active part in the South Jordan branch, then a part of the West Jordan Ward, and when the South Jordan Ward in 1877 was organized, he was chosen as second counselor to Bishop Wm. A. Bills. In 1866 he went back east again and brought a threshing machine to the Valley. Bro. Beckstead attended the school of the Prophets for a number of years in Salt Lake City. As a pioneer settler on the west side of the Jordan river, he took a leading part in bringing the canals through to South Jordan. In 1849 he married Luseen Bird Bybee, who bore him five children, three boys and two girls. In 1857 he married Emily B. Williams, who became the mother of six children (four boys and two girls). In 1862 (March 2nd) he married Emma Marsden and Elizabeth Woods. Emma bore him five boys and Elizabeth became the mother of two girls and a boy. About 1876 he married Mary H. Williams. By all theses wives Bro. Beckstead became the father of nineteen children. In 1887 he was arrested on the charge of unlawful co-habitation and served a term of imprisonment in the Utah penitentiary. He was released from his imprisonment in February, 1888, but during his incarceration his health was so completely ruined that he died, September 3, 1888, at South Jordan. His occupation was that of a farmer and stock raiser. For a number of years he furnished a team for the Church to send east after poor emigrants.
