Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Belnap, Gilbert

Belnap, Gilbert, Bishop of Hooper, Weber county, Utah, was born Dec. 22, 1821, in Hope, Newcastle district, Canada, the son of Rosel and Jane Belnap. He married Adaline Knight (daughter of Vincent and Martha Knight) Dec. 21, 1845. She was born in Cattaraugus county, New York, May 4, 1831, and became the mother of thirteen children. In 1840 Gilbert visited Kirtland, Ohio, for the purpose of becoming acquainted with the "Mormons" of whom he had heard a great deal. After being restored to health from severe injuries he had sustained in an accident, he became a member of the Church, being baptized Sept. 11, 1842. Soon afterwards he was ordained to the Priesthood and set apart for the ministry. He labored principally in the State of New York. He first met the Prophet Joseph in June, 1842, at Nauvoo, Ill., and subsequently passed through all the hardships and persecutions to which the saints in Nauvoo and vicinity were subjected. At the time of the exodus in 1846 he came west and arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley in 1850. He settled at Ogden, and Weber county thereafter became his permanent place of residence. Here he spent his time on the farm and in helping to redeem the desert and provide comforts for his family. In 1855 he was called as a missionary to the Indians on Salmon river (now in Idaho) and thus became one of the founders of Fort Limhi. Here he remained until the time of Johnston army troubles. He settled at Hooper in the spring of 1868 and was set apart as presiding Elder of that settlement June 27, 1868; and when the place was organized as a Ward May 28, 1877, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the same, which position he occupied until April 20, 1888. He died at Hooper Feb. 26, 1899, after occupying many places of honor and responsibility in the civil government of Weber county, aside from ecclesiastical labors. Gilbert Belnap was a man of quiet demeanor, honest, exceedingly independent, a characteristic obtained from the varied conditions of his life. He was clear in judgment and full of sympathy for the struggling and the lowly. One of his leading traits was valor to what his good judgment considered justice and the right. He hated sham, dishonesty and oppression, was plain and outspoken and as brave as he was true to his convictions. He disliked simulation and condemned hypocrisy. He was always faithful to his trusts and could be depended upon as a true friend under all circumstances. Bishop Belnap was the father of a large family.
