Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Cain, Joseph

Cain, Joseph, a Utah pioneer of 1847, was born Nov. 5, 1824, at Douglas, Isle of Man, Great Britain, the son of James Cain Esq. and Ann Moore. Being converted to "Mormonism" in his native land he joined the Church about 1840, and was ordained to the Priesthood, and in 1844 he emigrated to America, crossing the ocean in company with his brother in law, the late Pres. John Taylor. While residing for a short time in Nauvoo, Ill., he worked in the printing office with George Q. Cannon, making his home with Pres. John Taylor. In the spring of 1846 he was called on a mission to Great Britain, where he labored until February, 1847, when he returned to the United States and joined the main body of the Saints at Winter Quarters; he crossed the plains in company with Pres. John Taylor, arriving in Great Salt Lake Valley in October, 1847. He took up his permanent residence in Salt Lake City, and in 1849 he was called to go on a mission to California under the direction of Elder Charles C. Rich. During this hazardous journey they attempted to reach California by way of a cut-off; which added greatly to the dangers and duration of the trip. They suffered terribly, especially for want of water, so much so that when they reached their destination their tongues were swollen in their mouths, and they were almost starved. Bro. Cain's mission in California lasted about one year. Upon his return to Utah in 1850 he became very active in both public and private duties, for which his unusual strong and active mind peculiarly fitted him, and which made him generally known among the saints as a worthy and enterprising citizen as well as a true and faithful Latter-day Saint. He became associated with the "Deseret News", in connection with Willard Richards and Judge Elias Smith, and remained on the staff of that paper up to the time of his death, which occurred April 20, 1857, in Salt Lake City. Brother Cain possessed rare literary abilities, and many productions of his facile pen graced the columns of the "Deseret News" at an early day. At times he wrote in the name of Homer, but often signed his own name to his articles. During his missionary trip to England he met Miss Elizabeth Whittaker, who became his wife Feb. 1, 1847, just prior to his return to America. She made the trip with him, and together they endured all the trials and hardships incident to pioneer life in Utah. Mrs. Cain survived her husband and lived until 1880. Joseph Cain was the first postmaster in Salt Lake City to be appointed by the government. He joined the Church in opposition to his relatives' wishes, and was one of the most faithful and consistent members, enjoying the confidence and esteem of the community amongst which he lived.
