Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Clarke, James Hill

Clarke, James Hill, first counselor to President Stephen L. Chipman of the Alpine Stake, Utah county, Utah, was born Dec. 23, 1862, in American Fork, Utah, the son of James Clarke and Ellen Drew Gemmell. His father was one of the first settlers of American Fork, locating there in the fall of 1852. James attended the common schools, being a student of "Aunt Edithy," Mrs. Griffiths, Eugene A. Henriod and Joseph B. Forbes, and attended the B. Y. Academy one year. He has always been active in public affairs, and especially in Church matters. He was baptized about 1871 by Thomas Shelley, and was ordained to the Priesthood when quite young, was secretary of the American Fork Sunday school, and was also secretary, counselor and president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. at different times. He filled a mission to Great Britain in 1890-1892, serving two years in England and Scotland. After acting for some time as one of the presidents of a quorum of Seventy, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as an alternate High Councilor in the Utah Stake by Reed Smoot, April 15, 1900, and on July 15, 1900, was set apart by Geo. Teasdale as a regular member of the same council. When the Utah Stake was divided in 1901, he was chosen as the first counselor to the president of the Alpine Stake, which position he still holds. Dec. 19, 1894, he married Bertha Harrison Jackson, who has borne him nine children, namely James M., Albert H., Willard H., Peter J., John L., Henry G., Helen Drew, Robert A. and Bertha E. All of these children are now living, except Albert H., who died in infancy. As early as 1887 Bro. Clarke was elected and served as alderman of American Fork. He has also served several years as a city councilor, and was mayor in 1904-1905. While he served as mayor the first steps were taken to introduce a water system into the city. During all his service as a public officer Bro. Clarke made a clean and honest record. In a business way he started out as a farmer, his father having died when the son was but ten years old. Thus he was left together with two sisters and one brother to be cared for by their mother, he being the oldest of the four; hence quite early in life he learned to work to help support the family. He afterwards worked in the American Fork Co-operative Store, and was superintendent of that institution for 14 years, during which time it made a steady and substantial growth. He has been one of the pioneers of Utah county in the dry farming industry, and has from his early youth stood in the front ranks for everything tending to the advancement and progress in secular as well as in ecclesiastical affairs.
