Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Clayton, Thomas

Clayton, Thomas, one of the early missionaries of the Church in the Hawaiian Islands, was born May 15, 1826, near Manchester, England, the son of Thomas Clayton and Ann Critchlow. He was one of a family of twenty-one children born to his parents, fourteen of whom left England and came to America in the early forties and settled in Nauvoo, Ill. One of his brothers was the late Wm. Clayton (one of the original Utah pioneers of 1847). The mother of Thos. Clayton died in Nauvoo in 1848. The father moved with his family to St. Louis, Mo., where he died in 1849, leaving Thomas an orphan at the age of seventeen. Thos. Clayton came to Utah in 1849 and passed through all the vicissitudes of pioneer life. Later he assisted a number of belated emigrant trains over the plains and mountains. In 1856-1858 he filled a mission to the Sandwich Islands, and at the time of the Johnston army episode he was left to guard Salt Lake City when the populace moved south. In 1861 he was called to St. George, where he labored zealously to build up the southern part of Utah. Later in the sixties he went to Bear Lake Valley, Idaho, and opened up the pioneer butcher shop in Paris. He was a carpenter by trade and built a number of houses in different localities where he lived. During the Indian troubles in the early history of Utah he was valiant in the defence of the settlers. He participated in the Black Hawk war and in fighting he received several scars which he carried till his dying day. At the time he resided in Paris, Bear Lake Valley, there were no doctors, but when any member of a family was sick and needed assistance, they looked to Thomas Clayton to help them, he being a man of efficient ability as a nurse and possessed a cheerful disposition. Frequently he would wait upon the sick for days and night, never getting tired as long as he could help them; if the patient died he would wash and dress them and prepare them for burial, and in most instances he did his work as a labor of love, money being the least consideration. He was tender-hearted and compassionate, feeling the sufferings and misfortunes of others as his own. He carried the mantle of charity with him always, never speaking evil even of those who wronged him most. He met every trial with resignation, ever seeking to hide the clouds by a cheerful countenance and a kind word to someone else. Bro. Clayton died beloved and respected by all who knew him, March 17, 1914, at Murray, Salt Lake county, Utah, leaving eight living children.
