Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Ricks, Joel

Ricks, Joel, a Patriarch in the Church, was born near Donaldson, Creek, Trigg County, Kentucky, February 18, 1904. He descended from a line of English ancestors, one of whom, Isaac Ricks, came to America about 1660 and settled in Warrasguyeake county, Virginia. He was a member of the Quaker church. In 1752 Benjamin Ricks, a grandson of Isaac, removed to North Carolina and settled in Edgecomb (now Nash) county. Lewis Ricks, a son of Benjamin and grandfather of Joel, was killed at the battle of Guilford court house during the revolution. Jonathan Ricks, father of Joel, removed from North Carolina in 1802 and settled on Donaldson Creek, in what was then Christian county, Kentucky, but which has since been cut off to form the county of Trigg. That part of Kentucky was a wild country in those days and Father Ricks grew up inured to all of the trials of a frontier life. By dint of perseverance he acquired the rudiments of a common school education. It was the custom of the farmers along the rivers in those days to market their products in New Orleans, floating down the Mississippi on flat boats and returning by steamboat. Father Ricks made several trips to New Orleans in this manner. On May 17, 1827, he married Elenor Martin, the daughter of a neighbor, and on July 21, 1828, a son, Thomas Edward, the founder of Rexburg, Idaho, was born to them. On July 15, 1829, Father Ricks left Kentucky on horseback for the purpose of exploring the Illinois country and being pleased with the new country he located a farm on Silver creek, in Madison county, a few miles east of Alton, and returned to Kentucky for his family. On Sept. 12, 1829, he again left Kentucky for his new home. He continued to reside on Silver creek for sixteen years, during which time eight children-four boys and four girls-were born to him. He was a hard working, industrious man and accumulated considerable property. Some time after his arrival in Illinois he joined the "Campbellite" church with which sect he was associated until 1841, at which time a "Mormon" Elder came into his neighborhood and held several meetings. Father Ricks became converted and was baptised June 6, 1841, by Elder George Boosinger. On March 20, 1842, he set out for Nauvoo to see the Prophet Joseph Smith. On his return home he began preparations to remove to Nauvoo and in August, 1845, took his family to the City of the Saints. He bought a farm at Appanoose, above Nauvoo, and a house and lot in the city. He began at once to take an active interest in Church affairs which he continued to do to the time of his death. When the exodus came he sent two teams to convey Church property to the Missouri river. On April 27, 1846, he crossed the Mississippi river at Fort Madison and commenced his journey westward. He located on Silver creek, opposite Winter Quarters, until the spring of 1848, when he began his journey to the Rocky Mountains. He sent a team with the pioneer company in 1847. He reached the Elkhorn with one span of horses, eight yoke of cattle and six wagons. While at the Elkhorn Thomas Edward was shot by the Indians and seriously wounded and Father Ricks had a very narrow escape from death while trying to recover him. When the great company at the Elkhorn was ready to move it consisted of 2,417 souls and 792 wagons. Father Ricks was captain of ten, John Pack of fifty and President Herriman of 100 and Heber C. Kimball of the company. They reached Salt Lake City in September, 1848. Father Ricks passed the first winter at Bountiful and then located on a farm, just north of Centerville. Later, he secured land near Farmington and started a tannery there. On Oct. 26, 1852, he married Sarah B. Fisk Allen, widow of Ezra Allen, who had gone with the Mormon Battalion and who had been killed by Indians while returning from California. In May, 1859, Father Ricks visited Cache Valley and being pleased with the country sold out at Farmington and in July, 1859, removed his wife, Sarah B., to Logan, and later brought his entire family to Cache Valley. He continued to reside in Logan until his death, which occurred Dec. 15, 1888. Patriarch Ricks was always an active, progressive citizen and was identified with every move for the growth and development of the country. On reaching Logan he engaged in the tanning business and was identified with the first saw mill and flour mill in Logan. He was an officer of the Logan Canyon Road Company, and treasurer of Cache county for nearly twenty-five years. He was a devout Latter-day Saint and was always ready to answer any call, and hardly a year passed that some of his teams did not go east for emigrants. He was identified with the erection of every meeting house or school building in the city. He was a member of the High Council for years and was ordained a Patriarch some years before his death. His posterity at his death numbered 377 souls.
