Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Davis, William K.

Davis, William K., a Bishop of the Baker Ward, Union Stake, Oregon, was born Sept. 2, 1877, at Deleno, Schuylkill county, Pennsylvania, the son of David D. Davis and Cedy Davis. He was the fourth son and ninth child of a family of twelve. The elder Davis and wife had accepted the gospel in Wales, and had started to emigrate to Utah, but running short of means, stopped over in Pennsylvania twelve years. About a year after William K. was born the family went on to Utah, living first in Salt Lake City. They then moved to Red Creek, Iron county, remaining there over a year, when they moved to Logan. William K. shared the lot of the ordinary boy, working here and there to make a living, assisting his father, who was a blacksmith in the employ of the railroad, and securing but small opportunity for scholastic education. But nature endowed him with wit-and he learned wisdom, being of a determined, energetic character, and whatever he undertook to do, he did with all his might. In March, 1896, he left Logan for Baker City, Oregon, to enter the employ of the Oregon Lumber Company, and he has, with the exception of something over two years spent in the mission field, remained with said company up to the present writing (Dec, 1902). He so well filled the various trusts reposed in him by his employers that on May 3, 1902, he was made manager of the company's extensive mercantile establishment at Baker City. Bishop Davis' nature was always deeply religious, and he always took an active part in ecclesiastical affairs. He has held with honor many positions in the Church, commencing as librarian in the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Logan Third Ward, and was successively music director of the Logan Second Ward Y. M. M. I. A., assistant music director of the Sunday school of the Logan Second Ward, etc. When the first Y. M. M. I. A. was organized in Baker City, he was chosen as counselor to the president, holding the same position under two succeeding presidents. Accepting a call to the mission field, he was set apart June 25, 1890, for the Northwestern States Mission. He labored with success in Anaconda, Montana, and in seven counties of the State of Washington, baptized a few souls and made many friends; he was honorably released Feb. 18, 1900. After visiting with his parents for a time he again returned to Baker. In 1900 (June 27th) he married Emily Stoddard (daughter of John and Elizabeth Yeates Stoddard). June 9, 1901, he was chosen to act as Bishop of the Baker Ward, and was ordained the same date under the hands of Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff. His counselors were Wm. J. Wale and Jens C. Westergaard. Bishop Davis is progressive, and under his direction an $800.00 addition to the branch assembly hall and other improvements were made.
