Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Linford, James Henry, Junior

Linford, James Henry, Junior, president of the Brigham Young College, Logan, Utah, and first assistant superintendent of Cache Stake Sunday schools, is the son of James Henry Linford, sen., and Zillah Crockett, and was born Aug. 27, 1863, in Centerville, Davis county, Utah. In March, 1863, he moved with his parents to Kaysville, in the same county, where he grew to manhood. His early life was spent on the farm, but his desire for an education led him to enter the University of Utah, then called the University of Deseret, from which institution he graduated in June, 1890. Soon after graduating, he was elected school trustee of District No. 8, of Davis county, and in July, of the same year, he was selected by the board of trustees as principal of the Kaysville public schools; in 1893, at the general election, he was elected county superintendent of public instruction, which positions he held till he removed from the county. While residing in Kaysville, he took an active part in the local Sunday school, acting as its secretary, and for a number of years a teacher in the theological class; was an active member of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement association from its organization, and for a number of years its president, and was closely associated with the work of the Ward choir, brass band, and dramatic associations. He held the offices of Deacon and Teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood, was ordained an Elder Feb. 29, 1884, by Pres. Jno. W. Hess; and a Seventy Feb. 9, 1890, by William Blood. For a number of years he was secretary of the 55th quorum of Seventy. In civil positions he was deputy recorder, recorder and assessor and collector of Kaysville from 1884 to 1891. On Feb. 24, 1892, he was married in the Logan Temple to Mary Hooper Blood, daughter of William Blood, and Jane Wilkie Hooper. Early in the year 1892 he was offered a position as teacher in the Brigham Young College at Logan, Utah, then presided over by Prest. Joshua H. Paul. This offer was accepted, and in August of the same year he moved his family to Logan and entered upon his labors with the same zeal that had characterized his efforts in former positions. In his new field of labor he was assigned to teach biological subjects, and through close application to his work he soon succeeded in building up a strong department. The summers of 1895 and 1896 were spent in the Hopkin's Seaside Laboratory, a department of the Leland Stanford University, located at Pacific Grove, California, in studying marine life and in making collections for the college biological laboratory and museum. In 1898 he studied histology and bacteriology in the University of Chicago. On July 28, 1900, the board of trustees of the Brigham Young College elected him by a unanimous vote president, to fill a vacancy caused by the resignation of President W. J. Kerr. In this position he has pursued a progressive yet conservative policy, carrying out as fast as possible, with the means placed at his disposal, the wishes of the great founder, Brigham Young. Already as a result of this policy, excellent commercial and domestic departments have been organized, well equipped carpenter shops and thorough courses in agriculture established. April 30, 1900, he became a member of the Cache Stake Sunday School Union board and on July 28, 1902, was chosen to act as first assistant Stake superintendent.
