Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Jackman, Levi

Jackman, Levi, one of the original Utah pioneers of 1847, was born in Orange county, Vermont, July 28, 1797, the son of Moses French Jackman and Elizabeth Carr. In 1810 the family removed to Batavia, N. Y., and in 1830 removed to Portage county, Ohio. In 1831 Joseph the Prophet visited that place, bringing with him the Book of Mormon, testifying of its truth and of the great Latter-day work. After a careful investigation of the doctrines advanced by the Prophet, Levi Jackman was baptized by Harvey Whitlock May 4, 1831. A few days later he was ordained an Elder under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, and in November, following, he was ordained a High Priest. In May, 1832, together with about one hundred others, he started from Ohio for Missouri, as a member of Zion's camp, and arrived in Independence, Jackson county, August 14th of the same year. He suffered with the saints during the persecutions inflicted upon them by their enemies, and was one of the number compelled to surrender their arms to the relentless mob and move into Clay county. When Joseph the Prophet visited Clay county in 1834 and organized a Stake of Zion there, Bro. Jackman was chosen as a member of the High Council. In 1835 he, together with Caleb Baldwin, traveled on foot to Kirtland, Ohio, without purse or scrip, arriving there July 26, 1835. Two days later Bro. Jackman commenced to labor on the Kirtland Temple, continuing in that occupation until the Temple was completed. In 1836 he left Kirtland, returning to Clay county, Mo., and, in consequence of persecutions, was compelled to remove to Far West, Caldwell county, where he was elected a justice of the peace. By continued persecutions he was constrained to relinquish his farm in Missouri and with his family left for Illinois, where he settled at Commerce (afterwards Nauvoo), Hancock county. He performed a mission in 1844, labored on the Nauvoo Temple and assisted in constructing wagons for the saints to migrate to the mountains. During the exodus of 1846 he left Nauvoo for the West, and after spending the winter of 1846-1847 at Winter Quarters he went to the mountains, as one of the pioneers under President Brigham Young, arriving there in July, 1847. He was chosen as a member of the first High Council organized in the Valley and acted for many years as a counselor to Bishop Shadrach Roundy of the Sixteenth Ward, Salt Lake City. Subsequently he was ordained a Patriarch. Bro. Jackman was a man of integrity, without ostentation, an earnest advocate of the cause of truth, a friend of God and humanity, and died firm in the faith of the gospel in the hopes of a glorious resurrection, at Salem, Utah county, Utah, on Sunday, July 23, 1876, aged 78 years, 11 months and 25 days. (See "Deseret News" 25: 439.)
