Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Knight, Joseph

Knight, Joseph, one of the earliest members of the Church, was an American by birth, though the exact place and date of birth is not known. He was well advanced in years when the work of the Lord in these last days began to come forth. From the journal of his son, Newel Knight, it is learned that Joseph Knight, sen., married Polly Peck; that he moved into the State of New York in 1809, and settled on the Susquehanna river, near the Great Bend, in the township of Bainbridge, Chenango county. Two years later he moved to Colesville, Broome county, N. Y., where he remained nineteen years. "My father," says Newel Knight in his journal, "owned a farm, a grist mill and carding machine. He was not rich, yet he possessed enough of this world's goods to secure to himself and family, not only the necessities, but also the comforts of life. His family, consisting of my mother, three sons, and four daughters, he reared in a genteel and respectable manner and gave his children a good common school education. My father was a sober, honest man, generally respected and beloved by his neighbors and acquaintances. He did not belong to any religious sect, but was a believer in the Universalian doctrine." The business in which Joseph Knight, sen., engaged made it necessary at times for him to hire men, and the Prophet Joseph was occasionally employed by him. To the Knight family, who were greatly attached to him, the young Prophet related many of the things God had revealed respecting the Book of Mormon, then as yet to come forth. So far at least was the elder Knight taken into the Prophet's confidence that he purposely so arranged his affairs as to be at the Smith family residence near Manchester, at the time the plates of the Book of Mormon were given into Josesph's possession. Mr. Knight had driven to the Smith residence with a horse and carriage, and in this conveyance, according to the statement of both Lucy Smith, mother of the Prophet (see Lucy Smith's History of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Chapter 23), and Josesph Knight, sen., Joseph in company with his wife Emma drove away very early-before daylight-on the morning of Sept. 22nd, 1827-it is presumed, of course, the Prophet drove to the hill Cumorah and there received from Moroni the plates of the Book of Mormon, etc. Mr. Knight remained at the Smith residence at Manchester, several days and was there the day Josesph brought home the plates, and in company with Joseph Smith, sen., and Mr. Stoal-who was also present at the Smith residence in company with Mr. Knight-went in search of those men who had assailed the Prophet while on his way home with the plates, but they did not find them. Joseph Smith in his history of Aug. 22, 1842, refers to Joseph Knight in the following endearing terms: "I am now recording in the Book of the Law of the Lord, of such as have stood by me every hour of peril, for these fifteen long years past-say, for instance, my aged and beloved brother, Joseph Knight, sen., who was among the number of the first to administer to my necessities, while I was laboring in the commencement of the bringing forth of the work of the Lord and of laying the foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. For fifteen years he has been faithful and true, and even-handed, and exemplary, and virtuous, and kind, never deviating to the right hand or to the left. Behold he is a righteous man; may God Almighty lengthen out the old man's days; and may his trembling, tortured and broken body be renewed and the vigor of health turn upon him, if it can be Thy will, consistently, O God; and it shall be said of him by the sons of Zion, while there is one of them remaining, that this man was a faithful man in Israel, therefore his name shall never be forgotten. There are his sons, Newel Knight and Joseph Knight, jun., whose names I record in the Book of the Law of the Lord with unspeakable delight, for they are my friends." ("Mill. Star" 19: 756.)
