Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Knight, Newel

Knight, Newel, one of the earliest Elders in the Church, was born Sept. 13, 1800, in Marlborough, Windham county, Vermont, the son of Joseph Knight and Polly Peck. Together with his parents he moved into the State of New York when he was nine years old, and lived first in Bainbridge township and later in Colesville, Broome county, N. Y. He continued to live with his father until he was twenty-five years old, and in 1825 (June 7th) he married Sally Coburn, a woman of rather delicate health, who held an honorable position in the choir of one of the most respectable churches in the vicinity. After his marriage Newel went a few miles distant and put in operation a carding machine, which he soon sold, and afterwards engaged in running a grist mill. During this time his wife gave birth to a child which did not live and his wife's sufferings were very great. Newel's own health gradually declined, and being told by a physician that he had consumption, he quit the mill business and moved back to Colesville, settling near his father's place. In settling up his mill business he suffered a heavy financial loss. During this time the Knight family was frequently visited by Joseph Smith, the young Prophet, in whose divine mission Newel became a firm believer. While investigating the principles of "Mormonism" he was attacked by an evil influence which threatened him with destruction, but by the miraculous manifestation of the power of God under the hands of Joseph Smith the Prophet he was relieved. This occurrence is referred to as the first miracle which took place in the Church. Soon afterwards Newel Knight and others were baptized and from that time on Newel was a faithful and staunch member of the Church, continuing thus until the time of his death. He was with the Prophet during his arrest and trial in South Bainbridge, Chenango county, and Colesville, Broome county. In August, 1830, Newel and his wife visited the Prophet in Harmony, Pa., which gave occasion for the appearance of a Heavenly messenger and the revelation on the Sacrament. Soon afterwards Newel moved Joseph and his family to Fayette, New York. Later Newel was ordained to the Priesthood and appointed to do missionary labors. Early in 1831 he and his wife accompanied the Colesville branch on their journey to Kirtland and afterwards to Missouri, where Newel was present at the dedication of the Temple spot Aug. 3, 1831, and afterwards became a participant in all the important council meetings held at Independence during the visit of the Prophet Joseph and other prominent Elders in the Church. While the Prophet Josesph and others returned to Kirtland, Newel Knight and family remained in Missouri, and when the Prophet visited them the next year (1832) he blessed an infant son, which had been born to Newel Knight and wife Oct. 4, 1831. Bro. Knight was present when the Church met together at the ferry at the Big Blue river, Missouri, April 6, 1833, to celebrate the birthday of the Church for the first time. Afterwards he became subject to the terrible persecutions which befell the Saints in Jackson county, and was finally expelled, together with his co-religionists, from said county, in 1833. The Colesville branch, of which Newel Knight and family remained a member, kept together during the persecutions and formed a small settlement on the Missouri bottoms, building themselves temporary houses. While exposed to persecutions and hardships in Clay county, Newel Knight's wife took sick and died Sept. 15, 1834, and Bro. Newel's own health also being poor, he decided to go East, making the best arrangements he could for the care of his little son Samuel and an aged aunt. In company with a number of brethren, he boarded some canoes and floated down the Missouri river. They traveled on said river by day and camped at night on its shore. Newel was hardly able to walk when he started on this journey, but his strength gradually increased and when he arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, in the spring of 1835, he could commence to labor on the Temple, which work he continued until the Temple was finished and dedicated. Nov. 24, 1835, he married Lydia Goldthwait, Joseph Smith the Prophet performing the marriage ceremony. After receiving his anointings in the Kirtland Temple, and having witnessed great manifestations of God's power in that sacred edifice, he left Kirtland April 7, 1836, with his wife Lydia, for Clay county, Mo., where they arrived May 6, 1836. Soon after his arrival in Missouri the spirit of mobocracy again manifested itself, and, under the threats made by mobs, the Saints were compelled to leave their possessions in Clay county, and move out upon the prairies of what afterward became Caldwell county. There Newel Knight made a new home for himself and family, but was driven out during the general exodus of the Saints from the State of Missouri in 1839. In Illinois, where Newel Knight and family cast their lot with the Saints, they again passed through many hardships and persecutions and were finally driven into exile once more in 1846. Newel and his family traveled westward in Bishop George Miller's company and wintered among the Ponca Indians on the Running Water in what is now northern Nebraska. Here Newel Knight, exposed to the hardships of the winter, took sick and died Jan. 11, 1847. His wife Lydia describes the end of her husband as follows: "On Monday morning, Jan. 4, 1847, Bro. Knight, whose health had been failing for some time, did not arise as usual, and on going to him, he said, "Lydia, I believe I shall go to rest this winter." The next night he awoke with a severe pain in his right side, a fever had also set in, and he expressed himself to me that he did not expect to recover. From this time until the 10th of the month, the Elders came frequently and prayed for my husband. After each administration he would rally and be at ease for a short time and then relapse again into suffering. I felt at last as if I could not endure his sufferings any longer and that I ought not to hold him here. I knelt by his bedside, and with my hand upon his pale forehead asked my Heavenly Father to forgive my sins, and that the sufferings of my companion might cease, and if he was appointed unto death, and could not remain with us that he might be quickly eased from pain and fall asleep in peace. Almost immediately all pain left him and in a short time he sweetly fell asleep in death, without a struggle or a groan, at half past six on the morning of the 11th of January, 1847. His remains were interred at sunset on the evening of the day he died." (Scraps of Biography.)
