Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Knight, Lydia Goldthwait

Knight, Lydia Goldthwait, wife of Newel Knight, was born June 9, 1812, in Sutton, Worcester county, Mass., the daughter of Jesse Goldthwait and Sally Burt. When fifteen years old she was sent to a boarding school in a village where she met a young man by the name of Calvin Baily, to whom she was married in the fall of 1828. This marriage proved an unhappy one (though it was blessed with two children), and three years after her marriage she was deserted by her husband. She then returned to the home of her parents. During a visit to Mt. Pleasant, Upper Canada, she first became acquainted with the Latter-day Saints, the Nickerson family living at that place being visited by Joseph Smith the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon in October, 1833. A number of meetings were held, and the Nickerson family, Lydia and others were baptized. When Lydia, in the summer of 1834, returned to her father's home in New York State, her relatives did all they could to persuade her to leave "Mormonism." At length she grew restless and unhappy on account of the constant railery and derision showered upon her by her parents on account of her religion, and therefore decided to go to Kirtland, Ohio, which at that time was a gathering place of the Saints. Immediately on reaching Kirtland in the spring of 1835 she met Vincent Knight, who approached Sister Lydia, saying: "Sister, the Prophet is in bondage and has been brought into distress by the persecutions of the wicked, and if you have any means to give, it would be of benefit to him." She at once emptied her purse containing $50, which was all she had. Bro. Knight looked at it, counted it and fervently exclaimed, "Thank God, this will release and set the Prophet free." The young girl was now without means, not having enough to procure a meal or a night's lodging. For six or eight months after that she lived a pleasant life in the home of Vincent Knight. In the fall of 1835 Hyrum Smith asked Lydia to come to his house and assist his wife. She complied with the request and while living there she became acquainted with Newel Knight, who boarded at the place while working on the Kirtland Temple. Newel Knight (who was not related to the Vincent Knight previously mentioned) is described by Sister Lydia as a tall man with light brown hair, a keen blue eye and a very energetic and determined manner; he was a widower, whose wife, a delicate woman, had died the previous fall, in consequence of the trials and persecutions she had suffered, and left an infant only two days old. Bro. Knight, in course of time, made Lydia an offer of marriage, which she after some hesitation accepted, and the two became man and wife Nov. 23, 1835, Joseph Smith the Prophet performing the marriage ceremony. It was the first marriage ceremony the Prophet ever performed. The young married couple gladly accepted the offer of Hyrum Smith to spend the winter at his home. In the meantime Newel Knight continued his labors on the Temple and generally attended the school of the Elders in the evenings. Together with his wife he also attended the dedication of the Temple and witnessed many marvelous manifestations of the power of God. After this Sister Lydia and her husband moved to Clay county, where a girl was born to them Dec. 1, 1836. In February, 1837, Newel Knight purchased 40 acres of land from the government near Far West, Caldwell county, Mo. A boy (named James Philander) was born to Lydia April 29, 1837. She passed through the persecutions of the Church in Caldwell county, Mo., and afterwards in Illinois, and she left Nauvoo with her family April 17, 1846, in the exodus of the Saints for the Rocky Mountains. While on the way, and while stopping temporarily together with many other Saints at a place known as Ponca, her husband died, Jan. 11, 1847. Thus she became a widow with seven helpless children and for several years after that she battled with all kinds of odds to support herself and family and to raise her little ones as best she could on the frontiers. Finally the way opened for her to come to the Valley; she crossed the plains in 1850 in Edward Hunter's company, arriving in Salt Lake City Oct. 3, 1850. For several years she resided in the City and on a farm near the City. She subsequently located in Provo, where she taught school. Next she resided at Payson and Santa Clara, but when the St. George Temple was finished in 1877 she was called by President Brigham Young to labor in that sacred building as an ordinance worker. She responded cheerfully, made her permanent home in St. George and attended faithfully to her duties in the Temple till the day of her death, which occurred in St. George April 3, 1884. Sister Lydia's life was full of events and her character full of integrity; she possessed a lovely disposition, gained the confidence and good will of all who knew her and died a most devoted and faithful Latter-day Saint. (See Lydia Knight's History.)
