Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Knight, Jesse

Knight, Jesse, a prominent Elder of the Church and a resident of Provo, Utah county, Utah, was born Sept. 6, 1845, at Nauvoo, Hancock county, Illinois, the son of Newel Knight and Lydia Goldthwait. He participated as a child with the Saints in the exodus from Nauvoo in 1846 and came to Utah in 1850, crossing the plains and mountains in a company led by Edward Hunter, whose train arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 13, 1850. The family made their home temporarily in Salt Lake City. Jesse remained with the family, who resided on the Church farm, near Salt Lake City, until he was eleven years of age, when he moved with his mother to Provo. He started out for himself by herding cows, gleaning potatoes, etc., and in due course of time he earned enough to buy a horse, the first property he owned for himself. He also engaged in freighting with ox teams and followed that business for eleven years. In 1862 he made a trip to the Missouri river after emigrants; in 1863 he made a trip to Montana, teaming and freighting, and in 1866 he participated in the Black Hawk Indian war. Bro. Knight was baptized when about eight years of age and was ordained an Elder Jan. 22, 1891, by Vernee L. Halliday. He was ordained a High Priest March 3, 1907, by David John. In 1868 (Jan. 18th) Brother Knight married Amanda McEwan, who was born Nov. 13, 1851, in Salt Lake City, Utah. She was the daughter of John McEwan and Amanda Higbee. The children of Jesse Knight and Amanda McEwan are Lydia Minerva (died Dec. 28, 1887), Oscar Raymond, Jesse William, Amanda Inez, Jennie Pearl and Addie Iona. For about twenty years after his marriage Bro. Knight took little interest in the Church. The loss of confidence in men, the faithfulness of his parents, sickness and healing in his family led him to seek the Lord in earnestness and humility. Thereby, in 1887-1888, he received a testimony of the gospel and of the authority of the Priesthood, and he decided that the most effectual way to do good was through the organization of the Church. Since that time he has developed numerous mining properties. Through his efforts three settlements have been started, namely, Knightville, in Tintic, Utah, Raymond, in Alberta, Canada, and Storrs, in Carbon county, Utah. Each of these towns have a branch of the Church, and none of them have ever had a saloon. Much has been done by Bro. Knight in getting water on to dry lands, developing power plants, and home industries, and in all things his motive has always been as much to help others as to make profits. Brother Knight built the first sugar factory in the Northwest Territory, Canada, the second sugar factory in Canada. He is president of all the Knight Investment Company's industries, including a sugar company, power company, woolen mills, smelter company, coal and other mining companies, railroad, reservoir, light and irrigation companies and others. A few years ago he was unanimously nominated by the Democratic party as candidate for Governor of Utah, but he refused to accept. In June, 1907, he visited the place of his father's death and burial, which is seven miles from Mobrara, Nebraska. He found remnants of the old fort which was built by a company of Saints who wintered there in 1846-1847. This company was the first to start from Nauvoo for the mountains in 1846, but owing to the call for the Mormon Battalion they could not continue the journey that year and the Ponca Indians inviting them to winter on their reservation they spent the winter of 1846-1847 on the Running Water. The place of the fort is still an Indian reservation. Bro. Knight erected a monument in commemoration of his father and the other Saints who died in that place on account of unusual privation and hardship. Bro. Knight was the principal contributor to the Maeser Memorial Hall of the Brigham Young University at Provo, which was built under the direction of the Alumni Association. As his parents were ready to help the Church in the beginning, so throughout Bro. Knight is a liberal contributor to Church and Charity.
