Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lambert, Charles

Lambert, Charles, senior president of the 23rd quorum of Seventy and for 43 years a resident of the Seventh Ward, Salt Lake City, was born at Kirk Deighton, York, Yorkshire, England, Aug. 30, 1816. He learned the trade of a stone-cutter and commenced to work on the London & Birmingham Ry when nineteen years of age. Subsequently he was a contractor and builder on the York & North Midland Ry. He embraced "Mormonism" in Lincolnshire and was baptized July 12, 1843; a few weeks later he was ordained to the office of a Priest, and the following year he started for Nauvoo, Ill., crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Fanny," which sailed from Liverpool, England, Jan. 23, 1844. After his arrival at Nauvoo he made the acquaintance of Joseph the Prophet, his brother Hyrum and other leading men of the Church; he labored on the Nauvoo Temple until the walls were finished, and subsequently received his endowments in that building. He was ordained an Elder in the Church shortly after his arrival in Nauvoo and married Mary Ann Cannon in November, 1844. After the death of his wife's father, he was appointed guardian of his (Cannon's) younger children. He was also ordained a Seventy and became one of the original members of the 11th quorum, and in 1845 became a president of the 23rd quorum. He participated in the Nauvoo battle in September, 1846, and was with the company that used the famous steamboat shafts, after first helping to make them into cannons. When the city of Nauvoo finally capitulated, Elder Lambert was seized by the mob and forcibly immersed several times in the Mississippi river, under the most hideous oaths and blasphemies imaginable. At last he succeeded in getting away and made his escape across the Mississippi; he was encamped with his family on the opposite bank at the time the quails came to the relief of the Saints. After assisting in getting all the sick and poor across the river, he traveled to the Missouri river, arriving there after untold hardships. He built a small house in Winter Quarters, and then went to St. Joseph, Mo., where he worked at stone-cutting and building until the spring of 1849, when he started for Utah, arriving in G. S. L. Valley in the fall. He built one of the first adobe houses erected in Salt Lake City, a part of which is still standing. For many years he acted as clerk of the Seventh Ward, and was always on hand with his means and ability to help on the work of God. Bro. Lambert died at his farm in Granger, May 2, 1892.
