Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Merrill, Heber Kimball

Merrill, Heber Kimball, a High Councilor in Cache Stake, is a son of Apostle Marriner W. Merrill and Almira J. Merrill and was born at Richmond, Cache county, Utah, Sept. 23, 1869. He is the third child of a family of twelve, eight sons and four daughters. His early life was spent on the farm, attending the district school in the winter. From 1886 to 1892 he attended school in the winter and worked on the farm during the summer. The first two years were under Miss Ida I. Cook at a private school, one year at the Brigham Young College, at Logan, and three years at the University of Utah, where he graduated in the normal course in June, 1892. The next year he taught a district school at Lewiston, Cache county, Utah. Later he returned to the University of Utah and took the degree of B. Pd. He taught a district school at Richmond the next year. April 13, 1894, he was set apart for a mission to Germany by Apostles Geo. Teasdale and Franklin D. Richards, in Salt Lake City. He went as an Elder and successfully labored for nearly three years in Nurenberg, Frankfort-a-Main and Dresden, Germany, and Geneva, Switzerland, returning home Feb. 4, 1897. He was married to Oretta A. Dudley of Oxford, Idaho, June 30, 1897, and began teaching in the Brigham Young College at Logan in September of same year, where he is still laboring and now has charge of the theological department. During the summer of 1897 he acted as home missionary for the Y. M. M. I. A. and in the winter he was in charge of the first intermediate department in the First Ward Sunday school of Logan. In the summer of 1898 he served as a Stake home missionary for six months. That winter he had charge of the theological department in the Seventh Ward Sunday school of Logan. Jan. 29, 1899, he was chosen a High Councilor of Cache Stake and was ordained a High Priest by Apostles Marriner W. Merrill and Geo. Teasdale. In June, 1899, he received a Church degree of B. D. From May to November, 1900, he labored as a home missionary and on Oct. 22, 1900, was chosen as an assistant in the Brigham Young College Sunday school and was also appointed a teacher in the same.
