Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Merrill, Amos Newlove

Merrill, Amos Newlove, second counselor in the presidency of the Utah Stake of Zion, was born March 15, 1875, at Richmond, Cache co., Utah, the son of Marriner Wood Merrill and Sarah Ann Atkinson. He was baptized May 3, 1883, and ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood in his early teens. He received his elementary education in the public schools at Richmond and his high school and college training in the Brigham Young College and the State Agricultural College at Logan. He graduated from the latter institution in June, 1896, with the degree of Bachelor of Science. He returned to the college during the following year to do advanced work and to assist in the biological department. In July, 1897, he was ordained an Elder under the hands of his father. In August, 1897, he was ordained a Seventy and set apart for a mission to England, from which he was honorably released in January, 1900. While on this mission he labored as a traveling Elder in the Leeds conference and later as president of the Liverpool conference, with headquarters at Accrington. April 25, 1900, he married Eliza L. Drysdale. During the following two years he was in the employ of the Cache Valley Creamery Company at Richmond. As a Church worker he served in the superintendency of the Richmond Sunday school and, upon the organization of the Benson Stake of Zion, in the superintendency of the Stake Sunday schools. In August, 1902, he moved to Logan and became an instructor in mechanic arts at the Brigham Young College. Dec. 9, 1906, having been called to serve in the Bishopric of the Logan Second Ward, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart to that position by Apostle Reed Smoot. While connected with the Brigham Young College he was promoted to professor of agriculture. During the summer of 1906 he attended the Graduate School of Agriculture at the University of Illinois. During the following year he returned to the east with his family to resume his studies. He graduated with the degree of master of science in June, 1908, from the University of Illinois, and remained the following summer to do post graduate work in his chosen field, agriculture. Upon his return to Utah he resumed his work at the Brigham Young College at Logan. In the spring of 1909 he accepted the position of professor of agriculture and head of the agricultural department of the Brigham Young University at Provo. In October, 1911, he was called into the Bishopric of the Provo Fifth Ward and a few days afterwards (Oct. 29, 1911) into the presidency of the Utah Stake of Zion. In the spring of 1912 he was chosen as principal of the Brigham Young University high school. At this date (Dec. 8, 1914) he is the father of five children, to-wit, Amos Lyman, Vernon Newlove, Erma Jennett, Sarah Lucile and David Marriner.
