Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Neff, John

Neff, John, a Utah pioneer of 1847, was born Sept. 19, 1794, in Strasburg township, Lancaster county, Pennsylvania, where he lived until he gathered with the Saints in Illinois. In the earlier part of his life he was moral, industrious and economical and thereby acquired a handsome fortune. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized Feb. 7, 1842. In May, 1844, he went to Nauvoo, Illinois, to visit the Prophet Joseph Smith; there he became acquainted with many of the leading members of the Church and returned to Pennsylvania well pleased, having unlimited confidence in the Prophet and his divine mission. In the spring of 1846 he started with his family for the contemplated gathering place of the Saints "beyond the Rocky Mountains." He arrived in Nauvoo just in time to be driven across the Mississippi river by the mob; thence he proceeded onward to Winter Quarters, where he was greatly afflicted, himself and family all being sick; his son Cyrus, an amiable youth of twenty, was buried there. At Winter Quarters Bro. Neff was ordained to the High Priesthood. In the summer of 1847 he started with many others for the Rocky Mountains. After a laborious journey of four months he arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley in October, 1847. It is said of John Neff by one who was walking with him, that on emerging from the mouth of Emigration Canyon and beholding the desert valley, he knelt upon the ground and thanked the Lord that he had found a resting place. He moved out of the "Old Fort" (Salt Lake City) and located near the mouth of Mill Creek Canyon in the spring of 1848; there he built a flouring mill (the first of its kind in Utah), under disadvantageous and very discouraging circumstances. He was very active in developing the agricultural resource of the Territory and was a man of great benevolence. It is told of him that during the famine year of 1856, when flour was worth one dollar a pound, he refused to accept more than six cents a pound and declined to sell at any price except to those who were in need. Bro. Neff died May 9, 1869, at his home in Mill Creek. In an obituary published at the time of his death the following occurs: "Father Neff was truly devoted to his religion. The kingdom of God to him stood paramount to everything else. His faith was exhibited by his works. He was liberal with his means. When assistance was called for, it was forthcoming. When at Nauvoo he helped the Prophet and gave a considerable sum to start the ship "Brooklyn" for California. During the reign of mobocracy in Nauvoo he also rendered considerable pecuniary assistance. He has also done much to gather the poor from foreign lands, as well as to help them after reaching their destination. In times of extreme scarcity, when provisions commanded a high price, he distributed his means among the brethren at low figures, when he could have obtained twice and even thrice the amount from passing strangers. The poor called not on him in vain, nor were the destitute sent empty away. In Pennsylvania he was called an honest man and a good citizen. He was an affectionate father and a true and faithful husband. In short he lived and died a saint."
