Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Reid, William Taylor

Reid, William Taylor, Bishop of Manti North Ward (South Sanpete Stake) Sanpete county, Utah, was born July 21, 1830, at Drumbo, county of Down, Ireland, the son of John Reid and Frances White. He was baptized Jan. 9, 1848, by John Reid; ordained a Priest in October, 1848, by William Gibson; ordained an Elder in November, 1848, by William Gibson; ordained a Seventy in November, 1862, by William Allen, and became a member of the 20th quorum of Seventy; ordained a High Priest in 1870 by Orson Hyde and set apart as a member of the Sanpete Stake High Council; ordained a Bishop in July, 1877, and set apart to preside over the Manti North Ward, by Pres. Brigham Young. This latter position he filled until the time of his death, which occurred at Manti, Feb. 28, 1904. Before he emigrated from Europe to America in 1862 Elder Reid performed active and successful missionary work in Scotland. After his arrival in Utah he settled in Provo; afterwards he resided successively in Springville, Payson and Spring Lake Villa, teaching school in some of these places. In 1866 he moved to Sevier county and became one of the early settlers of Richfield. In November, 1887, he located in Manti, Sanpete county, where he lived the remainder of his days. In November, 1848, he married Jane McEwan and in 1869 (Nov. 22nd) he married Mary A. Cox. By these wives he became the father of thirteen children. Bishop Reid passed through many of the Indian troubles in Utah and served in the Black Hawk war as adjutant under Col. Jesse N. Smith. He was also prominent as a civil office holder, serving sixteen years as county clerk of Sanpete county, and ten years as county recorder and county superintendent of common schools; he also filled many other minor offices. In Church labors he was an energetic Sunday school worker, being a Sunday school teacher for thirty years and a Stake superintendent of Sunday schools ten years. From 1873 to 1875 he served as first counselor to Bishop Andrew J. Moffatt of Manti. His main avocation was that of a farmer, but he was also greatly interested in various business enterprises. For over thirty years he was president of the Manti Co-op.
