Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Tanner, John

Tanner, John, popularly known as Father Tanner, one of the earliest Elders in the Church, was born Aug. 15, 1778, at Hopkinton, Rhode Island, the son of Joshua and Thankful Tefft Tanner. Early in the year 1800 John married Tabitha, daughter of Elisha Bently, who bore him one son, Elisha B., born March 23, 1801. His wife died on the 9th of the following month. In January, 1802, he married Lydia (daughter of William and Ann Stuart), who was born in 1783 and was of Scotch descent and said to be of the royal Stuart family of Scotland. Her mother was a descendant of Miles Standish of Pilgrim fame. Lydia bore her husband twelve children, namely: William Stuart Martha, Willard, Sidney, John, Joshua, Romelia, Nathan, Edward and Edwin (twins), Maria, Louisa, Martin Henry, and Albert Miles. One evening in the year 1808 two of John Tanner's children were bitten by his dog, which had gone mad, and in the attempt to confine the dog he himself was also bitten in the calf of the leg. He at once seized a pair of sheep shears, cut out the affected part of his leg and filled the wound with salt; and by the aid of a prescription which he obtained, he succeeded in curing his children. In the spring of 1818 he moved with his family to North West Bay, where his daughter, Maria Louisa, and son, Martin H., were born. In 1823 he moved into the town of Bolton, Warren county, New York, where in 1825 his son Albert M. was born and on May 31st of that year his faithful wife Lydia died. In November, 1825, at Bolton, Warren county, N. Y., he married Elizabeth Beswick (daughter of Everton and Anna Lamb Beswick), who bore him six sons and two daughters, namely: Marion, Seth, Benjamin, Freeman, Everton, Joseph Smith, Philomelia, David Dan, Sarah and Francis. Notwithstanding the expense of raising his large family, John Tanner became comparatively wealthy, was extensively known and universally respected. The poor and needy always found a friend in him; he would give them employment whereby to earn what they needed, if they were able to work, but would supply their needs just the same, whether they were able to work or not. Father Tanner, as he was reverentially called, was a member of the Baptist church, and the leading spirit among the members in his neighborhood. About a year and one-half after the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, two Elders, Jared and Simeon Carter, came and preached in his neighborhood. Believing that his church was the only true church, he naturally thought that these men were imposters, when he heard of their appointment, and he attended their meeting for the purpose of exposing their error to his Baptist brethren. But on seeing the Elders and hearing them preach and expound the gospel and bear their testimonies to the divinity of the mission of Joseph Smith, he was too good a judge of men and too well versed in the Scriptures not to be profoundly impressed, and was too honest to breathe a breath of discredit upon them or their doctrines, when they did not appear clear to him. Accordingly, when these Elders asked him his opinion of them and their doctrines he simply answered in the language of the wise and conservative Gamaliel to the persecutors of the primitive Church, "If this work be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it." But he was too profoundly impressed to let them pass without a thorough investigation, and therefore invited the Elders to accept of the hospitality of his home for the night. He borrowed and read the Book of Mormon while they went on their way, and upon reading it was convinced of the divinity of the work. After an absence of two weeks the Elders returned and Bro. Tanner was baptized; soon afterwards he was ordained to the Priesthood. Bro. Tanner became the instrument in the hands of God to contribute means, by which the partially constructed Kirtland Temple and grounds were saved from passing out of the hands of the Saints by a foreclosure of the mortgage, and having assisted to complete the sacred edifice and fit it for the administration of holy ordinances Father Tanner was present at the dedication and partook of the glorious gifts, manifestations and hallowed influences of that memorial occasion. He also received his washings and anointings in that, the first Temple erected to the name of the Lord, and under the direction of God in this dispensation, and hallowed by the personal presence of the Savior, Moses, Elias, Elijah and other holy personages. With his characteristic energy, Father Tanner put forth his best efforts to assist the Prophet in sustaining the "Kirtland Bank," and for that purpose bought and held much of its paper; but there was a Judas behind the counter and in spite of the best efforts of the Prophet, sustained by Father Tanner and others, the bank went down, and Father Tanner, like many others, was completely crippled financially. At the time that the Saints were compelled to leave Kirtland, Father Tanner, with the journey of one thousand miles before him and a large family, was destitute of the means to migrate. He had an excellent farm and home which were exempt to him from sale by law, and he could have retained these and remained in Kirtland in comfort, but he had signed as surety for the Church, and no financial promise of his had ever before gone unfulfilled; nor would he now fail to meet his obligations if it took all he had. He sold his farm and enough other property to pay his obligation and was consequently left with only one horse, a turn-pike cart, a keg of powder and $20 in cash, with which to transport himself and family of eleven a distance of a thousand miles. This was quite a change for Father Tanner; from a condition of wealth in which he was enabled to assist many people and the Church in general, he was left in a condition without means to assist himself at the age of sixty years. In a financial way he had staked his all on his faith, the Prophet and the Church, and had lost. No doubt this happened to try his faith, for it was not traceable to his lack of business sagacity or thrift. But all this did not cause Father Tanner to lose his faith in the gospel nor in the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, for he had a firm testimony of the truth of the gospel and believed firmly in the latter-day dispensation; hence, he could not be moved out of the chosen path. By the aid of his horse and cart and a wagon and three horses, which he succeeded in borrowing he was enabled to carry his family safely to Missouri, receiving some help from the people along the way. But the journey was not without hardships, which caused the death of one of his daughters. Arriving in Missouri, and relating his experiences to some of his friends, he remarked that if others had come up to Missouri easier than he, they had not learned so much and had not therefore received so much benefit from the journey, thereby acknowledging the hand of the Lord in his privations. He arrived at Far West, Missouri, July 3, 1838, where, with his characteristic thrift and the aid of his sons, he soon paid off the debts and had the means of a comfortable living. While he and his son Myron were returning from a mill in the fall of 1838 and were about nine miles from home, they saw a company of state militia coming in their direction, and their appearance was so much like that of a mob that, suspecting their evil intentions, Father Tanner told his son Myron to run and secret himself, so that he could be spared to tell what become of his father. Myron accordingly ran and secreted himself beneath a heap of brush. The mob came up, and, as Father Tanner had suspected they would, they sought to take his life. One, Capt. M. Meyer Odell, snapped his gun with deadly aim at him and as it refused to discharge its contents, he seized it by the muzzle and dealt Father Tanner a heavy blow upon the head. Had not Father Tanner worn a thick felt hat at the time, it is very probable that it would have proved fatal. The mob then took him prisoner and held him and his team for several days. In order to wipe out the evidence of the murderous assault they ordered him to wash off the blood from his head and face, but this he refused to do. They killed one man by the name of Carey, and upon Father Tanner's word of honor that he would return, they allowed him with others to go and take the corpse to his family, and ever faithful to his promise he returned to their custody. During the militia raid Father Tanner lost heavily in stock stolen by the mob. As soon as he was released, he went to work at once making preparations to remove to Illinois. Together with his family and the families of his sons he arrived in New Liberty, about the 1st of April; here he sojourned for a year and prospered. About the middle of March, 1840, he moved to Iowa and settled upon the "half breed" tract, about four miles from Montrose, in Lee county, where his daughter Sarah was born in July of that year. Here he opened and cultivated a large farm, putting 250 acres under the plow, and about 200 acres into pasture, all under good fence, and here he lived and prospered for six years. At the April conference, 1844, Father Tanner was called to take a mission to the Eastern States. Before starting he went to Nauvoo to see the Prophet Joseph Smith, whom he met in the street. He held the Prophet's note for $2,000, loaned in 1835, to redeem the Kirtland Temple farm, and in the course of the conversation he handed the Prophet his note. The Prophet, not understanding what he meant by it, asked what he would have him do with it, and Father Tanner replied: "Brother Joseph, you are welcome to it." The Prophet then laid his right hand heavily upon Father Tanner's shoulder and said: "God bless you, Father Tanner, your children shall never beg bread." He went upon his mission, and was in the East when the Prophet and Patriarch were assassinated; he returned early in the fall of that year. The Church up to this time, owing to the extreme adversity through which it had been called to pass, had been unable to pay the notes in full for the $30,000, which Father Tanner had signed as surety, and he was now called on to pay this, and judgment obtained against him in the sum of $700, in the district court of Lee county, Iowa; but he succeeded in affecting a compromise whereby the judgment creditors agreed to accept $100 from him as his share in full, and look to the other parties for the remainder. Father Tanner aided materially in the building of the Nauvoo Temple, and received his endowments, sealings and second anointings therein. In the spring of 1846 he sold his home at a nominal price, preparatory to gathering to the Rocky mountains with the Saints. With the means thus obtained he fitted up comfortable teams and wagons and started west about the middle of May, joining the westward bound streams of Latter-day Saints in their exodus from Illinois. He moved two families besides his own to Council Bluffs. In July, 1846, he fitted out two of his sons, Albert M. and Myron, and sent them with the Mormon Battalion into Mexico. He then moved across the Missouri river to Cutler's Park, and thence to Winter Quarters, where he herded the stock of the whole camp of Israel for three months, receiving no remuneration, through a misunderstanding. After giving up the herd, he moved to the "Chimneys" on the river, three miles above Winter Quarters, where he spent the winter. While here he lost nearly everything he owned by fire. In the spring of 1847 he assisted in fitting out the pioneers for the westward journey, opened up a farm and raised a good crop of corn. His son Myron returned in the fall from his trip with the Battalion, while Albert M. went on to California. In the fall he also sent out help to the pioneers who were on the return trip. In the latter part of June, 1848, he fitted up five teams and loaded up his worldly effects, including eighteen months' provisions, and started west for Great Salt Lake Valley. He spent the 4th of July on the Elkhorn river. Somewhere between Wood river and Fort Laramie his grandson, Sidney, six years old, fell from the tongue of a wagon which was loaded with about 3500 pounds; both wheels passed over his bowels; he raised up on his feet and then fell and expired in about twenty minutes. This occurred on the 26th day of July; the company traveled on till the following day, when the boy was buried on the bank of the Platte river. Otherwise Father Tanner had a prosperous journey; he arrived in Salt Lake Valley on the 17th of October, 1848, and located on Little Cottonwood creek, about one mile above the present Union Fort, where he built a home and laid out a farm in the spring of 1849 in the so-called Lyman survey, between the two Cottonwoods. In the fall of 1849 he was taken with the rheumatism, and on New Year's day, 1859, he was confined to his bed and suffered terribly till April 13, 1850, when he died. He was buried on the 14th in lots 4 and 13 in block 1, plat "C," Salt Lake City Cemetery.
