Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Terry, Otis Lysander

Terry, Otis Lysander, a Utah pioneer of 1850, was born March 12, 1818, at Hardwick, Worcester county, Massachusetts, the son of Otis Terry and Cynthia Ruggles. In 1842 (Oct. 18th) he married Fannie Marilla Loveridge, who bore him five children. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized in 1843 by Elder Mephibosheth Sirrine. In 1845 he moved to Honey Creek, Iowa, and lived there and at Kanesville for several years. In 1850 he crossed the plains and mountains to G. S. L. Valley in Capt. Warren Foote's company, Bro. Otis L. being captain of fifty and his father captain of ten on the journey. After his arrival in Salt Lake City, Otis L. settled in Union, Salt Lake county, where he engaged in farming and also labored as a cooper. In 1851 he took charge of Gardner's flouring mill on Mill Creek. That year also he married Levee Terissa Daucy, who bore him eight children. In 1852 he married Jane Hart, who became the mother of two of his children, and in 1853 he married Sarah Vail Howell, a widow with three children. In 1855 he moved with his family to North Ogden, Weber county, where he spent the winter of 1855-1856. That season proved the hardest time of their lives on account of the grasshopper devastation. Flour could not be had at any price and therefore the family had to subsist on bran bread and beef made from cattle that had frozen to death in the Weber river. These animals would go out on the ice to drink, when the ice would frequently break under them and let them down into the water, where they would freeze to death, and Father Terry would occasionally cut the ice to get the cattle out long after they were dead. Towards spring sickness came upon the family and they had measles, scurvy and flucks. In this weakened condition his beloved wives, Fannie and Jane, unable to combat the destroyer, died. Two of his children also succumbed to the disease. Becoming somewhat disheartened Bro. Terry moved the remainder of his family back to Union Fort, where he endeavored to make a fresh start in life. Times were still very hard and he buried two more of his children. In 1857 he married Martha Jane Van Volkenberg, who bore him seven children; hence after the death of Fannie and Jane he still had three wives. Altogether he became the father of twenty-six children. During the winter of 1857-1858 he participated in the Echo Canyon campaign and during the general move south in 1858 he settled temporarily at Spring Lake Villa, Utah county. Deciding to change his place of residence once more he left Union in March, 1860, with part of his family and settled permanently at Fairview, Sanpete county. There he soon became one of the leading citizens, taking an active part in building mills, making roads, constructing canals and ditches, grubbing sage brush, killing snakes and guarding the place from Indians. He lived in the old rock fort until it was considered safe to move out upon the city lots, and he was one of the first to venture out to the canyons for timber for building purposes. Bro. Terry took an active part in the Black Hawk war and ran the first saw mill at Fairview. He also took charge of the grist mill in Fairview for many years and was among the first to raise apples in the north end of Sanpete valley. His corn invariably grew the tallest, his stacks of grain were always the largest and he always had a good herd of cows, horses and sheep. Bro. Terry was the first choir leader in Fairview, as he delighted in the songs of Zion. It was always a pleasure to him to tell of his early experiences in the Church. He held the office of a High Priest at the time of his death, which occurred Nov. 16, 1899, in Fairview. At the close of 1913 his posterity numbered 383 souls. His sons and daughter grew up full of vigor and cheerfulness and nothing ever happened which caused them to lose sight of the bright side of life. His wives were kind and generous and did a mother's part by the children who had lost their mothers. This was especially the case with Levee Terissa, whose heart was not only large enough to work for and divide with all his large family, but many times she helped others, being indeed a mother to the motherless and a friend to the oppressed. Her home was always open to the young people and many a happy evening was spent parching corn, making molasses candy and shaving off dried beef to be eaten with some of her famous biscuits and light bread. She was a teacher and defender of virtue and some of her words still ring in the ears of many who knew her. In her home could be heard the hum of the spinning wheel and the whack, whack of the loom. She and her daughters carded, spun and wove many a yard of cloth which was made into clothing for the family. Bro. Terry himself took pride in wearing his home made jeans, long after the store-bought articles had come into use. His boys grew up full of push and enterprise. Though none of them have attained to great riches, they have been promoters in different lines of industry and helped a great many people as well as themselves to get a start in the world. They have always been on hand to assist in the upbuilding of the Church and have in a most liberal way donated their time, talents and means for the furtherance of the work of the Lord. Some of them have gone on missions, and though not fluent speakers, they have done a great work by their example, and they are all faithful Latter-day Saints to this day. The Terry family have up to date done work in the Temples for about two thousand persons.
