Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Wood, James Grace

Wood, James Grace. (Continued from page 91.) Bro. Wood gives the following additional particulars of his life: "My occupation is that of a farmer. I am the ninth child of my father's thirty-seven children. For a number of years I acted as a Ward teacher and spent seven years in exile for having obeyed one of the Lord's commandments. I acted for some time as superintendent of the South Hooper Sunday School, and in 1894 I was chosen first counselor to Bishop Cook of the South Hooper Ward, of the Davis Stake of Zion. After the division of that Ward I was chosen Bishop of that portion of the same which was named Clearfield and was ordained a Bishop Nov. 3, 1907, by Orson F. Whitney. After this ordination I spent three months gathering material for the genealogy of the members of the new Ward. After having presided over the Clearfield Ward four years I had the satisfaction of knowing that there was not a single non-tithe payer in the Ward belonging to the Church, and that of the twenty-four non-members residing in the Ward eighteen had been baptized. After returning from my mission and exile I assisted two of my brothers to fill missions in England and one in Scotland; also assisted my oldest son, James C., financially to fill a two years' mission to the Central States; after his return, Loy Wood, the next of my sons in order of age, filled a mission to Asia, where he spent three years. Next my son Alvin filled a two years' mission to the Eastern States, and just before he returned an orphan girl (Viola Howard), whom I had raised, filled a mission at my expense to the Northern States. Thus since the year 1883 I have spent nearly $9000 for missionary purposes, which I consider a good investment. Thanks to my Heavenly Father, my family, myself included, are at the present time in perfect harmony with the authorities of the Church and labor with implicit faith in the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ."
