Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Woodruff, Emma Smith

Woodruff, Emma Smith, one of the early heroines of the Church, was born March 1, 1838, in Spring Hill, Daviess county, Missouri, three miles from Adam-ondi-Ahman. Her father, Samuel Smith, was of English descent, and her mother, Martishia Smoot, was of French lineage and was sister to the well-known Abraham O. Smoot, and Emma was therefore always intimately associated with the Smoot family in Utah. Her parents came originally from Tennessee, and located in Spring Hill, where the little Emma was born. When but a tiny child her parents moved to Nauvoo, for they joined the Church in the early days, and here they lived and labored under the teachings and with the close friendship of the Prophet Joseph Smith, until after the martyrdom, and indeed, till the expulsion from Missouri. The mother was a remarkable woman, modest and retiring, but of the best type of American womanhood. The little girl was always sober, industrious and mature for her years. She remembered all her life the splendid presence of the Prophet, and how he fondled her on his knee when she was near him. She was a playmate of the children of his home, and was often on his grounds and about his place. He was passionately fond of children, as all know who knew anything about him, and the little Emma was quite a favorite with him. This precious memory she cherished as one of her most sacred treasures. In the year 1850 the little girl started West with her parents. The father had worked hard and sacrificed much to be prepared for this journey into the wilderness, and yet he undertook it with the same buoyant hope and manly courage that animated all those early pioneers. His wife had already four little children, Emma being the eldest. What tragedies are written into those early annals! And how simply we tell of them! Yet, are they none the less the record of supreme suffering and sacrifice. When the family reached Salt Creek, the father died suddenly, after only two hours of deadly suffering. Can anyone picture the scene without a flow of sympathetic tears? The mother, alone, bereft, with her four little children about her knees, the fires of persecution burning behind her and the terrors of an unknown wilderness before her? But-she was a saint. And with quiet trust in the God that had never forsaken her, she bent her shoulders to her heart-breaking task. The blow was not all fallen. Three days after the death of the father, the mother was delivered of a little girl, and behold, the little Emma, but twelve years old, was left to assume the responsibility of looking after the bereaved family. There were kind friends about them, and the Church cast its protecting arms about the widowed mother and her offspring. But none the less, Emma was a woman from that hour. The ordinary carefree existence of childhood, its merry pleasures, its joyous hours of play, were nevermore known by the sober and capable girl. She was a girl-woman, and nobly she accepted her duties, maturing still more rapidly under the stress and storm of her trials, the "little mothers" that "Mormonism" has developed. It is such lessons that bring out all the latent powers of management, or, as we now term it, executive ability, possessed by our Latter-day Saint women. Emma Smith, girl-woman of twelve years old, took the long black-snake whip, learned to hitch-up her oxen, and trudged beside them as she drove them on with her mother lying within, surrounded by her three babies. Thus they entered the Valley. Camping time found little Emma mixing her bread, milking her cow, and cleansing the children, ere she put them to rest beside her mother in the wagon. Kind friends were there, as has been said, but each family and part of a family had its own heavy burdens to bear, and Emma was found equal to the occasion; so she was allowed to do her double, nay therble share of the work. After many privations and trials, the little party reached the Valley in the early fall of 1850. And here the struggles was continued. But so capable a girl, so matured a mind, so bright an understanding was not long left alone. In the year 1853, when Emma was but fifteen years old, she was married to the rising young Apostle Wilford Woodruff, as his second wife. Again her abilities were called into effective use, for she became in a large manner the pivot of the well known and industrious Woodruff family. She was a hard worker, full of zeal for the welfare of her husband and his family, and she made for herself a very large and important place in her new home. Eight children were born to Emma Woodruff, their names are as follows: Hyrum Smith, born Oct. 4, 1857, died Nov. 24, 1858; Emma M., born July 4, 1860, died Nov. 30, 1806; Asahel H., born Feb. 3, 1863; Clara M., born July 23, 1868; Ann, born April 10, 1867, died April 11, 1867; Abraham Owen, named for Bro. A. O. Smoot, and born Nov. 23, 1872; he was the brilliant and beloved Apostle who died June 20, 1905, mourned by the whole Church; Winnifred Blanche, born April 9, 1876, and Mary Alice, born June 2, 1879. Asahel H. is now Bishop of the Waterloo Ward, Winnifred Blanche an aid in Granite Stake Relief Society, and Clara M. a counselor in the general board of the Primary associations of the Church. Emma Woodruff was also very active and useful in the organizations of the Church. She was a charter member of the Retrenchment Society, and was chosen to act on the first Salt Lake Stake Board Relief Society. She was president of the Farmer's Ward Relief Society. She was chosen to act as a member of the General Board of the Relief Societies when it was incorporated in October, 1892. Here she labored for many years, traveling and ministering in her calling among the sisters of that powerful society. It is said that Sister Woodruff was given many of the hardest trips and she traveled perhaps as much as any other member of the Board. When the Granite Stake was organized Sister Woodruff was chosen as the Stake president of the Relief Society in that Stake. And her labors there are worthy of all emulation. She was gifted with rare executive ability, was an excellent organizer, knew how to handle women and to utilize forces. She was broad in her sympathies, allowed gifted women under her to express themselves in both word and deed, and, in short, she carried forward to the time of her death one of the best and most active Stake organizations known in the Church. Moreover, she did this with the loving sympathy and help of practically every woman under her charge. She was not only loved, but highly respected for her candor, her just decisions and her keen perceptions. When the Salt Lake Temple was opened in April, 1893, Sister Emma Woodruff was one of the first women chosen to officiate in that sacred House. She was named as counselor to Sister Zina D. H. Young, who acted as the High Priestess there, and later, when Sister Bathsheba W. Smith followed Sister Young in 1901, Sister Woodruff was again named for the same responsible position. Here then she labored for many years, practically till her death. Sister Woodruff was generous to a fault, although she was likewise prudent and very thrifty. But her impulses were broad and her spirit noble. She was a loved and loving friend of the poor and suffering, and none knew her kindness better. She was an excellent housekeeper and a sympathetic home-maker. Her hospitable doors opened wide for all guests, and her table was ever spread for friend and visitor. She was with it all, devoted heart, might, mind and strength to the gospel of Jesus Christ. She loved the Prophet with an abiding testimony, and therefore was a true worshipper of Christ. She loved the Savior, because she loved His children. Her own children were her greatest blessing and her chief care. That they should be taught the gospel and remain true to those teachings was her daily and hourly prayer. And be it said, that she succeeded beyond her utmost dreams in rearing a family who have followed in the footsteps of both the noble mother and that grand old Patriarch and President, Wilford Woodruff. That Emma was the wife of President Woodruff was an honor to her all her life, and that their children were willing always to take his counsel was her greatest blessing. To such as she, the doors of heaven open wide, and when she entered into that celestial portal, who may describe the songs of joy and gladness which greeted her, for there entered in one of earth's heroines. Requiest En Pace. Emma M. Woodruff married Henry A. Woodruff; Asahel H. Woodruff married Naomi Butterworth; Clara M. Woodruff married Ovando C. Beebe; Abraham O. Woodruff married Helen Winters; Winnefred Blanche married Joseph J. Daynes, jun., and Mary A. Woodruff married Wm. McEwan.
