Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Sessions, David

Sessions, David, a pioneer of Davis county, Utah, was a son of David Sessions and Patty Bartlett, and was born May 9, 1823, in Newry, Oxford county, Maine. His father was "what most men well to do would call." Besides a large farm, he owned a saw mill and a grist mill. As soon as David was able to do so, he began to assist his father on the farm. Then the family heard the Gospel, and yielded obedience to it willingly. In 1837 they set out to join the Saints in Kirtland, Ohio. The journey was made with ox teams and occupied about three months. Later, they moved to Far West, and finally to Nauvoo, where David began to clerk for his brother-in-law, Winsor P. Lyons. While in Nauvoo he became intimately acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, for whom he formed an undying love. When Mr. Lyons moved from Nauvoo to Iowa City, David accompanied him, engaging again in the mercantile business. In 1850 he made up his mind to come to Zion. He had a good four-horse team, wagon and harness; the latter he made with his own hands. He came with a company of immigrants who were going to California. The company was under the command of Perrigrine Sessions, a brother of David, the subject of this sketch, who was appointed one of the hunters, to assist in procuring meat for the party. On his arrival in the Valley in 1850, he settled in what was later known as Sessions' Settlement, now Bountiful. His father died about a month after their arrival. On Dec. 30, 1852, David Sessions was united in marriage to Miss Phebe Carter Foss, by whom he had the following children: Sarah Phebe, Cerdenia Estelle, David, Olive Cordelia, Fabian Carter, Darius, Rhoda Harriet Calvin Elizabeth Foss and Annie Sylvia. Calvin and Rhoda died while they were quite young. David worked with his brother Perrigrine on a farm till 1860, when he moved into a home of his own, and began farming on his own account. He devoted his spare time to harness making, and to the manufacture of boots and shoes, in both of which trades he became quite proficient, notwithstanding that he had never served one day's apprenticeship in either. In 1865 Elder Sessions was called to go on a mission to the Muddy river. The following spring he returned and disposed of his possessions, intending to return with his family to the Muddy; but on account of Indian troubles, he was advised to remain at home. Elder Sessions was known for his benevolent disposition; he contributed liberally of his means from time to time to charitable objects. Being averse to notoriety, he never sought for public office, but contented himself by treading in the quiet paths of life. He was for many years postmaster of Bountiful, Utah. Feb. 2, 1846, he was ordained a Seventy, in Nauvoo, and this office he held at the time of his demise, which took place April 19, 1896.
