Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Walsh, John

Walsh, John, a High Councilor in the Davis Stake of Zion, is the son of Wm. Walsh and Alice Fish and was born Aug. 22, 1852, at Over Darwen, Lancashire, England. He was baptised May 1, 1861, by Wm. Ostler, and ordained to the Priesthood in the following order: Ordained an Elder March 30, 1869, by Samuel H. B. Smith, and a High Priest Dec. 2, 1894, by Abraham H. Cannon. That he has ever been an active Church worker will appear from the following record: He labored for many years as a teacher and officer in the Sabbath school, also as a Ward teacher and a counselor in the presidency of the 2nd Quorum of Elders in Salt Lake Stake. For eleven years he was a Stake home missionary. From December, 1894, to September, 1902, he was an alternate High Councilor in the Davis Stake and since the latter date he has been a regular member of that body. He was married to Adella R. Long July 10, 1879, who has borne him four children. Together with his parents he emigrated to Utah in 1856 in one of those ill-fated handcart companies in which so many perished en route on the plains. Two of his family, namely, his father and brother, died of cold and starvation, and John became so weak and emaciated that when he reached the Valley he had to learn to walk anew. He settled in Salt Lake City, where he lived till 1894, when he moved to Farmington, Davis county, where he still resides. In civil life he has had a somewhat active experience, having held the following positions: Justice of the peace, school trustee, city councilman and mayor, all in Farmington. His chief occupations have been logging, lumbering, farming, etc. For fourteen years he was an employe of the General Tithing Store House in Salt Lake City. He is interested in a number of business enterprises and has been a director in the following concerns: People's Equitable Co-op. (Salt Lake City), Steed Creek Irrigation & Water Co., Farmington Creamery Co., Davis County Bank, etc. Elder Walsh is universally known as a consistent Church member and a progressive citizen.
