Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

King, Thomas Franklin

King, Thomas Franklin, a High Councilor in the Davis Stake, is the son of Thos Jefferson King and Rebecca E. Olin, and was born in Portage county, Ohio, May 1, 1842. In a sketch prepared for this work, Elder King writes: "My parents joined the Church in September, 1830. They both died in 1876, and were previous to their death the oldest living couple belonging to the Church. They were intimately acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, and passed through all the trials and persecutions that were heaped upon the Saints in the early rise of the Church. In 1845 they moved from Ohio to Illinois and bought a farm in Morley's Settlement, a short distance from Nauvoo. They raised one crop there when they were told by some of their neighbors that the mob intended to drive all the "Mormons" out. My father was sick at the time. Previous to this the mob had driven out all the able bodied men among the Saints, including my brother George E. who was about seventeen years old. When the mob came, they told my mother to leave at once. Father was not able to help. All the team my parents had at that time was one horse and a one-horse wagon. My mother moved some of the furniture into the cornfield, and put the beds and some of the light things into the wagon, after which we all got on top of the load. As soon as we had started, the mob set fire to the house. We went to Nauvoo and found shelter in a large frame house that was already occupied by three other families. After we were housed, my mother took my brother Alma, who was twelve years old, and returned to the farm to get the balance of our furniture. There was a good crop of corn on the farm ready to gather. As we had no bread, my mother and brother went again to the farm to get a load of corn. The mob threatened her at that time, but she told them she had no bread for her children and must have it. They threatened to shoot her if she did not leave, but she told them to shoot away, as she would just as soon die as to starve. When she returned the third time one of the mobbers put a gun to her breast and said: "If you return again, I will shoot you." As she thought she had secured enough to last us through the winter she did not return any more. The first recollection I have in this life was the parching of this same corn, that my mother risked her life to obtain for the sustenance of her children, which was parched and ground in a coffee mill and eaten with milk on our journey westward. Two cows which we owned at that time, were a great help to us. My father was with us on the journey; he owned a wagon but no team, as the team we used belonged to my grandfather. He and his wife, not my grandmother as she died some years before, were traveling with us, or we with them. My grandfather was quite aged, and as his wife had not much faith in the Gospel, they soon concluded to go no further. Thus, when they took the team of the wagon, we were side tracked. This took place forty miles from Mount Pisgah, in Iowa. My brother George E. then started out on foot for Mount Pisgah and secured a team which landed us at that place all right. We moved into a log cabin which had no floor, and the roof was of bark which curled up, so that when it rained it was just as wet inside as it was outside. My father being a carpenter and builder soon obtained employment, but at some distance east of Mount Pisgah. In a short time he hired a man to move us to a place called Stringtown, where quite a number of our people had settled temporarily for the winter. The next year we moved to Black Hawk and in a short time to Iowaville; both these places were on the Des Moines river, less than a hundred miles from Nauvoo and there were quite a number of our people in these places, among whom was Judge Elias Smith and his aged father and mother. We remained here about seven years and found some very warm friends, a great contrast with the way we had been treated in Illinois. One man in particular, whose name was John Baker, should be mentioned in Church history as a ram in the thicket, for when our people went into that neighborhood in poverty, he, being the village store-keeper and having the only store in the village, said to our people: "Come to the store and get what you want and pay for it when you can." He also gave our people a great deal of work to do. Many others of the citizens were very good to our people. A. J. Davis, subsequently the great Montana millionaire, furnished a great deal of work for our people. My father and Judge Elias Smith became very intimate friends. As they were both industrious they finally secured some ox teams and did a great deal of freighting between Iowaville and some other towns and Keokuk. A. J. Davis, among his many other enterprises, had a large distillery, where he converted great quantities of corn into whiskey, which had to be hauled from the distillery to Keokuk to market. My father and Elias Smith did a great deal of this hauling. They would take a load of whiskey for Mr. Davis and return with a load of merchandise for Mr. Baker. On one of those trips my brother Wm. J accompanied them. One night they camped in a hollow where there was a stream of water, and slept on the heads of the barrels of whiskey standing in the wagons. They went to bed as usual, but during the night it commenced to rain, and many of the readers of this well know what a rain storm in Iowa means. The result was that the downfall soon formed a good-sized river. Sometime during the night my brother straightened out, when his foot went into the water. This caused him to be very much awake. He knew what it meant. In a moment he roused the others who were soon wide awake too. My brother and father were both good swimmers, but Elias Smith could not swim. My father took him on his back and swam across with him. Returning to the wagons he got the log chains and fastened the wagons to some trees that were standing near by. On another occasion my father and my next younger brother, Alma, were hauling salt to Keokuk on a pair of low bob-sleds. The weather being bitter cold, they took turns in going into houses to warm themselves. Thus one of them would go into a house to warm and the other drive on, When the one in the house got warm he would run and catch up with the team and drive, while the other went into another house to get warm. On one of these turns Alma had been in to warm himself, and catching up with the team he took the whip while my father went into another house to get warm; on coming out he ran to catch up with the team, but soon found the lifeless form of Alma. It was supposed that in trying to jump onto the sled his foot slipped and that he was thrown under the sled which crushed the life out of him. Father left his team there and hired a man to take the body home. It was a most heart-rending scene that took place when he reached home, as Alma was the model brother of the family. In the spring of 1850 my father concluded to go to to California to make a raise, as he thought we were too poor to undertake to move to the Valley as a family. He therefore built a double log house and left us quite comfortable. In the spring of 1851 a great freshet wiped out nearly the whole town including our comfortable home. The Des Moines river, which was only one-fourth of a mile wide when within its banks, reached on the occasion mentioned a depth of fifty feet and a width of four miles. The people all moved out to the higher lands and we were taken into the house of a man named Isaac Nelson and treated the same as members of their own family. We stayed with Mr. Nelson until the water went down about six weeks later. The next thing to do was to build another house which we did that summer. In going to California my father went by way of Salt Lake, reaching California in the fall of 1850. He went to work as soon as he arrived and began a little later to send money home. Engaging in merchandising he soon made some money and in exploring the Feather river he found there were nuggets of gold in the river bed, so he thought of a scheme to turn the river out of its channel and get the gold. He then went to work and at a great expense built a dam across the river and turned the water out of its natural channel, but he got in only three days' work when a freshet came and took out his dam. Consequently he only got gold to the value of seventeen thousand dollars; this he took out in three days. Next he built a quartz mill which I think was the first mill of that kind built in California, but I believe he lost money in that undertaking. In the fall of 1853 he started for his home in Iowa, sailing around Cape Horn, and reached home in the spring of 1854. Setting to work at once getting an outfit for the journey across the Plains, he had one wagon made to order and another fitted up; he also bought more oxen, making up two teams with two yoke to each wagon. Then he bought some good cows and some young stock, making us a very comfortable outfit. As all of our people had moved out except two or three families that never went to the Valley, we came with a few of our neighbors who were going to California. In all we numbered eleven wagons. On the second day of May, 1854, I being just twelve years old, we took the line of march for the west, Benjamin Truman being our captain. My brother, Wm. J., took charge of one team. He and my sister Amy Jane, now the widow of Elias Smith, rode in one wagon and I took charge of the wagon which my father and mother and younger sister Angelina rode in. I drove the team the entire distance of 1400 miles. My brother, George E., who had married and had a young family concluded to go his own way. He fitted himself up with a first class four horse team and started a few days ahead of us, for Washington Territory, and that was the last we ever saw of him. He settled in King county, near Seattle, Puget Sound, in 1857. Soon afterwards occurred what was called the White river massacre in which he and his family were killed by the Indians. In traveling through Iowa the roads were very heavy and muddy. We passed through Garden Grove, stopped at Council Bluffs a day or two and then crossed the Missouri river on a ferry boat near the present site of Omaha. There were only a few houses on the west side of the Missouri river at that time. Omaha Indians lived in the neighborhood. We traveled on until we came to the Pawnee nation of Indians who called us to halt. As I remember they were a hard-looking lot and wanted flour, beef and almost everything they could think of. Finally, the captain compromised with them by giving them a two year old beef. When we got to a certain river we found a toll bridge over the stream, and the toll being very high, the captain said, "We won't pay the price asked." Traveling down the river a short distance to camp, he told the women folks that they could have a day to do their washing. There being tall cottonwood trees and plenty of brush there, he told the men to cut down some trees. They were felled into the river and men, who were stationed on the other side of the river, caught the top as they floated down and fastened them with ropes. They were then covered with heavy brush and thus made into a strong floating bridge. The men ran the wagons across the bridge by hand and made the stock swim. In this manner we got across the river in one day, while the women folks attended to their washing. After getting through the Iowa mud we had fine roads, and I had a fine time, as all I had to do was to drive my team, being too young to stand guard. Everything went lovely until one day, while traveling up the Platte over a broad smooth prairie, when all at once my brother's team passed by me as though the animals had been shot out of a gun. I knew in a moment that it meant a stampede. I spoke to my near wheeler which was one of the most intelligent oxen I ever saw. His name was Darby and I never said "whoa" to him before when he would not hold any pair of oxen that ever looked through a bow, but on this occasion Darby had the spirit of the stampede and paid no attention to me. I immediately jumped from the wagon and ran to my leaders, hitting them over the head with the butt of my whip. In some way my near leader struck me on the head with his horn knocking me senseless. That was the last I saw of the stampede. By the time I regained consciousness it was all over. We caught up with a company of emigrants going to California, who had some of their stock stolen by Indians and were very much frightened. Fearing that the Indians might attack them again and kill them, they asked our captain if they could travel with us. The captain gave his consent and we camped together that night and put out a strong guard. Some time during the night one of the guard accidentally discharged his gun which was the signal for "every man to arms." There was great excitement for a few minutes until the mistake was discovered. When we arrived at the mouth of Emigration canyon and could see the valley and city, I being only a lad, leaped for joy to think we had got to the place for which my mother had longed for so many years, where we could be free from mob violence and worship God according to the dictates of our conscience. The next day we drove down to the city, arriving there August 6, 1854. Judge Elias Smith welcomed us all warmly to his home, as he was acquainted with the whole company. The company stayed in Salt Lake City a few days and then went on their way to California. After they left, we went over the Jordan river and camped near the place where Taylorsville now is. We camped there about three weeks and then went to West Bountiful, intending to locate there. In September, 1854, while at Bountiful, I was baptized into the Church by Bishop John Stoker. We went on the mountain and got out a set of house logs, but before we started to build a house, my father took a walk to Kaysville and concluded to locate there. So we hauled our logs thither and buildt the second house north of Kays Creek, in what is now Layton Ward. The next spring we went to work between our location and the settlements on the Weber river to get the water on the small farm my father had taken up, making a ditch one and one fourth miles through oak brush and clay as hard as a brick. We put in four acres of wheat and reaped a fairly good crop, which my father and I cut with sickles, threshed with a flail and winnowed out with the wind. The years 1855 and 1856 were known as the hard times. We had hard winters which killed off the cattle and the grasshoppers and crickets took everything green. We got along nicely, however, during the scarcity, as we had some good cows. We had plenty of milk and butter, cheese and potatoes, but were short of flour. On one occasion we were without bread two weeks; but there were plenty of segoes which helped out wonderfully. Many of our neighbors however, were not as fortunate as we were. I never saw the time that my mother had not something to give to those who were less fortunate than we were. The Indians often came to her for something to eat and they never went away empty handed. During the winter of 1856-57 I went to school in the Sixteenth Ward of Salt Lake City. In the summer of 1857 the Johnston army was sent out by the government to straighten out the "Mormons." All able bodied men were called to arms to protect ourselves; even the boys in their teens were not exempt. A boys' company was organized in Kaysville, of which I was appointed captain and R. R. Albred lieutenant. We were drilled day after day and retained as a home guard. My father was out in Echo canyon all winter. In the spring of 1858 we were all on wheels again, and went as far south as Provo, where we stayed until the compromise was thought about, after which we returned home, but still kept up our drill. The boys' company was finally disorganized and I joined the infantry under Captain Robert Harris, of the Mormon Battalion. Later, I joined the Cavalry company or minute men under Major Lot Smith and Col. Philemon Merrill. I participated in the Morrisite trouble in 1862 and helped to make the willow battery and roll it into the fort, which brought about the surrender of the Morrisites. I belonged to the Company until it was disbanded by Gov. Doty. As we all were very hard up for clothing my father went to Camp Floyd and succeeded in getting the contract to furnish the entire camp with fire wood, which was to be delivered at a certain price per cord in regular cord or four foot lengths. He hired some men to chop the cedars down and I hauled most of it to the camp, having two yoke of good oxen and two wagons with wood racks on; I trailed one behind the other. In that way I hauled four cords at a trip. My father built a house at Camp Floyd and my mother came out and stopped a while in the fall, but when cold weather came on, she returned home. As we had no hay, I was obliged to camp with the men in the hills where the feed was good. We tried to camp in a wagon box, but it was not satisfactory, as we had to move camp very often, so we slept on the ground. Sometimes the snow would fall on us while in bed to the depth of one foot. When the snow fell in such quantities it made us too warm and the warmth of our bodies melted the snow under us, which made us feel somewhat uncomfortable. The next spring we returned home and I worked on the farm and in the canyon. The next winter I again went to school, and the following summer worked on the farm and in the canyon as usual. The following winter I taught the first school in the district now embracing Layton Ward. Later, my mother taught school in the same district for several years. In 1861, when the troops were called east, they had no teams to move themselves and consequently had to hire teams. My father fitted up two wagons with three yoke of oxen and loaded them with goods for Uncle Sam and took them back as far as Atchison, Kansas; there he unloaded and got his money. It being quite late in the season, he concluded to stay there all winter. One day during a conversation the matter of mail carrying came up and father said he would like to get the contract for carrying the mail between Salt Lake and Brigham City. Mr. Moulton who was quite an influential man, told father that if he wanted the contract he could get it for him. Consequently he wrote Washington and succeeded in getting him the contract. Father telegraphed me to take the mail from Brother Henry Miller on the second day of July, 1862, as his contract would then expire. On that date I took the mail and carried it until father came home in September. Taking his teams and a fourteen year old boy with me to drive one of the teams, I started east loaded with grain for the Overland mail; we hauled it as far as Green River. The Indians, who were very hostile at that time, burned one of the mail stations the night after we started for home. When we got to the coal beds, we loaded our wagons with coal and hauled it to Salt Lake City. As soon as father got home, he bought a carriage and three teams for the purpose of carrying passengers. After my return home I went into the canyon to get out our winter's wood, after which I carried the mail and also carried the first passengers that were ever taken over the road from Salt Lake City to Brigham City. We also carried the Boise express to Brigham City; from there it was carried by pony. We had to make the trip from Salt Lake City to Brigham City in one day with the express. January 1, 1863, I married Lucy Ann Ogden, and in the spring of 1863 moved with my wife to Ogden in order to get nearer the center of the mail route. In the summer of 1864, I, with my cousin, Emmett King, went to Virginia City, Nevada, with loads of potatoes, eggs, grindstones, etc. We sold potatoes there for 35 cts. per pound. In 1865 we moved to South Weber and lived there a number of years. I was ordained an Elder by Bishop A. H. Raleigh February 29, 1868. In 1877, July 24th, I was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop David S. Cook, of the South Weber Ward, Davis Stake, under the hands of Apostle Franklin D, Richards. In 1881 I sold out at South Weber and bought a farm in Farmington. In September, 1882, my wife died, leaving nine children. April 12, 1883, I married Hannah T. Moon, daughter of Bishop Henry Moon, formerly Bishop of the First Ward in Salt Lake City. In 1884 I was elected sheriff of Davis county and served one term. Later, I was elected Justice of the Peace of Farmington City and served one term. About the year 1887 I was called as an alternate member of the High Council of the Davis Stake, but was not set apart to that office until December 2, 1894. I was set apart as a regular High Councilor March 12, 1898, by President Geo. Q. Cannon."
