Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Linford, James Henry

Linford, James Henry, superintendent of the Kaysville Sunday schools, is the son of John Linford and Maria Christian. He was born August 16, 1836, in Graviley, Cambridgeshire, England. His parents embraced the Gospel in 1842, through the teachings of Elder Jos. Fielding. They suffered considerable persecution and for a time the family was threatened with starvation, but through the blessings of the Lord they were enabled to raise their family in comfortable circumstances. They were careful to instil the principles of the Gospel into the hearts of their children as they grew up, and as a result all became sincere Latter-day Saints. James was baptized December 5, 1852, by Elder Jno. M. Brown, was ordained a Teacher, May 25, 1853, and a Priest, February 20, 1856. His early life was occupied in working with his father in the boot and shoe trade. He was zealous in magnifying the Aaronic Priesthood that had been conferred upon him, and as a reward was ordained an Elder February 25, 1856, by Brother Thomas C. Griggs. Soon afterwards he was called to labor in the missionary field in Great Britain. The first district assigned him, on leaving home, was the Cambridge conference; but soon his labors were gradually extended to the Norwich and Bedford conferences. On completing his missionary work, he spent eight months acting as assistant clerk in the Liverpool office, when in the spring of 1861 he set sail for Zion in the ship "Manchester." He crossed the plains in Capt. Eldridge's ox company, reaching Salt Lake City in September, 1861. His parents and three brothers had preceded him to Utah, coming in one of the handcart companies of 1856; this journey proved to be too much for his father who died of exposure on the "Sweet Water." The family had taken up its residence in Centerville, Davis county, and to this place he soon proceeded. He married Zillah Crockett, daughter of Edward Hall Crockett and Sarah Rogers, January 19, 1862. Eight children were given to them, three boys and five girls; one of the latter died at an early age. Soon after settling in Centerville, he took up the occupation of farming. He had not resided in Centerville long before he was ordained a Seventy by Henry Tingey, and assigned to the Seventieth Quorum. In 1866, with Nathan T. Porter, he organized a society of young men, the object of which was to teach its members the principles of the Gospel and to give them practice in public speaking. So successful were they for a number of years that Bishop Wm. R. Smith gave the society every Sunday evening and invited the public to attend. In March, 1868, he moved with his family to Kaysville, his present home. Farming was again chosen as a means of making a livelihood. In February 9, 1890, he was set apart as one of the presidents of the Fifty-fifth Quorum of Seventy which position he held till December 20, 1903, when he was ordained a High Priest under the hands of President Jos. F. Smith. On September 21st, of this same year, he had been ordained a Patriarch by Apostle John W. Taylor. For over thirty years he has acted as superintendent of the Kaysville Sunday school and was always found at his post of duty, except in case of sickness or for unavoidable reasons. He was twice elected mayor of Kaysville City, served five times as a city councilman, and was once elected justice of the peace.
