Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Nixon, James William

Nixon, James William, Bishop of Huntington Ward, Emery Stake of Zion, since 1902, is the son of James W. Nixon and Johanna M. Schultz, and was born at St. George, Washington county, Utah, September 7, 1866. He was baptized into the Church September 7, 1874, and his ordinations to the Priesthood are as follows: Ordained a Deacon January 13, 1878, an Elder December 24, 1882, and a Bishop July 29, 1902, by Apostle Rudger Clawson. In a brief autobiography, prepared for this work, Elder Nixon says: "My father died when I was sixteen years of age, leaving me a large family to assist in supporting, I being the eldest son. I followed the pursuit of teaming or freighting for two years, when my health failed me, having contracted chills and fever. I was then encouraged by my mother to turn my attention to getting a further education which so far had not extended beyond the high school course of that day. I spent one year more in the High School at St. George taught by Prof. J. A. Whitelock. The following summer, 1885, I was released from my duties to the family, as my younger brother George was then old enough to take my place. My sister Emma and Hannah had married and were residing at Price, Carbon county. I decided to pay them a visit which I did and spent the summer of 1885 in the employ of J. M. Whitmore, my brother-in-law. Learning that they were needing a school teacher at Price, I applied for and procured the position of district school teacher and taught the school that winter. In the fall of 1886, I entered the Deseret University as a county normal of Emery county. Completing the course of two years, I accepted a position to teach at Huntington, Emery county. September 7, 1888, I married Effie D. Woolley, the youngest daughter of Frank Woolley, who was killed by the Indians while returning from California. On returning to Huntington, I commenced teaching the district school which I taught for ten years consecutively. In 1889 I was called to act as second counselor to Bishop Charles Pulsipher, Peter Johnson being the first counselor. This position I filled for two years, when Bishop Pulsipher resigned and Peter Johnson was chosen Bishop, with Andrew Allen as first and I as second counselors, which position I held two years more, when I resigned. I was then called upon a mission to California, being set apart for the same in October, 1896. I labored as a traveling Elder for eighteen months, when I was called to preside over the Northern California conference, which position I filled until I was released to return home October 4, 1898. Before leaving California I had been engaged through telegraphic communication to take the principalship of the Wellington District school, and on returning home, I removed my family there for the winter. The following year, 1899, I moved back to Huntington and accepted my old position as principal of the District schools of that place. In 1890 I retired from the profession of teaching and the succeeding year engaged in the business of merchandising. July 29, 1902, Bishop Peter Johnson having resigned, I was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside as such, over the Huntington Ward, by Apostle Rudger Clawson, with J. Fleming Wakefield as first counselor and Peter Nielson as second counselor." Bishop Nixon is the father of six children, two boys and four girls. From 1899 to 1902 he served as a member of the Emery Stake High Council. While laboring as a missionary in California he traveled without purse or scrip in Southern California for a number of months. That his labors were successful is attested to by the fact that he had the privilege of baptizing forty-seven souls into the Church. "To accept and obey the counsel of the Priesthood is the only way for a Latter-day Saint to live," writes Elder Nixon.
