Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Meservy, Joseph Roberts

Meservy, Joseph Roberts, clerk of Wilford Ward, Fremont county, Idaho, is the son of Joshua Meservy and Jane Roberts and was born at St. Johns, Jersey (British), April 30, 1842. His early life was principally spent in a French school. His parents, having accepted the Gospel, emigrated to Utah in 1853, leaving Jersey, with their family, in January of that year. They crossed the Atlantic on the ship "Golconda". After an eventful voyage, they landed at New Orleans in April, 1853. The emigrants sailed up the Mississippi river to Keokuk, where they remained till wagons, animals, etc. were procured, when they proceeded on their journey over the plains in Joseph W. Young's company. While en route they passed through many trying ordeals, but reached the Valley in safety Oct. 10, 1853. The Meservy family located in Tooele, Tooele county, Utah; later they assisted in building the "Spanish Wall" in G. S. L. City to protect the settlers against the attacks of hostile Indians. In 1855-56, they suffered the pangs of hunger and privation in common with other settlers, as the crops had been destroyed by grasshoppers. In 1856 they moved to Santaquin, Utah county, where they remained till 1858, when they moved to Goshen; thence they moved to Franklin, Idaho, in 1860, and helped found that settlement. Joseph R. went east to Florence, Nebraska, in Wm. B. Preston's company, to aid in bringing in a company of emigrants The family moved to Fish Haven, Bear Lake county, Idaho, in 1864. On Christmas day, of that year, Joseph R. married Augusta P. Cook, who, after bearing him one child, died in September, 1867. He married Laura Southworth March 9, 1869. Elder Meservy has followed school teaching and farming as his chief occupations. Among the civil positions he has held it may be mentioned that he served as school trustee for many years and a justice of the peace for over twelve years. As a church worker he has been very active, having labored as a home missionary, secretary of Elders Quorum, M. I. A. officer, Ward ecclesiastical clerk in various Wards for over 35 years, and a Sunday school worker over thirty years. During 1895-96 he performed a mission in Europe, where he labored principally in the Swiss and German Mission. He married Mary Ophelia Kingsbury January 1, 1877, who has borne him ten children. Since 1887 he has lived at Wilford, Fremont county, Idaho.
