Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Jones, Daniel Brooks

Jones, Daniel Brooks, president of the Religion Class work in the Granite Stake of Zion, was born Nov. 7, 1857, in the parish of Powick, Worcestershire, England. He attended the village school in his native land, but as his father had a large family, he was put to work when quite young; his first pay was two shillings per week and his work was principally along the lines of market and landscape gardening. He is the fifth child of James and Ann Brooks Jones. His father and mother joined the Church in February, 1855, through the teachings of Elder William Butler. Daniel B. was born in the Church, so to speak and always had a strong inclination for the teachings of the Gospel and a love for the institutions of the Church; and while his parents kept no record of his baptism, he believes that he was baptized near the proper age. He loved the Elders who came to his father's home, among whom were John Henry Smith, Joseph Bull, George Atkin, Thomas Judd, Thomas A. Wheeler and many others. Daniel B. always believed in the power of prayer and sought the Almighty often to open the way that he might come to Zion and that too that he might learn of the ways of the Lord and walk in His paths. He always desired to mingle with the Saints and when the Elders sang "O ye mountains high", his heart was filled with a longing to gather up with the Saints. Through rigid economy and prayer he left all his folks and friends and pioneered the way for his father's family to come to Zion. He left his home Oct. 13, 1877, crossed the Atlantic on board the steamer "Idaho," and landed in Salt Lake City Nov. 7, 1877, with but a dollar and a half in his pocket. His first night in Utah was spent in the railway car, but the next morning he made his way to the Tithing Office, and in less than an hour he hired out to Thomas E. Jeremy, who conducted a market garden in the 16th Ward. He worked for him just one month, got $3 in cash and a pair of No. 10 boots, which looked rather odd on a No. 8 foot. J. A. Cunningham was the next man he worked for, and he remained in his employment until Sep. 1, 1878, when he secured a situation at the work he loved best with President Geo. Q. Cannon, in whose employ he continued for upwards of five years, during which time he was treated with kindness, courtesy, love and respect. During the time he was with Pres. Cannon he superintended the Sunday school and presided over the Mutual which was held on the farm and which consisted of Pres. Cannon's families and the near neighbors; and when that neighborhood was joined with the Farmers Ward, Brother Jones was set apart as 1st assistant superintendent of the Sunday school and the next year as president of the M. I. A. He was ordained an Elder in May, 1880, by Robert R. Irvine and Thomas Winter. May 13, 1880, he married Sarah E. Wheeler, daughter of Thomas A. and Ann Walker Wheeler. The result of said marriage is eight boys and one girl. He presided over the 19th quorum of Elders for eleven years and was counselor to Chas. Harper of the 14th quorum of Elders for six years. He was ordained a Seventy Dec. 26, 1890, by Jonathan G. Kimball, and sent on a mission to the Northern States. The following year, when his business block was destroyed by fire, causing him a loss of $5,000, he was honorably released and returned home not daunted or discouraged, he set to work and in 90 days had his building ready to re-enter. In November, 1902, he was called to take a mission in the interest of M. I. A. in the Juarez Stake of Zion, in Old Mexico; he was away on that mission four months. Before and during this time his son Orson was in Germany on a mission, and soon after his return home, his son Milton was called to England. Of civil offices, Elder Jones has filled several; thus, he served as a constable for five years in the South Cottonwood and Murray precincts, and deputy sheriff under A. J. Burt. During the past twenty-five years he has been active in the auxiliary organizations in the Wards in which he lived, either as superintendent of Sunday schools or president of M. I. A.; for many years he held both positions at the same time and is now one of the counsel in the 72nd quorum of Seventy. He is still a worker in the Sunday school and M. I. A., besides his labors in Religion Class work. His places of residence has been the 16th and 4th Wards, Salt Lake City, Mill Creek, Farmers, South Cottonwood, Murray 1st and now Murray 2nd Ward. On two occasions, at least, he has been the subject of miraculous manifestations through the administration of the Priesthood, being literally snatched from the power of death.
