Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Williams, Ira T.

Williams, Ira T., first counselor in the Bishopric of the Hyrum 1st Ward, Hyrum Stake, Cache county, Utah), is the son of Thomas Williams and Elizabeth Mariah Allen, and was born Feb. 11, 1861, at Hyrum, Cache county, Utah. He was baptized in 1869 by Jens Lauritzen, and his ordinations to the Priesthood took place as follows: An Elder Jan. 30, 1882; a Seventy Dec. 3, 1884, by Hans P. Hansen, and a High Priest Sept. 22, 1901, by Pres. Anthon H. Lund. During 1891-92 he filled a mission to Great Britain, where he labored in England and Wales. In Church work, at home, Elder Williams has officiated as a Ward teacher, an officer in the M. I. A., and a counselor in the Bishopric. He was married in 1883 and is the father of seven children. His chief occupation has been farming and merchandising. Brother Williams relates the following experience: Together with another Elder, I sailed from New York Dec. 13, 1891, on board the steamship "Abyssinia," to fill a mission to England on the morning of the 18th, about one o'clock, the alarm of fire was sounded, as the steamer was found to be on fire. I shall never forget the scene. People were wild with excitement, and reason and judgment seemed to have fled from everyone. All on board had apparently lost hope, and my companion Elder remarked that we were lost. But I remembered my Patriarchal blessing given a few days prior to my departure, which said that I should go in peace and return in safety; and I felt confident that we would be saved. Just at the moment when the outlook was most dark and gloomy, at least two thirds of the ship being enveloped in flames, and no relief at hand, the good ship "Spree" hove in sight. We hailed her and after several hours of hard work our entire company, passenger and crew, were rescued from the burning ship and quartered safely on board the "Spree". In due course of time we landed safely at Southampton, England, Dec. 23, 1891. I look upon this as an actual fulfillment of the promise given me in my Patriarchal blessing."
