Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Mousley, Lewis H.

Mousley, Lewis H., a Patriarch in the Jordan Stake of Zion, was born in Delaware Feb. 7, 1833. In a brief sketch written for this volume Elder Mousley writes: "I lived in my native State Delaware, til I was twenty-three years old, when I had a desire to see the great "Far West", and in April, 1856, I started on my journey westward. While stopping in Ohio for a few days I became converted to "Mormonism" and joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I then continued my journey and arrived in Salt Lake City in September, with Philemon C. Merrill's company. At once I proceeded to Sanpete county, where I secured employment with Warren S. Snow, tilling the soil. In the fall of 1857 Major Snow organized a company of men to go on the road east and meet Johnston's army, which was then nearing our borders. I was one of that number. We experienced some very interesting times; up Ham's Fork and then down Ham's Fork again. We remained with them till they went into winter quarters at Fort Bridger. In the spring following I joined the standing army, but it was soon afterward disbanded. On March 3, 1858, I married Mary A. Crossgrove, and soon after we went south to Springville, Utah county, during the "Move". Here we remained till we were permitted to return to our homes. Soon after returning to Salt Lake City, I was called to go to Dixie and settle. After arriving at St. George, Washington county, I was sent by Pres. Erastus Snow to Los Angeles, California, to purchase and bring to St. George tools and materials for de driving of an artesian well at that place. Altogether I remained in Dixie about three and a half years, when I was released to go to the relief of my father who was very ill, and who soon after died in Sugar House Ward, Salt Lake county. I continued to live in Sugar House for a number of years, and on Aug. 29, 1868, I married Sarah L. Crossgrove. At the organization of Farmers Ward, in 1877, I was ordained and sustained as its Bishop. I labored in that capacity till Aug. 8, 1886, when the Bluffdale Ward was organized, and I was chosen and set apart to preside as Bishop of that Ward, which position I held till January, 1900, when I was ordained a Patriarch by Pres. Anthon H. Lund. In February, 1887, I served a term in the Utah penitentiary for unlawful cohabitation, and paid a fine of $300 and costs." Brother Mousley is a man of sterling qualities and worth and is noted for his integrity and faithfulness in the Church.
