Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Cazier, David

Cazier, David, a High Councilor in the Juab Stake of Zion and a resident of Nephi Juab co., Utah, is a son of William Cazier and Pleasant Drake, and was born May 1, 1834, in Oldham county, Kentucky. The family moved to Moltry county, Ill., in 1840. Elder Cazier writes: "My father and mother joined the Church in 1845 and moved with their family to Council Bluffs, Iowa, in 1846, where they shared with the Saints in the general hardships of that time. My brothers James and John enlisted in the Mormon Battalion; my mother died in the fall of 1846 in a hay shed and was buried in a coffin made of a hollowed-out log; there were no flowers in evidence at her funeral. My father went into Missouri to split rails, thereby earning corn and pork wherewith to feed his family. We resided in Iowa for four years and when we departed from that territory to migrate to Utah, we left a good house. We settled in Nephi in 1851, being among the first settlers of that place. I was baptized in 1852 and took an active part in the Walker and Black hawk wars. Together with my brothers John and Samuel, I also participated in the Echo canyon campaign during the winter of 1857-58. In June, 1857 I married Sarah Francis Mangum, who has borne me four sons. In 1865 I married Eliza Naylor as a second wife. While yet quite young I was ordained to the office of a Priest; in 1855 I was ordained a Seventy and in 1870 I was ordained a High Priest and set apart as a High Councilor, which position I still hold. In 1872 I was called on a mission to Great Britain; during my absence I presided over the Bristol conference. My occupation is that of a farmer and I have cut thousands of acres of grain and hay with a scythe. In running trashing machines for over forty years, I have thrashed over one million bushels of grain. I raised the first fruit in Nephi and can truthfully say that I have earned my bread by the sweat of my brow. I have also cut and hauled from canyons one thousand saw-logs. In conclusion I will say that I never indulged in vice of any kind."
