Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Redd, Lemuel Hardison

Redd, Lemuel Hardison, a veteran Elder in the Church, was born in Onslow county, North Carolina, July 31, 1836, the second son and sixth child of John Hardison and Elizabeth Hancock Redd, both of whom were born in the county and State mentioned. His father who was generally known as Captain Redd (as he followed a seafaring life) was a man of letters, engaged in the mercantile business, and was well known and highly respected in the community where he lived. The names of his eight children were: Edward and Harriet who died in infancy, Ann Mariah, Elizabeth Ann, Mary Catharine, Lemuel Hardison, John Holt and Benjamin Jones. At the age of six years Lemuel's parents heard and obeyed the Gospel at Murfreesborough Tennessee, where they moved in 1838. The family moved to Great Salt Lake Valley in 1850; Lemuel, who was then fourteen years of age, drove an ox-team across the plains from St. Joseph, Missouri. At this time the Saints were visited with the cholera plague, Lemuel and his father both being attacked, but fortunately survived the dread disease. The impressions gained by seeing hundreds of the company buried along the roadside, by fearing the attacks of the Indians, and by witnessing the stampeding of thousands of excited buffalo, which then covered the great plains, ever remained fresh in his memory, and served as charming stories for his children and grandchildren. Captain Sessions, in whose company he traveled, arrived in Salt Lake in October 1850. Lemuel attended school in Provo, then a hamlet of about fifty families. The following spring he, with his father's family, moved to Spanish Fork, they and the family of William Pace being the pioneers of that place. Here his father helped to build the first saw mill south of Provo. In 1853, the Indian war broke out, causing the destruction of the mill and town with a loss to the family of $6,000. After this, they moved to Palmyra for safety. Lemuel was baptized June 2, 1852, by W. W. Willis and confirmed by Stephen Markham, who also ordained him a Priest on the same date. In July, 1853, the Walker war began and young Lemuel took an active part in the same and served as an officer or soldier in all the Indian wars of Utah, thus portraying the patriotism characteristic of his forefathers, being a direct descendant on his mothers side of John Hancock, the first signer of the Declaration of Independence. Jan. 2, 1856, he married Miss Keziah Jane Butler, a girl of sterling qualities, amiable and reserved, who proved a faithful wife and loving mother of thirteen children, whose names are as follows: Lemuel Hardison, Mary Jane, John Wilson, William Alexander, James Monroe, Caroline Elizabeth, Amos Thornton (died in infancy), Sarah Della, Farozine Ellen, Loraine Edward (died in infancy), Mariah Luella, Charity Alvira, (known as Vilo) and Alice. The marriage ceremony was performed and solemnized by Bishop William Pace and the following year they received their endowments and were sealed by Daniel H. Wells. Shortly after their marriage, they, with a company of others filled an Indian mission to Las Vegas, New Mexico. On his return, Lemuel was ordained an Elder and soon afterwards a Seventy and became a member of the Fiftieth Quorum of Seventy. In 1858, when the U. S. Army under Johnston came to Utah, he served as a soldier and was one of the two thousand who were organized as the Standing Army. Soon after peace was restored, he assisted with oxen and wagons in bringing the foreign emigration across the plains In the spring of 1862, with his wife and four children, he was again on the frontier, helping to found New Harmony, in compliance with the call made by Brigham Young to settle "Dixie". At Harmony he held many offices, such a trustee, justice of the peace, etc. He was also a member of the county court for six years. In 1866 during the Black hawk and Navajo wars he went with Captain Andrus' company of soldiers to Green River by way of Potato Valley, to ascertain the plans of the enemy. The company was gone one month, during which they suffered many hardships and privations and the loss of one man and a horse killed by the Indians. The same year he married, as his second wife, Miss Sarah Louisa Chamberlain, an intelligent and ambitious young lady, who five years previous had been miraculously saved from a flood through her own heroic efforts by climbing a tree, and assisting her aged father. This wife bore him fourteen children, whose names are as follows: Wilford Solomon, Mariah Vilate, (both of whom died in infancy) Teresa Artimesia, Burton Lemuel, Teresa Artimestia, Burton Lemuel, George Edwin, Susan Elizabeth, Parley, John Wiley, Jennie May, Effie Ancel Ray, and Hazel Lurena. In the year of 1866 he purchased the John D. Lee homestead in Harmony and completed an unfinished brick house which served as a home for both families for twenty years. In 1871, he was set apart as first counselor to Bishop Wilson D. Pace under the hands of Charles Price, which office he held for nearly twenty years. In 1847 the United Order was established in Harmony by Apostle Erastus Snow with Lemuel H. Redd vice-president and secretary. He also assisted to establish the Kanarra and Harmony cattle and sheep herd, and served as director and treasurer in each for about twenty years. Jan. 1, 1877, in company with his wife Keziah, he attended the dedication of the lower part of the St. George Temple. In April of the same year they attended the 47th semi-annual conference at St. George, which was held in the Temple when the whole building was dedicated. At the opening of the Temple for endowment work Elder Redd with his family were the first to labor for the dead. He continued this work of love whenever practicable until he was compelled to live in exile after the passing of the Edmunds bill, and also afterwards, whenever possible. During the seven years of persecution Elder Redd was forced to absent himself from his family, friends and loved ones for months at a time, leaving his entire affairs in the hands of mere children until the return of his son William from South Carolina, where he had filled a two years mission. His sons Wayne and Ben, aged respectively seventeen and fifteen, narrowly escaped an awful death in a blinding snow storm, while caring for their father's sheep, in his absence, but through his courageous efforts, and by the aid of Providence, the younger made his way to town and obtained help, thereby being the means of saving his own and his brother's life Though he was driven many times into the hands of the U. S. marshals, Providence seemed kind to him in preserving to him his freedom, and never once was he known to falter nor forsake either family during all his troubles. During his peregrinations, in the year of 1887-8, he moved his cattle and horses along with his son Monroe's family and daughters, Della and Ellen, to Bluff, San Juan county, for the purpose of bettering his financial affairs, as well as to escape the persecutions of the law which threatened him. This was an eventful trip, owing to the fact that they were followed by the wrathful enemy, thus compelling his daughters to share in the responsibilities of the journey, Della riding horseback and driving cattle, while Ellen drove one of the teams. This, however, was only a pleasure to his devoted daughters, for they realized, being seventeen and fifteen years of age, his precarious condition and were thankful to be able to assist him. The following year, they returned, and soon after he moved his wife Louisa and family to Bluff. Four of her children, however, remained for a while with the other family, Wayne being left in charge of his affairs in Harmony. In 1890, accompanied by Harvey A. Pace, he made a trip to Mesa, Arizona, where he spent a few months with his daughter Jane and returned by way of California visiting the places of note along the way. Previous to the persecution in 1879 he helped to move his son Lemuel H. Redd jun. and family to San Juan, where he had been called on a mission. His son Monroe accompanied them. When they arrived at the Colorado river, the company encamped and an exploring party was formed for the purpose of finding a suitable route from the Colorado to the San Juan river. The party consisted of Lemuel H. Redd sen., Geo. W. Sevey, George Hobbs and George Morrell. The trip was a hard and long one, lasting twenty-five days; most of the time they traveled through snow three or four feet deep and many days through timber so dense that it was impossible to tell which direction they were going. During the last few days of their explorations, their provisions gave out and they suffered for want of food, but Providence guided them through it all, and they came out all right, returned and submitted a report of their explorations to the company of which Bishop Jens Nielsen had charge. Bishop Nielsen was a man of indomitable courage and has since served as Bishop of Bluff for twenty years. A permanent road was afterwards made over the route explored by the party. On his return to the company, Lemuel found letters bearing news of sickness and distress in his family; and he immediately made preparations to return. This return journey was a dreary one, as he traveled alone. When he reached home, he found seven of his children down with diphtheria, though in an improved condition. An important event of the subject's life was that he was captain of twenty-two men who acted as an escort to Pres. Brigham Young on his last trio south. In 1891 Elder Redd thought it was wise for his own peace of mind to further move his family from Bluff to Mexico where they have since remained. Lemuel having previously made a visit there in company with his son-in-law James Adams. The entire journey with his family was made by team and alone through almost unknown wastes and Indian reservations. As soon as the family were comfortably located, he returned to home and family in Utah, where he remained eighteen months and has ever since made it a practice of visiting his family once a year. In 1893, in company with his wife Keziah, his daughter Ellen and son William, he attended the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple, where he met his two sons Monroe and Lemuel jun., who live in Bluff, and Caroline now living in Parowan. In 1895, he was called from Mexico to the death bed of his wife Keziah who passed away May 15, 1895. During her four months' illness she displayed a fortitude and patience which could not be surpassed remaining perfectly rational until the last breath. During the long period of persecution that the family underwent she remained at the homestead acting the part of mother and father to her own family as well as the four members of the second family before mentioned, who remained with her one year. During the last eight or ten years of her life, she suffered the trials incident to that period of persecution without murmur or complaint. Six of her children surrounded her bed side, three of whom were unmarried. "Better suffer wrong, than do wrong" was ever her motto through life. She lived the life of a true devoted, brave and generous woman and her children can truthfully say "No harsh word ever fell from my mother's lips." "Surely such a life is a benediction!" in 1897, in company with his two daughters, Vilo and Alice, Elder Redd attended the Pioneer jubilee in Salt Lake City, where he was joined by his son Lemuel H. and daughter Hattie, and sons-in-law James and Thomas Adams. During a great deal of the time which he has been from home, his son William A., Bishop of the Harmony Ward, has taken charge of his financial affairs. Elder Redd is the father of 27 children, 23 of whom are living. Lemuel H. Jr. now resides in Bluff. He has served two terms in the Utah Legislature and has acted as a counselor to the Bishop in that place for more than twenty years; Jane Spilsbury now resides in Mexico; John, after spending a term in the B. Y. Academy, served as bookkeeper for John W. Young, in Arizona, while the A. R. R. Railroad was being built and completed; from Arizona he went to Mexico to engage in mining business. Monroe and George E. have each filled honorable missions in the United States, and Luella in connection with her husband, Thomas Adams, filled a mission to Tonga or Friendly Islands, spending part of her time there teaching school. Nine others of the same family have been teachers in the schools of Utah and Nevada. Vilo and Alice have both graduated from the University of Utah with honors and are successful teachers. His daughter Caroline managed his business correspondence during his absence from home in Bluff. Wayne now resides in Bluff and has acted as counselor to three presidents of the San Juan Stake. Della and Ellen, in connection with their husbands, Wm. H. Ivins and C. F. Bryner respectively, are pioneers to the Mormon colonies in Nevada. Artemisia, in connection with her husband Geo. S. Romney, are now settled in Mexico. Burton L. has mastered the Spanish language and has been for five years a clerk in the Co-op Store of Colonia Juares. Benjamin resides in Mexico and follows the profession of a carpenter. Louisa, his wife, resides in Mexico, surrounded by all her children except Wayne before mentioned. Thirteen of Elder Redd's twenty-seven children are married and at this date of writing there are between seventy and eighty grandchildren. He has a very large record of the dead, all of whom have been baptized for and many endowed for. A striking feature of his ancestry was the fact that both his grandfathers had three wives (separately) and families for which he has done the Temple work. Lemuel H. was educated in the U. of U. as a normal student under the principalship of Dr. John R. Park. Ellen attended the Agricultural College, at Logan, during the year 1895-96. Elder Redd has seven unmarried children now attending the Church Academy in Mexico. It is the aim of his life to live his religion and it can be truthfully said that all of his children have followed in his wake. His present residence is in Colonia Juares, the head quarters of the Mexican Mission, where he acted as first counselor to Pres. Alexander F. Macdonald of the Juares Stake of Zion, who presided over the High Priests, and he has held the office of High Priest for over twenty years. In Salt Lake City, in 1902, at the October conference, he planned a reunion of his first wife's family and all those living with the exception of Monroe and Luella, both of whom were necessarily detained away. At this reunion his second wife Louisa, and baby daughter Hazel were also present from their home in Mexico; also his son Wayne who came by the urgent request of his father and the love and respect he had for the family. Convenient rooms were rented and all had a happy and a long to be remembered time for a week. The visit with each other especially Jane whom most of the family had not seen for seventeen years, was a treat of priceless value. They enjoyed the conference and when the Temple opened Elder Redd, his wife and most of his children worked a day in the Temple and attended to other ordinances in that holy house.-G.
