Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Johnson, Benjamin Julius

Johnson, Benjamin Julius, Bishop of Colonia Chuichupa, Chihuahua, Mexico, Juares Stake of Zion, was born in the town of Santaquin, Utah county, Utah, May 10, 1857, the eldest of eleven children, his father being the late Patriarch Benjamin F. Johnson, his mother Sarah Melissa Holman who died some years previous to the demise of her husband. During the Blackhawk war the family removed to Spring Lake Villa, a beautiful location between the towns of Santaquin and Payson. Here Benjamin remained during his childhood and youth, receiving an early training in habits of industry, and taking an active interest in the many branches of farming, fruitraising and gardening carried on at that big homestead. While quite young he was given almost entire charge of the extensive flower garden, an occupation in which he took great delight. Later he worked in his fathers fruit canning establishment the first venture of the kind ever attempted in Utah. His chances for scholastic education were very limited-a fact which has caused him life long regret; but being naturally observant, and quick to grasp every opportunity for self education, he succeeded in acquiring much necessary information under many difficulties. Having a natural love for music, he spent many midnight hours alone and unaided, in an almost hopeless study of that art. With the help of a tallow candle and old violin, and such scraps of music as he could get hold of, he succeeded so well that he was made chorister of the Ward. He remained in Spring Lake Villa until the year of 1878, when he was united in marriage to Isabella M. Russell and removed to Salt Lake City; four children have been born to them, three sons and one daughter. Benjamin remained in Salt Lake City in the employ of the Utah Central railroad until 1882, when having being called on a mission to Mexico, in connection with his fathers whole family, he started for Arizona, by the Union Pacific railroad, having obtained special rates and accommodations for a company of some twenty-three individuals mostly members of his fathers family. Not wishing to visit San Francisco, it became necessary for them to lay over one night at Lathrop, a small railroad town in California, in order to make connections with the Southern Pacific. Up to this point the company had been treated with all due respect, but here it became known that a company of "Mormons" was expected; hence, from the moment of their arrival, they were assailed with all manners of insults, jeers, and vile remarks, by the rabble on the platform, as well as the railroad employees, with one or two honorable exceptions. Such treatment being wholly unexpected, the women and children were naturally somewhat frightened, as well as indignant at being gazed at, and commented on as though they were a menagerie of wild animals. The treatment accorded the company by the Southern Pacific officials during the remainder of the journey, was in marked contrast to that received on the U. P. At Fort Yuma, Ariz., special respect and kindness were shown them, which was noticeable from the fact that several of the brethren from Mesa City were then serving out a term of imprisonment at that place for unlawful cohabitation. Elder Johnson remained in Arizona, residing in Tempe, and later in Mesa (where he was made chorister and also became leader of the Ward choir), until 1889, when, in company with his brother-in-law D. A. Stevens, and the family of President A. F. McDonald, he continued his journey into Mexico. In October of that year he married Harriet J. Hakes; nine children have since been born to them, seven of whom are living. Bro. Johnson located with his family in Colonia Juares, and endured many hardships, having arrived in Mexico just in time to pass through the trials of a three year draught. While residing in that colony he put upon the fruit market some commercial canned fruit, the first attempt of the kind ever made in Mexico. He had charge of the small cannery owned by Joseph E. Bentley-an enterprise with which the Mexican officials were greatly pleased. About this time Elder Johnson became interested in a movement to purchase land for colonization on the Garcia claim, of which President McDonald was agent. In 1894 he succeeded in obtaining sufficient means to make a purchase of six thousand acres, comprising the whole of the Chuichupa Valley-a beautiful location in the very tops of the Sierra Madre mountains. In the spring of that year a small company of colonists, with their families, farming implements and stock, moved onto the wild, but beautiful lands, and commenced to lay the foundation for future homes, Bro. Johnson turning the first furrow in the rich mellow soil. He was detained in Juarez until 1895, when he moved with his families to the new colony. In October that year, he was appointed presiding Elder, over the little colony, by Apostle Geo. Teasdale; he discharged the duties of that calling honorably and faithfully, until the year 1900, when a Ward organization was effected with Geo. M. Haws as Bishop, Benjamin J. Johnson as first and Samuel Brown as second counselor. Later Bishop Haws resigned his office and Elder Johnson was chosen Bishop, which position he still holds.
