Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Taylor, Alonzo L.

Taylor, Alonzo L., a faithful Sunday school worker in the Juarez Stake, Mexico, was born March 19, 1878, in Santaquin, Utah county, Utah, the son of Ernest L. Taylor and Mary Arnesen. In a biographical sketch prepared for this work, Elder Taylor writes: "My grandfather Norman Taylor was one of the original Pioneers of 1847; he drove the second wagon into Salt Lake Valley. I removed with my parents to Springerville, Apache county, Arizona, about the year 1881, where I lived until 1886, at which time I removed with my parents to Old Mexico and settled at Colonia Juarez, in the State of Chihuahua. During the early years of my life in Mexico I was called to pass through the hardships incident to settling a new country, though as a child I did not feel them so keenly as did my parents and the responsible members of the family. March 19, 1886 I was baptized by Elder Wm. Haws in the Piedras Verde river. At about the age of fifteen I was called to act in various positions in the Y. M. M. I. A., holding the office of second counselor in the local organization and for five years acted as secretary in the same organization. I was married Aug. 4, 1897, in the Salt Lake Temple, to Anna M. Eyring. In 1902 I was called to fill a mission to the City of Mexico, where I labored as mission secretary and second counselor to the mission president during my entire stay of two years. During the latter part of my mission I was called to pass through a sad and trying ordeal. Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff and wife, in company with President Anthony W. Ivins and others, visited the mission and a short time after their arrival Sister Woodruff became ill with a most malignant form of small pox in the City of Mexico. As help was hard to obtain, Bro. Paul Hennirig and myself volunteered to assist Apostle Woodruff through his wife's illness. Sister Woodruff had a five months old child with her at the time; but in order to lessen the probabilities of taking the disease the child (Rhoda) was given over to the care of Sister Kate Spilsbury, a young lady who went to Mexico City in Bro. Woodruff's party. Sister Woodruff gradually grew worse and died; she was buried in the American cemetery in the City of Mexico in the early part of June, 1904. Bro. Woodruff had me released from my mission, as he deemed it wise for those exposed to go to El Paso where better help could be obtained. Accordingly Bro. Woodruff, Sister Kate Spilsbury, little Rhoda and myself left Mexico and went north to El Paso, Texas. Bro. Woodruff became ill on the train, and on our arrival at Cinidad Juarez he was taken to the home of Bro. I. W. Pierce, but fortunately through the efforts of Prest. Ivins, who had came from Mexico a few days previous, arrangements were made with the health authorities of El Paso, Texas, to get us into the detention hospital. I took the disease the day before going into the hospital, so Bro. Woodruff and I were placed in the same room, where we were given every comfort possible by the nurses, and Prest. Ivins faithfully looked after our welfare from the outside, sending whatever we needed. Prest. C. R. Hakes, of the Maricopa Stake, who had priviously had the disease came and faithfully cared for us, being untiring in his efforts to assist us. June 20, 1904, Bro. Woodruff suddenly grew worse, and to the surprise of doctors and nurses and the dismay and sorrow of his brethren, he passed away at about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. Being slightly convalescent from my illness (which was a severe case) I was unable to assist much in preparing the body of Bro. Woodruff for burial which was attended to by Bro Hakes. The burial took place in the Evergreen cemetery June 21, 1904. Bro. Hanneria, who was with us during Sister Woodruffs' sickness and death, remained in the City of Mexico. He and Sister Kate Spilsbury fortunately escaped taking the disease. After returning home from my mission I spent one year in the Juarez Stake Academy, taking the business course. Sept. 19, 1905, I was chosen as second assistant supt. of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Juarez Stake. In a business capacity I have labored in connection with my father and brother in stockraising a part of my time; the balance of my time has been spent principally in clerical work, having acted as book-keeper in the Juarez Co-op Store, in the construction camps of the Chihuahua & Pacific Railroad and am at present engaged as cashier of the Corralitos Cattle Company, a corporation owning 1,000,000 acres of land and 40,000 head of cattle and horses. Since 1886 my home has been continuously in Colonia Juarez."
