Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Ballinger, Pearson

Ballinger, Pearson, a High Councilor in the Juarez Stake of Zion (Mexico), is a son of John Ballinger and Mary Sparrow and was born in Leigh, Gloucestershire, England, June 9, 1832. He writes: "I was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Oct. 6, 1853, and crossed the Atlantic Ocean in the ship "Thornton" in 1856. With wife and one child I resided in Quincy, Ill., for six years; here I buried the child 1 1/2 years old. There were born to me at Quincy one son and two daughters, namely Albert, now residing in Ogden, Emily (Mrs Emily Ballinger Ware) now dead and Clara (Mrs. Clara B. Williams) residing in Ogden. We moved from Quincy to Florence, Neb., where we resided six weeks, and then started on our journey across the plains in Captain Brunson's company. We left Florence with a blind pony and two cows, the cows furnishing milk and butter sufficient for our needs. We got along all right until we were three hundred miles from Salt Lake when one of the cows gave out. The Captain of the company told me to ask Bro. Williams for another cow to assist me on my journey, as he had plenty, but he refused to let me have one. I then prayed concerning it, after which my cow was able to travel and stood the rest of the journey well. The company followed along in the old 'Mormon' trail, passing close to the Carthage jail, and crossed the river at Keokuk. We arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 29, 1862. Here we stayed a few days and then went to Ogden where I obtained work with Elder Lorin Farr, assisting to build the first flour mill in Weber county. I worked for Elder Farr several years and also worked for Elder Peery as a millwright, etc., for 10 years. I had seven children born to me at Ogden, namely Willard, Frederick James, John, Charles, George, Sarah and Isaac. Willard and Frederick died in infancy. Charles died at the age of fourteen with small-pox. John, George and Sarah (now Mrs. Sarah B. Wright), and Isaac are still residing in Ogden. I then went to Hooper for a while and had a farm there, Bishop Belnap being my near neighbor. I was driven from Hooper and exiled for conscience sake and went to Mancos, Colo., where I resided for three and a half years. Here I worked at the coppering trade and ran the grist mill for three years. I also helped to build the first meeting house at Hooper. I returned to Ogden and was arrested and put under $2,000 bonds. I then left Ogden again for Colonia Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, Dec. 20, 1880, again enduring necessary trials incidental to the building up of a new country, being exiled from my family. Often I longed for the leeks and onions of Utah, as at times I would tire of Mexican mush and molasses and would wish for something else for a change. But I still rejoice that I have passed through these trials with the Saints, knowing that the Gospel is true. I have now resided in Colonia Juarez seventeen years with wife and one child, Alma Nephi, and I expect to close my mortal career here, as I am now 75 rears of age and quite feeble. I was ordained a High Priest in Ogden, in 1889, and set apart as a member of the High Council in Colonia Juarez, in 1894."
