Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Done, Arthur J.

Done, Arthur J. was born March 15, 1876, at Payson, Utah co., Utah. His parents were Abraham and Elizabeth Done. After completing the usual course of study in the Payson public schools in 1891, he attended the Latter-day Saints' College in 1891-92. Another year of study was spent in the Brigham Young Academy, after which he accepted the position of teacher in the public schools of Alpine during the school year of 1894-95. He was then 18 years of age. The following year he had charge of the school at Fairfield, Utah county, and in 1896 returned to Alpine to serve as principal of the school there. Here he spent a pleasant and successful school year. The summers of these years of teaching were spent in summer school at the Brigham Young Academy. He spent the school year of 1897-98 most profitably at the Brigham Young Academy as a student, taking special work in the line of literature. While in attendance at the academy he received a call to go on a mission to Germany and after receiving his endowments in the Salt Lake City Temple and being ordained a Seventy, he left Utah July 10, 1898, to fill that mission. On arriving in England he spent a month there visiting with his relatives and seeing places of historical interest. Upon arriving in Hamburg, Germany, Pres. Peter Lautensoch appointed him to labor in the Dresden conference in which city he spent the first five months of his mission. He was then called to take charge of the branch in Freiberg, in Saxony, and while here, though alone and not understanding the language very well, he was greatly blessed in his labors and the spirit of the Lord often made itself manifest to help and encourage him. The attendance at the meetings greatly increased. In February, 1899, he organized a Sunday school. His time was fully employed in visiting the Saints and friends whom the Saints introduced and which he made by tracting and in holding meetings. In March the police commenced to visit the meetings and after several visits to the courthouse. Bro. Done was forbidden to hold any meetings under a penalty of one hundred marks fine. The work however continued and the number of friends increased, and during April and May he baptized and confirmed four persons. Then Bro. Geo. J. Cannon was called to labor with him and during the next two months five more were baptized. About one hundred and twenty-five secret meetings for Saints and friends were held during this time. Being betrayed by the husband of a lady, who was investigating, Bro. Done was called before the police and ordered to pay a fine of one hundred marks. The conference president, however, told him to leave Freiberg without paying the fine, which he did. His next field of labor was Sorau, where he had charge of the branch; here his labors were blessed with success and during the ten months he spent there about ten persons were baptized. Next he spent a few months in Halle a Saale, trying to raise up a branch there, but as permission could not be obtained, to preach, he was called to Hannover, where he spent the last year of his mission. Here also the labors of the Elders were crowned with success and he and his companions baptized about fifteen persons. During his missionary experiences the gifts of the spirit were made manifest in preserving him in times of sickness and danger, in remarkable instances of healing, in gifts in the language, in explaining the truths of the gospel, and in the privilege of baptizing and confirming twenty persons members of the Church. Upon being released from his mission Elder Done went to the "Mormon" colonies in Mexico, where his parents had moved during the time he was on his mission. While here he was engaged to teach in the Juarez Stake Academy; he commenced these labors in 1901. At an early age Bro. Done started to play the violin under the tutelage of his father and continued his study of music for the pleasure he found in it. The first year at the academy he was called to take charge of the Juarez orchestra. In the academy his work was in English, phonography, and music. In the summer of 1902 he and Miss Fannie Slayson went to Salt Lake City and were married in the Salt Lake Temple May 28, 1902. Upon returning to his labors in the Juarez Academy, he was given charge of the choir and was called to be chorister of the Juarez Ward and the Juarez Stake choirs. The next year a band and orchestra were organized in the academy and Bro. Done was chosen instructor and leader of these organizations. In 1905 the band was uniformed and became very efficient in playing, and their services were sought at celebrations and promenade concerts by the Mexicans as well as the colonists. Bro. Done is still instructor in the Juarez Stake Academy.
