Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Harris, Hyrum Smith

Harris, Hyrum Smith, president of the Mexican Mission, is a son of Dennison L. Harris and Sarah Wilson Harris, and was born at Smithfield, Cache county, Utah, Oct. 2, 1860. He graduated with the normal class at the B. Y. A., at Provo, under Professor Maeser, in 1884, and taught school the following winter in his home town, Monroe, Sevier county, Utah. In the spring of 1885 he left home to fill a mission in the northwestern States, and was assigned to labor in Illinois. Just a month after leaving Salt Lake City, his father died. Two months later, he experienced one of many severe spells of sickness, brought on by a severe cold which settled in his face in a wound, he having been accidentally shot July 24, 1878. During his sickness President King, of the Indiana conference, offered him an honorably release, but when he refused to accept it, he was promised that he should never suffer again with his broken jaw. Although several fragments of bone later worked out, they were unaccompanied with pain. Elder Harris writes: "Being clerk of the Indiana conference, I had written out releases for several Elders who had finished their two years, and was just finishing my own, when President Palmer suddenly interrupted me by saying: "We cannot let you go home yet; we would like you to go either to Beaver Island, among the Strangites, or to St. Johns, Kansas, and open up a mission among the Bickerton and Cadmanites, offshoots from the Rigdonites. In company with Elder Swenson I went to St. Johns, where we made many friends and baptized three of the apostles and their wives, of the Bickerton church. July 11, 1889, I married Lexia A. Curtis, in the Logan Temple. I graduated from the University of Michigan with the title of L. L. B. in 1894. In 1895 I was called to Mexico to study the Spanish language and the laws. I completed the six years course in the National School of Jurisprudence, in the City of Mexico, but while waiting for the legalizing of my diploma, a new law was enacted which barred me from passing without taking seven technical examinations. In 1903 I was called to preside over the Mexican Mission, which position I held for a year and a half. After my release I returned to the colonies in Chihuahua, and there remained for ten months; then I was recalled to preside over the Mexican Mission and to represent the "Mormon" colonies in Mexico before the Government, which position I still have the honor of filling. During the past ten years I have met in business relations the greater number of the cabinet of President Diaz and have had three interviews with the president himself. I have also had the privilege of explaining the social and religious ideas of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to quite a number of the leading men of the Mexican nation. The Lord has blessed me with five children, four sons and one daughter. The three youngest boys were born in Mexico's national capital.'
