Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

McDonald, John

McDonald, John, a Patriarch in the Wasatch Stake of Zion, Utah, was born at Crawford's Burn, county of Down, Ireland, Dec. 12, 1833, the son of James McDonald and Sarah Furgeson. With the family he emigrated to America in 1844, and settled first at Nauvoo, Ill., where he lived for two years, and while at this place he worked his father's tithing on the Nauvoo Temple, being so young that he was allowed only half time. From this place he moved to Bonaparte, on the Des Moines river, Iowa, where he lived for three years and assisted the family in obtaining an outfit with which to come to Salt Lake Valley. In the spring of 1849, the family began their journey across the plains with three yoke of oxen, three yoke of cows and two wagons. They stopped at Kanesville during the following winter and in the spring of 1850 moved on to the Valley. His father died of cholera on this journey at the first crossing of the Platte river after being sick only one day. He dug a grave and assisted in burying a member of their company the morning previous to his death. After viewing the place where Salt Lake City now stands and its vicinity, it appeared that there was not sufficient feed to be had for their animals, so the subject of this sketch went in search of a better pasture and found it in the bottom lands near where Lehi, Utah county, is now located. He built a log house at the place now called Alpine and lived there during the winter of 1850 and 1851, then moved on to what is now Springville and lived there till 1866. He served in the Walker Indian war in 1853 as a cavalryman and with thirteen other men and eighty head of cattle he was sent by Pres. Brigham Young to make peace and conclude what is known in history as the Black Hawk war. This mission was a success. These agents met the Indians in the Ashley valley and after several days' discussion peace was declared; no formal battle has ever taken place since that time between whites and these Indians. In the spring of 1857 he was called by Pres. Brigham Young to assist in carrying the mail from Utah to the Missouri river; he served in that calling till the fall of 1857, when he was released on account of the Johnston army troubles. In 1856, responding to another call, he went back to assist the hand-cart companies, then on their way to the Valley, and he still bears the marks of the hardships of that notable event. In 1856 (Dec. 16th) he married Mary Lucinda Cole, by whom he is the father of thirteen children. Being called by Pres. Brigham Young in 1857 to go with the "Y X Company" and build roads and bridges, he responded and served till he was honorably released. Elder McDonald was baptized in 1842; ordained an Elder by Heber C. Kimball in 1857; ordained a High Priest by David Wood Feb. 10, 1866; was set apart as a High Counselor in 1888, and ordained a Patriarch by Francis M. Lyman Feb. 11, 1901. He served two terms as county commissioner of Wasatch county, and his home has been at Heber City since 1862. Most of his time has been spent on the farm and in giving attention to "his God and his home."
