Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Meeks, Heber Jesse

Meeks, Heber Jesse, a High Councilor in the Kanab Stake of Zion, is a sturdy product of Utah's frontier life. He was born May 9, 1869, in Harrisburg, Washington county, Utah, where he lived for eight years, after which he moved with his parents, Priddy and Mary Jane McCleve Meeks, to Orderville, Kane county, Utah, which place has since been his home. The educational advantages of the boy were meagre. In common with others who participated in frontier life, the farm instead of the school demanded most of his time. He, however, obtained an excellent schooling in the Orderville United Order. There he received a discipline, while a boy, that brought out the strongest traits of the man and made him public spirited to a high degree; also generous and full of brotherly interest and love. In 1889 Brother Meeks married Clarissa Amanda Bowers in the St. George Temple. Three years later he was set apart as a missionary to the northern States. He spent two years laboring in Indiana, West Virginia and Pennsylvania, and also visited places of interest in Washington, D. C., Baltimore and Philadelphia. After returning from his mission he attended school one year at the Brigham Young University in Provo. He has labored as a carpenter, cattle-raiser, sheep-grower and farmer, besides working faithfully in the Ward as assistant Sunday school superintendent, president of Y. M. M. I. A. and Ward teacher. He has also served as constable and filled many appointive offices. He has been secretary of the Kane County Sheepmen's Union, State sheep inspector, county vice president for Utah Wool Growers Association, and attended two national live stock conventions, one at Portland, Oregon, and one at Denver, Colo. The main work of Brother Meeks, however, has been in the M. I. A. He served four years as Stake counselor and was then sustained as Stake president of Y. M. M. I. A., which position he has now held for eight years. The works of Brother Meeks are characterized by faithfulness and earnestness. His heart is in his labor, and his zealous efforts are crowned with success. He is also a member of the High Council, and a useful citizen in his community, judicious and enterprising. Public improvements never fail to receive his support. He has a comfortable home in Orderville, where he lives happily with his wife and six children.
