Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Richards, Myron John

Richards, Myron John, Bishop of Riverside, Malad Stake (Box Elder county, Utah), is a son of the late Apostle Franklin D. Richards and Mary Thompson, and was born May 22, 1858, in Provo, Utah county, Utah. He was baptized in May, 1866, and ordained an Elder in the Endowment House, Salt Lake City, when he was about sixteen years old. In 1874 (Jan. 20th) he was ordained a Seventy by Truman Leonard, of Farmington, and became a member of the 56th quorum of Seventy. He was ordained a High Priest and Bishop, Jan. 27, 1884, by Pres. Wilford Woodruff, and at the same time appointed to act as Bishop of Plymouth Ward. When the Plymouth Ward was divided he became Bishop of South Plymouth, which later was named Fielding, and since Oct. 14, 1904, he has acted as Bishop of Riverside Ward. In 1879 (July 3rd) he married Julia Anna Peterson and on May 27, 1885, he took to wife Isabella M. Young. The names of his children are: Mary Ann (now dead). Myron J. Mabel (now dead), Ralph C., John, Maggie, Hyrum Y., Elmer T., Florence, Glenn and Legrand (now dead). His wife Isabella M. died Nov. 10, 1901. Bishop Richards is a farmer but has also tried his hand at merchandizing; his record as a civil office-holder includes a four year term as a deputy registration officer, and that of school trustee, notary public etc. The first three years of his life was spent in Salt Lake City, the next fifteen years in Farmington, Utah, followed by three years in Almy, Wyo. After that his home for fifteen years was in Plymouth (now Fielding) and Riverside has been his place of residence during the last thirteen years. He was one of the first settlers on what is locally known as Bear River Flat (Plymouth), and the responsibility of locating townsites, meeting houses, school houses and county roads has repeatedly rested on him. Bishop Richards is a kind-hearted man, gentlemanly in his bearing, and highly respected by the community in which he lives.
