Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Pomeroy, Franklin Thomas

Pomeroy, Franklin Thomas, second counselor in the presidency of the Maricopa Stake of Zion (Arizona) first saw the light of day at Paris, Bear Lake county, Idaho, Sept. 15, 1870. He is the son of Francis Martin Pomeroy (one of the 143 original pioneers who under the leadership of Brigham Young journeyed across the plains and mountains in 1847) and Sarah Matilda Colburn. When six years of age his parents moved to Arizona and settled in the Salt River valley, where, they, together with the colony accompanying them, constructed the Mesa canal and located the town of Mesa, where he has since resided. Elder Pomeroy was brought up under difficulties attendant on settling a new country and very early in life, owing to the death of his father in 1882, he was compelled to do his share towards supporting his mother's family. He was of a studious nature and with his meager earnings in his purse he went to Salt Lake City and entered the Salt Lake Stake Academy, where he remained two years. He graduated from the business course and received the first certificate of graduation ever presented by that school. July 11, 1891, he was ordained an Elder and on March 24, 1893, he married Sophia Isadora Morris; on their wedding tour the young couple visited Salt Lake City and attended the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple. In October, 1893, Elder Pomeroy was called to preside over the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Mesa Ward and was successful in introducing the first manual published into the association. After laboring in that capacity until March, 1895, he responded to a call for a mission to the Southern States, going direct from Mesa to Chattanooga, Tenn. He was appointed to labor in the Mississippi conference and two months later appointed president of the same. This position he filled with honor and credit until he was honorably released to return home in March, 1901. During this mission he had many remarkable experiences in the manifestations of the goodness of God, and he became thoroughly grounded in the faith of the Gospel. On his return home, his earthly possessions consisted of a wife and child, but within a year he engaged in business in which he has been very successful. In 1902 he was elected justice of the peace in Mesa precinct. As a Church worker Elder Pomeroy has ever distinguished himself, having labored as an officer in the M. I. A., acted as superintendent of the religion classes and class teacher. He has also filled many other offices of responsibility and trust.
