Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Phelps, Hyrum Smith

Phelps, Hyrum Smith, a High Councilor in the Maricopa Stake of Zion (Arizona), was born Feb. 26, 1846, in Nauvoo, Hancock county, Ill., the son of Morris Phelps and Sarah Thompson. His birth took place immediately after the last of the first company of the exiled Saints had crossed the Mississippi river on the ice, to come west. His parents sold their home in Nauvoo for a mere trifle and traveled as far west as Winter Quarters, where his father worked at wagon making, helping the Saints to migrate to the Rocky Mountains. In the spring of 1851 his father started for Utah in charge of 63 wagons, loaded with Saints. Arriving in G. S. L. Valley the following September, he soon afterwards settled in Alpine, Utah county. At the age of eight years the subject of this sketch commenced herding sheep belonging to the settlers of Alpine during the summer and went to school in the winter. This he did until he was large enough to work steadily on the farm. Part of his time was also occupied working in the canyons. He was baptized when eight years old and ordained a Priest some seven years later. In the spring of 1864 his father sold his farm in Alpine and moved to Bear Lake valley, Idaho, settling in Montpelier where he lived till he died in May, 1876. In 1866 (Sept. 26th) Hyrum S. married Clarinda Bingham, daughter of Calvin Bingham and Lucretia Thorn, after which he secured a home of his own. In the spring of 1864 he was ordained an Elder and received his endowments. In 1873 (Sept. 8th) he married Mary Elizabeth Bingham as a plural wife. In August, 1877, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Charles Robison, of Montpelier. Losing his crops successively on account of the long cold winters and hard frosts, he decided to make a change of climate. Consequently, he sold his home in Montpelier and moved to Arizona. In 1879 he located in Mesa, where he took up a farm and made his living by farming. In the fall of 1884 he was indicted by the U. S. grand jury for polygamy and unlawful cohabitation. Together with five others, namely, George T. Wilson, James Wilson, Charles I. Robson, Oscar M. Stewart and Almon Salisbury he pleaded guilty to the lesser charge, April 11, 1885, and was sent to the Territorial prison at Yuma for three months. In 1890 to 1892 he filled a mission to the Southern States, traveling mostly in the South Carolina conference. At the organization of the Maricopa Stake of Zion he was set apart as a High Councilor by Apostle Erastus Snow, which position he still holds. Elder Phelps is the father of 26 children, 12 by his first and 14 by his second wife. Eleven of the children are married and all living in Mesa, except one, who is living in Los Angeles, Cal. Nine are dead. He has 28 grand-children.
