Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Horne, Henry James

Horne, Henry James, a High Councilor in the Maricopa Stake of Zion, was born July 24, 1838, in Chariton county, Missouri, the son of Joseph Warren and Mary Isabella Hale. As a child he passed through the persecutions of the Saints who were driven from place to place and came to Utah in 1847. He was baptized by Apostle John Taylor in the Platte river, while journeying westward in that year. After the arrival in the Valley, he attended school in the Old Fort the first winter, the teacher being Mary Jane Dillworth. He also attended the first Sabbath school taught in Salt Lake City by Richard Ballantyne, was ordained a Teacher in the 14th Ward, received his endowments at an early day and was ordained a Seventy by Pres. Heber C. Kimball. In 1856 he went out to meet the handcart companies and in 1857 he was one of the expedition sent out under Col. Robert T. Burton to meet Johnston's army. In the spring of 1858 he took a load of provisions out to the men who had wintered in the mountains. His father being called to Dixie to raise cotton, young Henry James assisted in moving the family south. In July, 1860, he married Mary Ann Crismon and lived in Salt Lake City till 1864, when he removed to Paris, Bear Lake county, Idaho. Here he took an active part in public affairs and was ordained a High Priest by C. C. Rich. When the Bear Lake Stake of Zion was organized Aug. 25, 1877, he was ordained a Bishop of the Paris 1st Ward, by Franklin D. Richards. Being honorably released from his labors in Idaho, in the spring of 1880, he removed to Arizona and located in Mesa in December, of that year. In 1882 he removed to the San Pedro river and was set apart as second counselor to Bishop David P. Kimball. When Bishop Kimball was called to be President Christopher Layton's counselor, Elder Horne was chosen as Bishop of the St. David Ward. Later, he was made Bishop of the McDonald Ward, and when that Ward, on June 3, 1883, was attached to the St. David Ward, he was chosen a member of the High Council. In 1885 he moved back to Mesa, and in 1886 he was sustained as first counselor in the presidency of the High Priest's quorum and also a member of the High Council in the Maricopa Stake.
