Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Allen, Charles Hopkins

Allen, Charles Hopkins, president of the High Priests quorum in the Maricopa Stake, Arizona, was born Oct. 15, 1830, at Burton, Catteraugus county, New York, the son of Andrew Lee Allen and Clarinda Knapp. His father became a member of the Church at an early day in Catteraugus county, New York, and moved with his family to Kirtland, Ohio, where he purchased considerable property and became well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph. Later the family started for Missouri, but through force of circumstances stopped in Illinois, and lived for several years east of Carthage in Hancock county. While residing there the subject of this sketch visited Nauvoo several times and heard the Prophet Joseph preach. On one of his visits to Nauvoo he came near freezing to death on the prairie. His parents received their blessings in the Nauvoo Temple and the family joined the general exodus of the Saints in the early part of 1846. At Mount Pisgah they built a log house and put in some wheat and corn. Their bread giving out, they left their improvements there and traveled on to Winter Quarters, on the Missouri river. Afterwards they identified themselves with a branch of the Church on Keg creek, 18 miles south of Kanesville, Iowa, where they lived four years. In 1852 they crossed the plains and mountains in John M. Higbee's company, arriving in Salt Lake City Aug. 13, 1852. Soon afterwards the family located in Provo, Utah county. In the fall of 1855 Charles H., together with his brothers Andrew and James, went to southern California and located, with the Saints at San Bernardino. Two years later he visited his relatives in Utah and still later he went by way of San Francisco to Carson Valley, where a settlement of the Saints had been founded and where one of his sisters resided. After spending the winter in Carson Valley, he returned to San Bernardino, accompanied by his sister. In the mean time others of the family had settled in San Bernardino. In 1862 Charles H. returned to Utah, accompanied by his mother who died soon afterwards. In 1863 he went to the Missouri river after immigrants. After his return he and his brother Andrew decided to go back to California to sell their property and then locate permanently in Cache valley, Utah, which they did. June 15, 1864, the subject of this sketch married Elizabeth Adelaide Hoopes at Richmond, Cache county, Utah, and lived after that in Richmond until five children had been born to them; they then settled on a ranch north of Richmond and thus became numbered among the first settlers in what is now Coveville Ward. Suffering with rheumatism, Bro. Charles H., who in the mean time had been ordained an Elder, decided to locate in a warmer county; hence, he moved with his family to Mesa, Arizona, in 1882, where he made his home. Dec. 10, 1882, he was ordained a High Priest by Charles I. Robson, and set apart as a High Councilor in the Maricopa Stake of Zion. He was chosen as first counselor to Jesse Steele in the presidency of the High Priests quorum, and in 1885 he became the president of said quorum. He was appointed to labor as a missionary among the Lamanites, in which capacity he became a companion of Bro. Henry C. Rogers. As an Indian missionary he traveled up and down Salt river and Gila river preaching the Gospel to the Indians; he assisted in baptizing many of them and witnessed several remarkable cases of healing among them. His wife died Nov. 19, 1889, after having borne him fourteen children, the youngest being only six days old when she passed away. In 1890 Elder Allen went to Utah to work in the Logan Temple; here he spent ten weeks working for the dead. He also became acquainted with Annie Eliza Jones whom he married in the Logan Temple Oct. 30, 1890. After that he returned by railroad to his family in Mesa, Arizona. In the spring of 1898 he again went to Utah, traveling by team and taking two of his daughters with him; again he worked for the dead in the Logan Temple. Sep. 15, 1898, a reunion of the Allen family took place in the Coveville (Cache county) meetinghouse, after which Elder Allen returned to Arizona. In 1900 he made another trip to Utah for the purpose of attending to Temple ordinances. By his second wife, Elder Allen has had seven children, who were all living in 1906. At that time eleven of his children by his first wife were also living, and he had eighteen living grandchildren.
