Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Reeve, William Arthur

Reeve, William Arthur, Stake clerk of Millard Stake, Utah, and a president of the 21st quorum of Seventy, was born Nov. 18, 1863, at Virgen City, Utah, the son of Robert W. Reeve and Emma Burgess. He was baptized June 11, 1876 by David B. Ott, ordained a Teacher in June, 1876, an Elder Feb. 27, 1886, by Thomas Burgess, and a Seventy Nov. 18, 1877, by Samuel K. Gifford. In 1888 to 1890 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring in South Carolina and Georgia. Concerning this mission, he writes: "I could stand but little walking. Some of my friends thoght I ought not to go on this mission, but I wanted to go and looked upon this call as the means of relief from my afflictions. On request, when being set apart, I was blessed in my afflicted limb and promised I should be blessed of the Lord to perform the labors of the call. On arriving in the mission field, I was only able to walk a short distance, but gradually gained strength in my leg and was able to walk, and did walk as long distances, and as many of them, as most of the Elders in our conference. My life was sought many times by mobs while on my mision, but the Lord led me out of trouble and thwarted the plans of wicked men many times in a most marvellous manner. And it has been through the mercy and blessing of the Lord that my life has been spared, even from infancy. I believe few persons have passed through greater experiences in suffering or the hand of the Lord been more visibly manifest than in my life." At home Elder Reeve has acted as superintendent of the Duncan Retreat branch of the Virgen Sunday school, where he also acted as a president of the 9th quorum of Seventy, from June, 1901, to February, 1902. He has been a member of the council of the 21st quorum since May, 1897, and has also acted as ward clerk and as a teacher in Hinckley Ward. Jan. 19, 1888, he married Hannah M. Wright, with whom he has had three sons and seven daughters, all living. He was appointed Stake clerk Jan. 30, 1904; otherwise his occupation has been that of a farmer. He has been a student in the Agricultural College at Logan and a resident of Hinckley since 1902. He was also one of the pioneer farmers of Abraham, Millard county, Utah.
