Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Tanner, Joseph Smith

Tanner, Joseph Smith, Bishop of Payson Ward, Nebo Stake (Utah county, Utah), is the son of John Tanner and Eliza Beswick, and was born June 11, 1833, at Bolton, Warren county, N. Y. He was baptized in the Mississippi river at an early day and ordained successively to the office of Elder, High Priest, and Bishop, the latter ordination taking place in 1871, when he was appointed to preside over the Payson Ward. For some time Santaquin, Spring Lake, Salem and Benjamin were also under his jurisdiction. He labored faithfully as Bishop of Payson for twenty years and was honorably released in 1891 on account of ill health. Elder Tanner went to southern California in 1851, being called together with his mother and three brothers to settle and colonize San Bernardino. Returning from there in 1858 he settled in Payson, where he has resided continuously ever since. On his return from California in 1853, he, together with George Clark and John Mayfield, accompanied Col. Thomas L. Kane from San Bernardino to Salt Lake City, Utah. From 1868 to 1870 he filled a mission to the Muddy, in Nevada. In 1884-85 he labored as a home missionary in the Utah Stake, and filled a short mission to California in 1895. Feb. 17, 1860, he married Elizabeth Clark Haws, who, after bearing him thirteen children, died in April, 1882. Some time afterwards he married Jenette Hamilton, who bore him twelve children. In 1886 he married Helen Elizabeth Fogelstrand, who is the mother of six of his children. Altogether he is the Father of thirty-one children, seventeen of whom are living. Brother Tanner served as mayor of Payson two terms (1879-82) and was a member of the city council about ten years. He has been very successful as a farmer and stock raiser and is associated with a number of business enterprises in Payson. He has acted as president of Payson Co-op twenty years, vice president and member of Utah County Herd Association ten years, member of the board of directors of Utah Woollen Mills ten years, president of the board of Payson Stock raising Association fifteen years, member of the board and president of Payson Butcher and Stock Association twenty years, president and member of the board of directors of Payson Creamery Company, vice-president and member of the board of Payson Exchange and Savings Bank, etc. Bishop Tanner is a warm friend of education and all his children are well educated.
