Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Patten, George

Patten, George, a pioneer and veteran Elder in the Church, was born Oct. 26, 1828, in Chester county, Pennsylvania, the son of Wm. C. Patten and Julianna Bench. In a sketch prepared for this work, Elder Patten writes: "My mother died when I was six years old. Two years later, I was put out on a farm in the State of Delaware, sixty miles south of Philadelphia, with one of my father's cousins. There I lived till the fall of 1842, receiving in the meantime two months' schooling yearly for several years. In the fall of 1842 we removed to Nauvoo, Illinois, where I attended school the following winter. In June, 1843, I was baptized by Edson Whipples, at the foot of Main street, by the side of the Nauvoo Mansion. During the summer of 1843 I worked in the Temple stone quarry at Nauvoo; later I learned stone cutting under Jerome Kompton. I also became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and often heard him preach. I was present at the grand meeting held in Nauvoo Aug. 8, 1844, when Brigham Young was accepted as the leader of the Church, and I, together with so many others present on that occasion, received a strong testimony as to who it was the Lord had appointed to lead his people and upon whom the mantle of the Prophet Joseph had fallen. In the spring of 1846 I participated in the exodus from Nauvoo, and father placed me in the care of Bro. Charles C. Rich. Soon afterwards, though only eighteen years old, I was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the 34th quorum of Seventy. In February, 1846, we crossed the Mississipi river and traveled on to Sugar Creek, in Iowa, when the ground was covered with snow about a foot deep. In journeying through Iowa in slush and mud I drove loose stock and being exposed to the inclemency of the weather I caught a very severe cold and came very near losing my life; but I was healed by the prayer of faith and the administration of the Holy Priesthood. During the summer of 1846 I made two visits back to Nauvoo, my father's family being among those who remained behind till the driving out of the remnant of the Saints. I was present to witness the latter part of the so-called Nauvoo battle. We disposed of our house and lot in Nauvoo, worth about $500, for a cow valued at $15.00. Remaining in Iowa during the winter of 1847 to 1848, we hurried on to Winter Quarters early in the spring of 1848 and put in a crop. Being ordered to vacate Winter Quarters as the land on which it stood belonged to the Indians, my father moved his family over the river and made a temporary home on the Big Pigeon, nine miles north of Kanesville, Iowa. Here we struggled hard to get an outfit with which to cross the plains and the mountains to G. S. L. Valley. We started for the Valley in the spring of 1850 with two old wagons, three yoke of cows, one yoke of three-year-old steers, one yoke of three-year-old heifers and a yoke of two-year-old heifers. My team consisted of three-year-old steers, a yoke of cows, a yoke of three-year-old heifers and a yoke of two-year-old heifers. Father's teams consisted of two yoke of cows and an old light wagon. We left Florence June 21, 1850, in Wilford Woodruff's hundred and Edson Whipple's fifty, arriving in Salt Lake City, Oct. 3rd. In the fall of the same year (1850) I settled at what is now called Alpine, Utah county, assisting my brother-in-law Charles S. Peterson in building log houses. We were among the very first settlers of Alpine. In 1851 (Feb. 20th), I married Mary Jane Nelson and moved into a house that had dirt floor and roof. In 1853 I participated in the Walker war as a member of Samuel S. White's company. In the fall of 1854 I moved to Payson, where my father had located in the fall of 1850 as one of the first settlers. In the spring of 1856 I was called out to participate in the so-called Tintic war by order of Col. Peter Cownover, of Provo. Later in the year I went out as far as Fort Bridger to meet the hand-cart emigrants. During the winter of 1857-58 I participated in the Echo canyon campaign, part of the time under the command of Captain Lot Smith. In the Spring of 1858 I assisted in the general move south and later in the year took up a tract of land just north of Payson. In 1862 I went to the Missouri river in Homer Duncan's company, to assist emigrants across the plains. We made the round trip in 130 days; it was the quickest trip every made by oxteams. In 1865 I was called on the Muddy Mission and thus became one of the founders of St. Thomas, going there in 1866 to put up a molasses mill and a cotton gin. I built a race and flume and put in a small overshoot wheel which I attached to the gin and thus ginned out their cotton. There being a mountain of nice salt a few miles south of the settlement, I bought a small pair of burrs which I put up and ground salt, thus supplying all southern Utah with fine table salt. In the breaking up of the Muddy mission, later, I lost a thousand dollars. The settlers on the Muddy being compelled to tramp out their grain with horses and clear it up in the wind, I took a fanning mill down to the Muddy on one of my trips, which caused great rejoicing in the colony. After vacating the settlements on the Muddy I located temporarily in St. George, where I fenced in a lot and planted vines and trees. Later, I located in Harrisburg, where I built a house, but later I settled at Levan, Juab county. In 1866 I was elected major in the Nauvoo legion and in early days in Payson I served in the police force and was also a member of the city council. In 1870, together with about 300 others I filled a short mission to the States, visiting Pennsylvania, Delaware and Indiana. I helped to build the first telegraph line from Provo to Payson. In 1873 I was elected constable of Payson. I also helped to build the Provo Wollen Factory and took a contract for grading a part of the Utah Southern Railway. Later, after the grading was done, I, together with my son, helped to get out ties and bridge timbers from the canyons. In 1874 I helped to finish the St. George Temple and took a small contract for grading on the railroad from Provo to Payson. In 1883 I bought a ranch of 300 acres in Juab county, three miles north of Mona, then known as the Cheeny Ranch, which I greatly improved during the following year. I planted about 4000 trees and named the place Poplar Grove, as I set out a row of poplar nearly half a mile long. I also built a small frame house, a camp house and a barn and shed for campers, and drove three flowing wells. In 1888 I went to Mexico, and located the following year with two of my sons at Colonia Dublan. I remained there about four years, buying out thirteen Mexican claims, and as the brethren moved in, I sold them this land with only a small advance on the price I had paid. In 1893 I returned to Utah. In summing up my busy life, I will say, that I have built eighteen dwellings for myself and sons. Thus I helped to build two houses at Alpine, eight in and around Payson, one at Salem, one at Clinton (Thistle Valley), two at St. Thomas, on the Muddy, one at Harrisburg, one at the ranch, at Poplar Grove, and two at Dublan, Mexico. I have done my share of hard work to build up the country even if I have not done much preaching. I have been a teacher in Sunday schools for fifteen years and a Ward teacher about forty years. My first wife died July 6, 1896, and I married my present wife (Mary Burton) Oct. 10, 1901, in the Salt Lake Temple."
