Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Hale, Solomon Henry

Hale, Solomon Henry, first counselor in the Presidency of the Oneida Stake, Idaho, was born at Quincy, Ill., April 30, 1839, while his parents, Jonathan and Olive (Boynton) Hale, then recent converts to "Mormonism", were on their way to join the great body of the Church at Nauvoo, where he was later appointed Bishop of one of the Wards in the City. The Hales belongs to the distinguished family of the name that has a glorious record in both English and American history, and numbers among its renowned men Sir Matthew Hale, lord chief justice of England, and Nathan Hale, one of the early martyrs to liberty in America. There are now some 23000 members of the family, and its name has adorned every elevated and admired walk of life with the noblest traits of manhood and womanhood, the learning of the scholar, the eloquence of the orator, the courage of the soldier, the patriotism of the statesman, the genius of the writer and the daring of the pioneer, all being set down to its credit, and all repeated many times in its membership. The immediate ancestors of Solomon H. Hale were natives of Massachusetts, and could trace their ancestry back in an unbroken and distinguished line to the year 1400, and through all the variations of colonial history in New England. In 1830 they moved from their native State to Ohio, but after a short residence there went to Nauvoo, Ill., where they remained until 1846, and then joined the first company of saints for the far West. They reached Council Bluffs, Iowa, in the summer and crossed over the Missouri river to Winter Quarters in September of that year; the father soon died, and the mother followed him to the better world a few days later, as did two daughters, their youngest children. Four children were left in orphanage, namely Aroet L., Rachel S., Alma H., and Solomon H. The oldest son was a young man and the sister was also nearly grown at this time and they were able to keep the four together and continue the journey to Great Salt Lake Valley, which they did in the spring of 1848 with the second company. They remained in Salt Lake City four years, and during this time Solomon secured what education he could under the circumstances. In 1852 his two brothers moved to Tooele county, where they engaged in farming on land which they still own and occupy. The sister was married and moved to San Bernardino, California, where she died some time in the seventies. Solomon went to Farmington, north of Salt Lake City, to make his home with his uncle, Jonathan H. Holmes, and worked on his farm until 1854, when he began the battle of life for himself in earnest by going to Utah Valley, near Lehi, and securing employment on a stock ranch. He remained there until 1856 and then removed with the first settlers with a herd of Church cattle to the site of Logan, in Cache Valley. They all intended to remain there, but in the spring of 1857 United States troops came along under the command of General Johnston, and the settlers, by order of President Brigham Young, moved south. In the fall of the year they returned and Bro. Hale came with them. He passed the winter near Logan and in the ensuing spring of 1858 went to Salt Lake to work for William H. Hooper, then one of the most extensive stock-growers and dealers in Utah, with his principal ranches located about thirty miles north of Salt Lake City, where the town of Hooperville now is. Bro. Hale continued his work on the ranch until the spring of 1861, when he left Hooper's employ to break horses for the Pony Express Company in Deep Creek Valley. There was such a demand for riding horses on the express route at this time that Bro. Hale, who, by the way, had the reputation of being the best rider in the county, was required to ride ten bronchos a day. This he kept up for five months, when he was broken down in health and returned to Salt Lake City, spending the ensuing winter in Centerville. These were very troublous and dangerous times with the Indians. Some of the station keepers were killed, and express riders shot and a general state of terror was kept up. Bro. Hale was among those who suffered some very narrow escapes. One incident that showed well his bravery and adventurous spirit, which were so characteristic of him, was when he volunteered to go at the head of nine men in pursuit of two savages who were known to be the principal cause of their trouble. For days they kept a close watch upon their trail in the mountains, when, on their way to do further deeds of terror, the two braves passed the fatal spot where Bro. Hale and four others were successful in capturing and afterwards killing them. On May 1, 1862, Mr. Hale enlisted in the government service in Captain Lot Smith's command of Utah Volunteers and was appointed wagon-master and assigned to do duty in protecting the mails on the overland route, all the government troops having been called off the plains, leaving the Indians in almost full control and using their opportunity to murder emigrants, burn stage houses, destroy coaches, kill the guards and generally keep up a state of terror throughout the country. The Utah volunteers were used in restraining the savages and preserving order, putting up wires, protecting stage coaches and keeping up as far as possible communication with the east. They enlisted for ninety days, but were kept in service 115, and on their way home, three days before their term expired, they reached Fort Bridger, where Indians had made a raid on the ranch of the old mountaineer, John Robinson, and taken off 136 horses and mules. Yielding to the appeals of the settlers, the forty volunteers set out upon the trail of the savages, following them in swift pursuit for eight days into the Snake River region, the then heart of the Indian country. Not being successful in overtaking the hostiles, they gave up the chase after having reached the vicinity of the Three Tetons. They crossed Snake River at Meek's Ferry, north of Blackfoot, and went on to Pocatello; thence they passed through Malad Valley back to Salt Lake City, where they arrived on the 9th of Aug. and were mustered out of service on the 14th. This expedition, in which only one life was lost and that by drowning in the Lewis Fork of Snake River, has been recorded as being "one of the most hazardous in the annals of local Indian warfare". During the eight days of their pursuit they were almost without food and also suffered untold hardships in other ways. They subsisted principally upon what few birds and animals they could kill by the way and were at one time driven to the extreme measure of killing for food one of their pack horses. Brother Hale remained in the vicinity of Salt Lake until April 17, 1863, when he was married there to Miss Anna Clark, a native of Ohio, daughter of Samuel and Rebecca (Garner) Clark; her father was born in New Jersey and the mother in Tennessee. They came to Utah in 1848, and after a short residence in Salt Lake City moved to Provo, where the father started the first tannery in the Territory. The mother died in southern Utah and the father at the home of a son at Whitney, Idaho. After their marriage Mr. and Mrs. Hale settled in Skull Valley, Utah, where he was in the employ of William H. Hooper, having charge of all his interests in that region. Mr. Hooper was one of the famous men of early Utah history, being prominent in public life as well as in business circles. In the autumn of 1865 Bro. Hale moved to the Bear Lake country, which then contained but few settlers. He bought land near the present town of Liberty and engaged extensively in the stock industry, raising, buying and selling cattle. He remained there until the spring of 1872, when he changed his base of operations to Soda Springs, where he, in partnership with Brigham Young jun., opened a livery, feed and sale stable. He kept up right along big stock interests, procuring hayland in Gentile Valley for the raising of winter feed. He did the freighting from Logan, Utah, for the branch of the Z. C. M. I. in Soda Springs and acted as their Indian interpreter and trader. In the latter place he built two fine residences and a billiard hall, which was the best equipped of any north of Ogden City. These buildings are still standing and occupied. In the spring of 1875 he sold his interest in Soda Springs and procured other tracts of land in the central portion of Gentile Valley, where the town of Thatcher now is. Here he started a new enterprise and went quite extensively into the stock business and soon became one of the leading stock men of that whole valley. A peculiar incident in his locating in Gentile Valley was that the ranch men and trappers then living on the west side of the river forbade "Mormons" locating among them; they claimed that the valley should be kept exclusively Gentile. It will be plainly seen from this whence Gentile Valley derived its name. Mr. Hale gained the friendship of his neighbors and before a great while a number of other "Mormons" settled there and finally a Ward of the Church was organized, over which he was appointed Bishop. While living here he served his county (Oneida) for two years as one of its commissioners, during which terms funds were appropriated for the building of the county house in Malad City, the Bear River bridge in Gentile Valley, etc. In April, 1890, he was called by the Church to superintend the erection of the Oneida Stake Academy, at Preston, to which town his family moved the following July, retaining their possessions in the Gentile Valley. It took about five years to build the Academy and in 1894 Elder Hale traded land in the Gentile Valley for the ranch on which he now lives, about two miles south from the center of Preston. Here he has since maintained his home and carried on an extensive cattle and dairying business, also raising and selling large quantities of hay and handling pure breeds of sheep. Throughout his life he has been active in the Church works. He was a member of the High Council of Bear Lake Stake from its organization until the formation of Mormon (now Thatcher) Ward, in Gentile Valley, when he became Bishop of that Ward, holding the position until the Oneida Stake was formed, in May, 1884, when he was made first counselor to President William D. Hendricks. In August, 1887, he was called as first counselor to President George C. Parkinson, of the Oneida Stake, and filled the office until recently. In politics he is a staunch Republican and is active in the service of his party. His family consists of eight children in all. Their names in order of birth are as follows: Solomon H., Jonathan J., S. Clark, Hattie V., Arta D., Heber Q., A. Alma and Lavinna, of whom three are deceased, namely, Jonathan, Clark and Arta.
