Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Cutler, Allen Riley

Cutler, Allen Riley, Bishop of Preston Fourth Ward, Oneida Stake, was born Sept. 22, 1862, in American Fork canyon, Utah county, Utah, the son of Royal J. Cutler and Theda Ann Morton. He was baptized at the age of nine years by Andrew Gibbons and ordained a Deacon and afterwards an Elder in 1886. In 1901 (March 31st) he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Mathias F. Cowley and was ordained a Bishop Feb. 3, 1902, at the organization of the Preston Fourth Ward, by Apostle Marriner W. Merrill. In 1887 to 1888 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring in Tennessee and North Carolina. During his residence in Glendale, Kane county, Utah, he acted a superintendent of Sunday school. He organized the Panguitch Stake Academy in 1888 and served as principal of that Institution. After that he was principal of the Sevier Stake Academy and later of the Oneida Stake Academy, having received his own education in the common schools of Utah and in the Brigham Young Academy at Provo, and in the L. D. S. University of Salt Lake City. In 1899 he graduated from the College of Physicians and Surgeons in Baltimore and has practiced as a medical doctor in Preston ever since. In 1890 (May 28th) he married Lucy M. Hardy and is the father of nine children. His places of residence has been American Fork canyon, the Muddy (Nevada), Glendale, Richfield, and Salt Lake City, Utah, and Preston, Idaho. He located in the latter place in 1899. Bishop Cutler acted as superintendent of public schools in Kane county, in 1895-1897, and was a delegate to the first State Republican convention in Utah in 1896. He has also served as a member of the Board of Health at Preston and as school trustee during the erection of the Central School house etc. He was a member of the firm of Daines, Cutler and Co. (merchants at Preston), director in the Co-op Drug Store, and is a director of the Idaho State and Savings Bank of Preston. In 1907 he was honorably released from his position as Bishop and chosen as a member of the High Council of the Oneida Stake.
