Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Snow, Joseph Homer

Snow, Joseph Homer, first counselor in the Bishopric of the Kingston Ward, Piute county, Utah, was born Jan. 21, 1860, in Provo, Utah county, Utah, the son of James C. Snow. He was baptized in July, 1869, and accompanied a part of his father's family to southern Utah. In December, of the same year, (1869) they settled at Belview, the first settlement reached in Dixie after crossing the Black Ridge from the north. Here the family lived six years, during which time the subject of this sketch passed through many hardships owing to the lack of sufficient clothing and food; many times he had to subsist on a little corn ground on a coffee mill, stirred up in cold water, and baked over the fire; and frequently he had not enough of that to keep the pangs of hunger away. Much of this suffering was caused through the settlers not being able to cross Black Ridge in the winter and also through failure of crops. Joseph spent most of his time while in Dixie herding cattle. After six years of hardship his father was released from his mission to Dixie and settled then in Sanpete county, where he lived until the time of his death in 1884. Joseph was ordained to the office of a Deacon when sixteen years old by Bishop Petty, of Pettyville Ward (now called Sterling). In October, 1884, he was ordained an Elder and set apart as Sunday school superintendent of the Sterling Ward; he served in that capacity until October, 1888, when he removed to Emery county, Utah. The same year he married Mary Nielsen and lived in Emery county one year and acted as first counselor to Bishop Casper Christensen in the Muddy Ward. The water and climate disagreeing with his health, he moved back to Sterling, where he resided two years; thence he removed to Kingston, Piute county, where he still resides. In his new home he acted as a Ward teacher for several years, after which he was chosen second counselor to Bishop Rufus A. Allen. A couple of years later he was chosen and set apart to his present position. He is the father of nine children, five boys and four girls.
