Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Fotheringham, William

Fotheringham, William, a Patriarch and a veteran Elder in the Church, was born April 5, 1826, at Clackmannan, Scotland, the son of John Fotheringham and Charlotte Gentle. He was baptized in the fall of 1847 by Elder John Sharp; ordained a Teacher March 19, 1848, by Elder Wm. Gibson; ordained a Seventy in the winter of 1849-50, by Joseph Young; ordained a High Priest Dec. 3, 1870, by Jehu Blackburn; ordained a Bishop in 1877 by Apostle Erastus Snow to act as Bishop's agent in Beaver Stake, and ordained a Patriarch Jan. 22, 1905, by Francis M. Lyman. He was one of the first settlers of Lehi, Utah county, locating there in 1850, and in the spring of 1852 he accompanied President Brigham Young on an exploring tour through Utah, Juab, Sanpete, Millard, Beaver and Iron counties. In 1852-55 he filled a mission to Indiana, during which he traveled more extensively than any other Elder who has ever performed missionary labor for the Church in that country. He traveled 2,200 miles in a bullock wagon and went as far inland as the Himalaya mountains. In the province of Orissa he resided six months close to the Temple of Juggernaut. After his return to Utah he accompanied President Brigham Young on an exploring expedition to Salmon River (now in Idaho), and the following winter participated in the Echo Canyon campaign. In the spring of 1861 he left Salt Lake City on a mission to South Africa. In crossing the plains he assisted Captain Ira Eldredge in taking charge of fifty wagons to the Missouri River, and was ninety-nine days making the voyage from London, England, to Cape Town, South Africa. He presided over the mission until 1864, when he returned to Utah. At the Missouri River he assisted in the immigration of the Saints and acted as assistant captain to Warren S. Snow in leading the last company of the season (84 wagons) to Zion. The trip was a severe one, as nearly all the teamsters were inexperienced in handling oxen. At home Elder Fotheringham has been a very diligent and zealous Sunday school worker, spending about forty years of his life, more or less, in the Sunday school service. He has also labored considerably as a home missionary, and is at present filling a mission in the St. George Temple from Beaver Stake as an ordinance worker. Of civil offices he has held quite a number; thus he has acted as alderman of Lehi City, mayor of Beaver City, probate clerk of Beaver county for sixteen years, a justice of the peace of Beaver precinct, and been a member of of the Utah Territorial legislature from Beaver and adjacent counties. In his youth he learned the trade of ship carpenter and after his arrival in Utah he helped to build the old Tithing Office in G. S. L. City, and other buildings. Of ecclesiastical positions at home he has acted as a president of the Forty-fourth Quorum of Seventy, was Stake tithing clerk in the Beaver Stake twenty-four years, acted as a member of the High Council and as first counselor in the presidency of the Beaver Stake, and was also Sunday school superintendent twenty years. He married his first wife in April, 1856, a second wife May 25, 1857, and a third wife Oct. 10, 1865. By these three wives he has had thirty children, namely, eighteen sons and twelve daughters. On account of his family relations he served three months in the Utah penitentiary as a prisoner for conscience sake. Through the providence of God he was saved from a long term of imprisonment later on. Elder Fotheringham is one of the staunch Elders of the Church who has ever been true to his God, to his friends, and to his family, and is universally beloved and respected by all who know him.
