Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Gibbons, Andrew Smith

Gibbons, Andrew Smith, one of the Pioneers of Utah, was born March 12, 1825, in Ohio. When an infant his father gave him away to a family by the name of Smith, a relative of` the Prophet Joseph Smith. This circumstance, no doubt, caused him to become a member of the Church and to become well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph. In 1845 he married Rizpah Knight, a daughter of Bishop Vinson Knight, and left Nauvoo in 1846, at the time of the expulsion of the Saints; the following year he came to the Great Salt Lake Valley as one of the original pioneers under the leadership of Pres. Brigham Young. He returned east the same year to his family in Iowa and arrived in the Valley a second time in 1852. He located in Bountiful, Davis county, and later moved to Lehi, Utah county, whence he, in 1854, was called to Iron county to strengthen the settlements which were being made there at that time. Here he became identified with the Indian mission, then in charge of Jacob Hamblin. In 1858, in company with ten other men, he visited the Pueblo Indian villages, east of the Colorado river; in making this journey they traveled through a country then unknown to white men, and crossed the Colorado river at the old Ute Crossing. In the spring of 1861 Bro. Gibbons moved to St. George, where he was elected sheriff of Washington county. In 1865 he was called to the Muddy (now in Nevada) by Apostle Erastus Snow, to locate and mediate between the white and the red men. In 1868 he represented Piute county, Arizona, in the Arizona legislature, which met at Tucson. This necessitated a very long and dangerous journey through a country infested with hostile Indians. At the breaking up of the settlements on the Muddy, Brother Gibbons moved to Glendale, Kane county, Utah, from which point he made several trips of exploration with Jacob Hamblin and James S. Brown into Arizona and New Mexico, looking to the colonization of Saints in those territories. In 1880 he moved to St. Johns, Arizona, where he passed through the trying scenes connected with the settlement of that place. At the time of his death, which occurred at St. Johns, Feb. 9, 1886, he was a member of the High Council of the Eastern Arizona Stake of Zion. He died, as he lived, a faithful Latter-day Saint.
