Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Perkins, Abraham Junius

Perkins, Abraham Junius, a prominent Elder in the Layton Ward, St. Joseph Stake, Arizona, was born Aug. 11, 1848, in Harris Grove, Pottawattamie county, Iowa, the son of Abraham Perkins and Sarah Loring. The father died when Abraham was only ten months old. Through the assistance of friends his mother emigrated to Utah in 1853 with her two children, and soon afterwards she became the wife of Henry Harriman, one of the first seven presidents of Seventies, who in 1861 was called on the southern Utah mission. Bro. Harriman went there with his whole family, consisting of himself, three wives and seven children. The mother of the subject of this sketch being a weakly woman succumbed to the hardships of pioneer life and died Dec. 20, 1865. In 1863 Abraham went to San Bernardino, California, to live with relatives. In 1867 he returned to Utah with his aunt and went on to the Missouri River with Crisman Bros. Afterwards he spent sometime in Nevada, but returned to Utah in 1871, and after being ordained an Elder he located in Washington, southern Utah. In 1872 (July 23rd) he married Elzabeth Gubler. During the construction of the Temple in St. George, he was one of the permanent workers on the building. In 1877 he was called on the Arizona mission and arrived at Sunset, or Lot Smith's camp, on the Little Colorado river, in May of that year. Here he joined the United Order, but the lower valley of the Little Colorado not being very suitable for settlements the Saints moved further up and Elder Perkins located in Taylor, on Silver Creek. The first white child born at that settlement, Feb. 25, 1879, was his. Here he also engaged in successful farming and milling. In 1887 he went to Utah with his wife, who had become somewhat demented, and after spending eight years in the asylum at Provo, she died. Brother Perkins returned to Arizona, and was soon afterwards called on a mission to the Apache Indians. He was appointed by the government officials to take charge of a small flouring mill, near Fort Apache, belonging to the Indians. While grinding grain for the Indians he gained great influence over them, which caused the government officials to become jealous and order him to leave the Indian reservation forthwith. Complying with the order, he went to the Gila Valley, where he ran a flouring mill for Pres. Christopher Layton. In 1889 he visited Utah and for the last time saw his wife at the Provo asylum. In 1889 he married Hannah Salisbury. In 1890 (March 22nd) he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Francis M. Lyman and set apart to act as second counselor to Bishop John Welker; later (May 27, 1893) he was set apart as first counselor to the same Bishop. When the St. Joseph Stake was reorganized (Feb. 1, 1898) he was set apart as a member of the High Council, which position he filled about two years. He was then released to go to Sonora, Mexico. From this mission, however, he was released because of his age. Elder Perkins has acted as Ward clerk of the Layton Ward since October, 1899, has been Sunday school teacher of the theological and other classes for many years, and also superintendent of the Ward religion classes. He is the father of nine children, four by his first and five by his second wife.
