Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Welker, James R.

Welker, James R., Bishop of Layton Ward, St. Joseph Stake, Arizona, was born Jan. 25, 1866, in Bloomington, Bear Lake county, Idaho, the son of Adam Welker and Agnes Dock. He lived with his parents in Bloomington until 1883, during which time he received a common school education. In 1875 (Sept. 5th) he was baptized by Peter Greenhalgh and confirmed by George Osmond. In the fall of 1883, together with his parents, he moved to Safford, Graham county, Arizona, and thus became one of the pioneers in helping to settle that part of the country. Soon after his arrival in Arizona he was called, in company with other men, to follow a band of Indians who had stolen a number of horses belonging to the citizens. During the night they overtook three of the Indians and secured about twenty-five head of horses, but failing to get all the animals, they pursued the savages until ten o'clock the next day, when they were ambushed by the Indians, and two of the boys, Lorenzo and Seth Wright, were shot and killed, while riding side by side of Brother Welker. He was ordained a Deacon in 1884, and labored faithfully in that calling until Jan. 24, 1886, when he was ordained an Elder and set apart to preside over the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Layton Ward. In 1886 he was ordained a Seventy and set apart as a president in the 89th quorum of Seventy by Seymour B. Young; two years later he became the senior president of said quorum. Sept. 16, 1886, he married Louisa Peel. In 1894-1897 he filled a mission to the Tongan Islands, where he labored for two years and eight months, during which time he visited many islands and encountered a variety of dangers on the sea. On one occasion, when visiting some of the islands of the Tongan group, he was caught in a great storm, during which the boat sprang a leak and he and his missionary companion, Elder Robert A. Smith, together with the boat crew, drifted to the Fiji Islands, after having been on the water eight days. Elder Welker finished his mission as president of the Tongan Islands and arrived home May 11, 1897. After his return he engaged in mercantile business. In 1898 (Feb. 5th) he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop of the Layton Ward by Apostle John Henry Smith.
