Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Christiansen, Hans Jacob

Christiansen, Hans Jacob, special missionary to the Scandinavian Saints was born Jan. 9, 1848, at St. Jorgensbjerg, near Roeskilde, Denmark, the son of Christian Hansen and Margrethe Jacobsen. He was reared by his grandparents, and his grandfather being a sailor, Hans became attached to the sea from his early youth. Having a great desire to see the world, he hired out, when about fifteen years old, to make a voyage with the bark "Valkyrien" as a deck boy, and with that vessel he visited different parts of the world, including America. In South America he witnessed a cruel treatment of the black slaves by their white masters (the Portugeese), and on one occasion he had a narrow escape from being devoured by a shark. In New York he was taken sick with typhoid fever and robbed of all his money and clothing. After recovering from his sickness, he hired out to a big American bark, with which he visited the northern part of North America and had throughout a very hard experience before he returned to his native land. His father, who had been an employee of the Roeskilde post office for twenty-seven years, died at the age of forty-seven years, leaving his wife and six children; Hans, the oldest son, now about eighteen years of age, succeeded to his father's place in the post office. At the age of twenty-one he entered the Danish army and served a part of his time as a corporal. While yet in the army he married Nikoline Emilie Steffensen, who died after having given birth to a little girl. In the meantime his mother became a convert to "Mormonism" and under her influence Hans began to investigate the principles of the restored Gospel, believed and was baptized Dec. 26, 1871, in Copenhagen, by Elder Martin Willumsen; he was confirmed by Anthon H. Lund. Six months later, in June, 1872, he emigrated to Utah, together with 396 other emigrants, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Nevada". On the voyage he acted as captain of the guard and arrived in Salt Lake City July 17, 1872. He now learned the harness and saddle business and in October following his arrival in Utah he married Laura M. Larsen, and was on the same day (Oct. 28, 1872) ordained an Elder. In 1873 he moved with his family to Logan, Cache county, where he worked at his trade and soon became a possessor of a little home of his own. He also took a prominent part in Church matters and acted as a Ward teacher. In 1875 (Jan. 17th) he married Elise Haraldsen, and in 1880-1882 he filled a mission to Scandinavia where he labored in Copenhagen conference, first as president of a branch and later as president of the conference. During this mission he endured many hardships and trials, witnessed numerous marvelous manifestations of the power of God, and baptized eighty-five persons. Returning home from this mission in August, 1882, he led a company of emigrating Scandinavian Saints to Liverpool. After his return to Logan he engaged again in his former occupation and responding to a call he labored as an ordinance worker in the Logan Temple from May 30, 1884, to March 23, 1885. In 1883 (Aug. 30th) he married Inger Marie Larsen, and in 1885-1888 he filled a second mission to Scandinavia, during which he presided over the Christiania conference (comprising at that time all Norway) for upwards of three years. On this mission he was summoned before the courts several times for having administered the ordinances of the Gospel; he also encountered considerable opposition on the part of the Lutheran clergy, but was blessed with the privilege of adding one hundred and twenty-six souls to the Church by baptism. Returning home in July, 1888, he had charge of a company of emigrating Saints, which crossed the ocean in the steamship "Wisconsin". Once more at his home in Logan, he engaged in mercantile business with Bishop Isaac Smith as partner. In 1893-1895 he filled a third mission to Scandinavia. On the outward journey he visited the world's Fair in Chicago, Illinois, and reached Denmark by way of Holland and Germany. Once more he was made president of the Christiania conference, but he had only been absent from home about a year when the sad news of the demise of his wife Laura was received, and one week later he was informed that his eldest daughter Emilie was dead. This filled his heart with inexpressible grief, as it all came to him so unexpectedly. On this mission he visited all the branches of the Church along the coast of Norway between Christiania and Tromso and beheld the midnight sun. After a successful mission and after baptizing sixty-four persons, he returned home in August, 1895, in charge of another company of emigrating Saints. While laboring as a missionary in Norway he became very much attached to the inhabitants of that country. In 1897 (Nov. 14th) he was set apart as one of the presidents of the 32nd quorum of Seventy. From Nov. 14, 1897, to June 30, 1898, he acted as superintendent of the religion class in the Logan Sixth Ward. In May, 1898, he was called to preside over the Scandinavian meetings in Logan, having previously acted as counselor to his predecessor, Niels C. Edlefsen. When the 119th quorum of Seventy was organized and located in the Sixth and Seventh Wards, Logan, Feb. 7, 1899, Elder Christiansen was chosen as senior president of the same. In 1902 he removed with his family to Salt Lake City, where he still resides. In 1902-1905 he filled a fourth mission to Scandinavia and labored as president of the Copenhagen conference. Having the privilege of laboring together with some of his best friends such as Anthon L. Skanchy, C. D. Fjeldsted and Andrew Jenson, he enjoyed his labors very much. He visited all the branches of the conference, made a host of friends and baptized fifty-four persons. In 1905 he made a business trip to California, and in October of the same year he was called to labor as a special missionary among the Scandinavian Saints in all the Stakes of Zion. He has recently been ordained a High Priest, and since the beginning of 1906 he has acted as assistant editor of "Bikuben".
