Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Sorensen, Andrew Philip

Sorensen, Andrew Philip, first counselor in the Bishopric of Moab, San Juan Stake, was born April 4, 1861, in Denmark, emigrated, when two years old, with his parents, to Utah, and settled in Smithfield, Cache county, where his youth was spent. He attended the district schools as a boy, and also the B. Y. College at Logan for two seasons; after that he attended the University of Deseret two years and graduated in the normal department in 1885. He followed the profession of school teaching for eight years and then engaged in mercantile business, which he followed for ten years. His health failing, he engaged in outdoor work and has since been working on his farm in Moab. His parents being poor, he was obliged to make his own way through school, borrowing money with which to pay his tuition, and defray his other expenses, returning the same as he earned it by teaching. Elder Sorensen has filled various positions in the Church, commencing, when fourteen years of age, with the office of counselor to the president of a Deacons quorum. He also acted as secretary of Sunday schools and teacher of theological classes in the various Wards where he taught district schools and acted as secretary and president of Y. M. M. I. A. in several places. In 1889 (Aug. 20th) he was ordained an Elder by Robert A. Bain, and married Mary A. Hammond, daughter of Pres. Francis A, Hammond, Aug. 28, 1889. He moved to Bluff, San Juan county in 1888, where he taught school for four years, filling various callings in the Sabbath schools, Y. M. M. I. A., and also acted as Ward teacher. He then moved to Montecello, San Juan county, where he was ordained a High Priest Aug 21, 1893, and set apart as first counselor to Bishop F. I. Jones. In 1896 he moved to Moab, Grand county, where he was chosen first counselor to Bishop D. A. Johnson in the spring of 1897. When the Bishopric of Moab was reorganized Jan. 7, 1904, he was chosen as first counselor to Bishop John P. Larsen, which position he still occupies. Besides the almost continuous work in the ministry, Elder Sorensen has filled a number of civil offices. Thus he acted as county attorney in San Juan county, superintendent of district schools and as the representative of that county in the first Utah State legislature. From Grand county he has also been sent as a representative to the legislature and has served as county assessor, member of the town council, probation officer of Grand county, etc.
