Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lauritzen, Jacob Marinus

Lauritzen, Jacob Marinus, Stake superintendent of Sunday schools of the Sevier Stake, was born Sept. 9, 1869, in Aalborg, Denmark, the son of Niels Lauritzen and Larsine Jacobsen. He was baptized June 2, 1878, by Elder Anders Frederiksen and emigrated to Utah at the age of nine years, in company with his younger brother John, and located at Richfield, where he has resided ever since. From his early youth he has been active in Church work. He has held every grade of Priesthood, having been ordained a Deacon Dec. 17, 1884; a Teacher in December, 1886; an Elder April 29, 1888, by Elder William H. Seegmiller; a Seventy May 26, 1888, by Apostle John Henry Smith, and a High Priest Sept. 8, 1907, by Elder Henry N. Hayes. For twelve years he served as secretary of the 36th quorum of Seventy. He has been an active worker in the auxiliary organizations, but more especially in the Sunday school, having acted as teacher, secretary, treasurer, librarian, assistant Ward superintendent, Ward superintendent, assistant Stake superintendent and Stake superintendent. In 1899-1901 he labored successfully as a missionary in Scandinavia, his principal field of labor being the Trondhjem conference, Norway. From June 29, 1902, to March 18, 1906, he served as Stake clerk an historian and clerk of the High Council of the Sevier Stake. Jan. 27, 1904, he was set apart as Stake superintendent of Sunday schools of the Sevier Stake by Elder Joseph S. Horne. Elder Lauritzen received his education in the public schools and in the Sevier Stake Academy. In January, 1889, he was engaged as principal of the Richfield Public Schools, which position he occupied for a period of two years. He has filled a number of civil positions in Sevier county, among them being that of county recorder one term, county treasurer two terms, referee in bankruptcy four years, justice of the peace for Richfield city six years, manager of the Sevier Valley Abstract Company and manager of the Richfield Real Estate Exchange. In the fall of 1906 he purchased the furniture business of Joseph S. Horne & Co. and six months later incorporated the business under the name of the People's Emporium. He has taken an active part in the development of the Sevier Valley, being largely instrumental in inducing the State to undertake the building of the Piute Reservoir and Canal by means of which 20,000 acres of land in Sevier Valley will be irrigated. He was one of the organizers of the Western Construction Company, which now has the contract from the State to build the Piute Canal. In 1889 (June 19th) he married Annie Pratt Gardner, who has borne him nine children, five boys and four girls.
