Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Hansen, Niels

Hansen, Niels, Bishop of Aetna Ward, Alberta Stake of Zion, Canada, was born at Trostrup, Island of Fyen, Denmark, Aug. 11, 1832, being the sixth child of Hans Jorgensen and Mares Christine Petersen. They were strict Lutherans and the boy was nurtured in that faith. When seven years old he was attacked by scrofula, which clung to him for eight years, thus interfering with his schooling. He finally recovered, and although not advanced in book learning his mind was alert and concentrative. Being unable to engage in laborious work he became a tailor, and while so engaged he met for the first time a "Mormon" preacher in the person of Elder William O. Anderson. Upon hearing him the young man was at once convinced of the truth of the utterances and was baptized in December, 1851, his parents and several others doing likewise. Friends then became enemies and persecution became so active that the brethren for a season had to vacate. In 1852 he was ordained a Teacher and later that year he went with his brother to Copenhagen to work, the same year being called on a mission to Norway, proceeding with others to his field of labor at once. At Moss the authorities sought the Elders' expulsion, having previously expelled Brother Folkman, an associate; but Brother Niels so vigorously protested and defended his rights with such convincing argument that finally he was permitted to stay and much good work was done. After varying experiences embracing a seven months' term of imprisonment, the latter part of which was greatly mitigated through unforeseen friendly intervention. At the conference held in Copenhagen in August, 1853, he was ordained an Elder and appointed to preside over Trostrup-Korup branch, where he remained a year and was then sent to take charge of Hvissel and Grejs branches in Jutland. In the fall of 1855 he was released and sailed from Liverpool December 12th, following. The ship was eleven weeks on the ocean, and was the means of saving a shipwrecked crew of forty-two persons. The company landed in New York and went to St. Louis, Mo., where in April, 1856, he was called to go on a mission to some Norwegian settlers in Clay county, Mo., after which he crossed the plains, reaching Salt Lake City, Sept. 20, 1856. Circumstances necessitated various residences thereafter, but finally he located in Cache county. In 1862 he was ordained a Seventy, joining the 64th quorum. When Cache Stake was organized in 1877 he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as a High Councilor. In 1886 he was called to preside over Providence Ward and was ordained a Bishop by John W. Taylor. In October of that year he was gathered in by the U. S. marshal's dragnet on the prevailing charge-unlawful cohabitation-and subjected to repeated trials, but all to no purpose; they could not convict. In 1889 he went to Alberta, locating in Cardston, where he became so popular that when a man was wanted to open up the Manitoba mission, the lot fell on him and he served the cause well and faithfully; upon returning he was appointed Bishop of Aetna Ward, which position he held until his death, which occurred at Aetna, Dec. 13, 1902. Under his supervision the Ward had increased numerically and flourished spiritually. His labors were incessant and invaluable. His whitened hair and beard gave him a venerable and fatherly appearance, which the Saints admired and respected. He left a good family.
