Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Christensen, Lars Peter

Christensen, Lars Peter, a prominent Elder of the Sevier Stake of Zion, was born Jan. 17, 1837, in Gunderup, Vreiley parish, Hjorring amt, Denmark, the son of Christen Larsen and Gjertrud Hansen. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized Sept. 8, 1858, by Elder Jens C. Ostenkjar. His parents rejected the Gospel, but the son rented a blacksmith shop and soon earned means which enabled him to emigrate to Zion. Soon after his baptism he was ordained an Elder and appointed to preside over the Taars branch. Later he presided over the Harritslev branch. He also labored one year as a local missionary and baptized eleven persons. In 1861 he emigrated to Utah, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Monarch of the Sea," and the plains in Captain Samuel Woolley's Independent Company. After spending about one and a half years in Davis county, he settled in Milton, Morgan county, where he presided over that branch of the Church about ten years, and also acted as a Bishop's counselor. In 1875 he removed with his family to Richfield, Sevier county, where he still resides. Having previously been ordained a member of the 65th quorum of Seventy, he was ordained a High Priest in July, 1877. For twelve years he acted as counselor to Bishop Poul Poulsen in Richfield First Ward, and was president of the United Order in Richfield from November, 1876, till the order was dissolved in March, 1881. In 1881-1883 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, during which he presided over the Hjorring branch one year, and baptized 41 persons; after that he presided another year over the Aalborg conference. Returning home in 1883, he brought with him from Aalborg conference one hundred and twenty-two emigrants. In 1861 (May 16th) he married Anna Marie Lee, who bore him eight children; in 1866 (Sept. 8th) he married Anna Marie Pedersen (generally called Mary), who is the mother of nine children, and in 1883 (Dec. 13th) he married Karen J. A. Jacobsen, who is the mother of eight children. In 1889 he served three months in the Utah penitentiary for unlawful cohabitation. Subsequently, in order to avoid arrest, he went into exile and established himself as a blacksmith in Pioche, Nevada, and later at Delamare. While visiting his families occasionally, he was twice arrested by U. S. deputies, but was discharged on both occasions. He returned to his families at Richfield in 1898, but on the instigation of enemies he was again arrested and fined for unlawful cohabitation. Bro. Christensen is the grandfather of fifty children and has done considerable labor in the Temple for the dead.
