Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Goold, Samuel William

Goold, Samuel William, Bishop of Monroe Ward, Sevier Stake, Utah, was born Sept. 3, 1845, in Pontenwindde, Monmouthshire, England, the son of Robert Franklin Goold and Emma Watts. He received early religious training from his parents who were Baptists, but about 1856, together with his parents, he joined the Church and became a member of the Abersychan branch of the Herefordshire conference. In 1857 he was ordained a Deacon; later he was ordained a Teacher, still later a Priest and finally an Elder. For a number of years he led the singing in the Abersychan branch. In 1867 he emigrated to America and arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 5, 1867. He located in Washington, southern Utah, where he labored as a Ward teacher, Sunday school teacher and a member of the Ward choir. After three years' residence in Washington he moved to St. George, where he resided the following ten years, laboring as a gardener for Pres. Brigham Young. He testifies that Pres. Young was the most honorable man he ever knew, always good as his word; whenever he made a promise or an agreement with any one, he would always fulfill it to the very letter. He was associated with the President at his dining table, in his parlors, prayer circles and private office, and never heard or saw anything unworthy of a man of God. His example was worthy of imitation in every instance. In 1873 (July 28th) Elder Goold married Miss Sarah Ann Lewis, late of the Abersychan branch, and continuing his residence in St. George, he worked considerably on the Temple and was present at its dedication. While a member of the Third Ward, St. George, he served as a Ward teacher, Sunday school teacher and leader of the Ward choir. In 1877 (July 15th) he was appointed superintendent of the Third Ward Sunday school, which position he filled for two and a half years. He then moved into the St. George Fourth Ward, where he served as first assistant superintendent in the Sunday school, Ward teacher and member of the choir. In the spring of 1880 he moved to Bellview, where he remained three years. In the spring of 1883 he moved to Graves' Valley, now called Hanksville (in Wayne county, Utah), being one of the first pioneers to that place. He only remained there a few months. In 1883 he moved to Monroe, Sevier county, where he at once became associated with ecclesiastical labors and acted as a Sunday school teacher, teacher of the Theological class, and as assistant Sunday school superintendent for five years, being appointed to that position Dec. 2, 1889. In 1893 (June 4th) he was appointed superintendent of the Ward Sunday school, which position he filled for eight years, serving at the same time as Ward teacher, member of the Ward choir and Sunday school choir. In 1884 (Oct. 26th) he was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the 41st quorum of Seventy, and assistant secretary. The following year (March 28th) he was set apart as one of the seven presidents of said quorum. In 1894 (Dec. 16th) he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Orson Magleby, which position he filled for seven years. After Bishop Magleby's resignation, Brother Goold was appointed acting Bishop of the Monroe Ward, Dec. 15, 1901. Soon afterwards (Dec. 29th) he was ordained Bishop by Apostle Rudger Clawson. Bishop Goold has been a Sunday school worker for forty years and has officiated extensively in the ordinances of the Gospel. He has also been entrusted with many civil offices and has been a public servant throughout for forty-five years. He has a family of nine children, three sons and six daughters.
