Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Richards, Joseph Hill

Richards, Joseph Hill, a Patriarch in the Snowflake Stake, Arizona, was born Dec. 5. 1841, in Canada, the son of John Richards and Agnes Hill. His parents, who were of Scotch descent, belonged to the Church when the subject of this sketch was born and gathered with the Saints to Nauvoo, Ill., in 1842; they passed through the persecutions, trials and hardships which befell the Saints at that time and assisted in building the Nauvoo Temple. The father was among the first of the exiles who left Nauvoo for the west as a pioneer early in February, 1846, and crossed the Mississippi river on the ice. Returning to Nauvoo he started with the family in July of the same year. They stopped temporarily at Winter Quarters and in Iowa, until 1851, when they reached the Valley. Joseph was then nearly ten years old. With his parents he became a pioneer to Cache Valley, Utah, and assisted in building the first house in the old fort at Mendon. He was a member of a company known as "minute men," whose duty it was to guard the property and the lives of the settlers against the raid of the Indians, and was often exposed to great dangers. In 1864 he made a trip to the Missouri river as a Church teamster after emigrants. In February. 1876, he was called on a mission to Arizona, and located on the Little Colorado river, where he assisted in building forts, dams and water ditches and where he has had thirty years experience in trying to solve the very difficult problem of controlling the waters of that treacherous stream, the Little Colorado. In 1892-1893 he filled a mission to Great Britain, presiding over the Scottish conference a part of the time. In September, 1878, he was ordained a Bishop and acted in that office ten years; during that time he presided over the Little Colorado Stake nearly three years. When the Snowflake Stake was organized in Dec., 1887, he was called to the position of second counselor in the Stake presidency, which position he held until Feb. 10. 1907, when he was ordained a Patriarch. Elder Richards holds the commission of captain in the first militia of Arizona, served as postmaster in St. Joseph, Arizona, twenty eight years and a half, and has also held the offices of county treasurer and county commissioner.
