Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Smith, Samuel Francis

Smith, Samuel Francis, president of the Snowflake Stake, was born Nov. 21, 1873, at Parowan, Iron county, Utah, the son of Jesse N. Smith and Emma S. West. His father was a son of Silas, who was a son of Asahel Smith, the common ancestor of the Smiths of early Church history. On his mother's side his ancestors were thrifty, sturdy Southerners, though his grandfather, Samuel West, was the only member of the West family to accept the Gospel and cast his fortune with an unpopular people. His parents were both good, noble people. Samuel Francis is the youngest of his mother's nine children, while he numbers the fifteenth of his father's forty-four. At the age of six years, or in the spring of 1880, he left his birthplace and with his parents moved to Arizona, settling in Snowflake, Apache county, since called Navajo county. He was baptized by his father Dec. 9, 1881, and in due time he received the Priesthood and magnified his calling in every step of the same. From 1889 to 1898 he held numerous positions of honor and trust, such as secretary and counselor in the Ward Mutual, teacher in the Ward and Sabbath school, Ward clerk, and secretary of the Snowflake and Taylor Irrigation Company. When but a small lad he became of much use on his father's farm; he did farm work in the summer and attended school in winter, acquiring thus considerable knowledge. He attended the common district school; also the Snowflake Stake Academy. In 1898-99 he filled a mission to the Southern States. After reaching Chattanooga, Tenn., he was appointed to labor in the State of Mississippi and served a short time as first counselor to Conference President Osmer D. Flake. Early in May, 1899, he contracted a severe case of malarial fever from which he did not recover until after reaching home. After his return home he was chosen as second assistant superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Snowflake Stake. In February, 1900, he was called to act as junior president of the 83rd quorum of Seventy and also as Stake Sunday school secretary. April 5, 1900, he married Miss Lula J. Hatch, daughter of Lorenzo H. Hatch, in the Salt Lake Temple. He taught school very successfully for several years, then his occupation became varied, such as farming and clerking in the A. C. M. I., the largest business house in this part of Arizona. He was appointed Stake tithing clerk in January of 1905, which position he filled with honor, until Feb. 11, 1907, when, at the quarterly conference of the Snowflake Stake, he was appointed and sustained as president of the Snowflake Stake, a place made vacant by the demise of his honored father. He was ordained a High Priest by Apostles Jno. H. and Hyrum M. Smith. His labors in life so far have brought him in close contact with men of different views and abilities, thus enabling him to study men's character. Reared in a new country and in a large family, he has learned valuable lessons in economy and self-denial. Industry and thrift characterize his everyday labors. He is a kind, considerate husband and father, obliging and kind to friend and stranger, and has gained the respect and confidence of the honorable men and women over whom he is called to preside.
