Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Fish, Joseph

Fish, Joseph, a High Councilor in the Snowflake Stake, Arizona, was born June 27, 1840, at Twelve Mile Grove, Will county, Illinois, the son of Horace Fish and Hannah Leavitt. Horace Fish was born Jan. 6, 1799. The grandfather, Joseph Fish, was a native of New Hampshire, and was born April 17, 1770, a son of Nathan Fish, whose birth occurred in Massachusetts. The Fish family descends from English ancestry, but has long been identified with American history, and one of the name served under Captain Churchill in King Philip's war. Several members of his grandmother's family served in the colonial army during the Revolution and fought under Morgan as sharp-shooters, assisting in the capture of General Burgoyne at Saratoga. One of his uncles (Joseph Fish) enlisted in the United States army during the war of 1812-15, but died soon after. The boyhood days of Horace Fish were spent in Canada, where his father resided from early manhood until death; one branch of the Fish family resided in the State of New York. In 1836 the mother, Hannah Fish, joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and shortly after the family with many relatives started to join the Saints in the west, but before gaining the object of their journey the Saints were driven out of Missouri, and the family located in Will county, Ill., for a time. Here the subject of this sketch was born and the father Horace was baptized. In the fall of 1840 the family moved to Nauvoo, where the father built a home in the eastern part of the city, rented lands from Bishop Edward Hunter, and worked for some time on the Temple. He went through the hardships that the people endured in building up that city and guarding against their enemies. When the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo came, the family followed, crossing the Mississippi May 1, 1846. Not having team or an outfit for moving, the journey across the State of Iowa was slow and attended with many hardships; they, however, reached the banks of the Missouri river, early in 1847, where they remained until the spring of 1850. Here Joseph, the subject of this sketch, was baptized by Brother Clark in June, 1849, and while here attended school for a period during the winter months. In the spring of 1850 the family started for the Valley, traveling in Milo Andrus' company, which was the first of that season. On arriving in the Valley they located at Centerville, Davis county. Brother John C. L. Smith, who had married Sarah, the second daughter of the family, being called to settle in Iron county, the family moved to that place, starting in the fall of 1852; but storms came on so severe that they spent the winter at Provo and continued their journey in the spring of 1853. The family located at Parowan. Horace Fish died July 6, 1870, at his daughter's, at Beaver, and was buried at Parowan. His wife Hannah passed away some six years later. They had six children (Julia, Sarah, Jane, Joseph, Anna Maria and Franklin R.) Joseph Fish was ordained an Elder by F. T. Whitney March 11, 1856; ordained a Seventy by W, C. McGregor Feb 22, 1865, and ordained a High Priest and set apart as a member of the High Council by Pres. Joseph F. Smith March 14, 1869. He has occupied the position of High Councilor most of the time since that period. March 22, 1859, he married Mary Campbell Steele, daughter of John and Catherine (Campbell) Steele. From Scotland, their native land, this family came to America and in 1846 enlisted with the Mormon Battalion. Turning off at Santa Fe they went to Pueblo and the next year entered Great Salt Lake Valley close behind the Pioneers. Mary C. died Dec. 11, 1874, leaving six children, four daughters and two sons. In 1869 (July 26th) Bro. Fish married Eliza Jane Lewis, daughter of David and Elizabeth (Carson) Lewis. (Brother Lewis was one of the few survivors of the Haun's Mill massacre). Eliza never had any children of her own, but she merits a great reward for her devotion to her husband and the tender care and attention she gave to his children to whom she was even more than a mother. During Bro. Fish's residence in Parowan of twenty-five years he was engaged in a variety of labors, such as lumbering, farming, mercantile business, etc. Nor was his labors in the Gospel neglected. He often acted as teacher and labored in the Sunday school. From 1865 to 1871, during the Indian campaigns, he was a member of the Utah militia, serving in the Tenth Iron County Regiment, commanded by Col. William H. Dame. At first he held commission as lieutenant, later being promoted to the rank of major and aide-de-camp to the colonel. While in the service he took part in a few skirmishes with the Indians. After studying law he was admitted to the bar in October, 1874, and served for some time as justice of the peace; he was also treasurer of Iron county for one term, and served as county clerk for some time. May 1, 1876, he married Adelaide Smith, daughter of Jesse N. and Margaret (West) Smith. By this marriage he had three sons. Dec. 3, 1878, he started to Arizona with a part of his family and in January, 1879, located at Snowflake; the same fall he returned to Utah for the rest of the family. During the latter part of 1880 he had charge of the commissary department for John W Young, contractor in building the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad through the western part of New Mexico and eastern Arizona. In 1881 he became connected with the Arizona Co-operative Mercantile Institution (helping to start that business); this has claimed most of his time ever since, with the exception of some four years spent in Mexico and on the Gila. In 1883 (April 19th) he married Julia Ann (York) Reidhead. The fruits of this marriage has been eleven children; five of them, however, died while infants. On account of the persecutions that the Saints underwent in 1884, Elder Fish and many others went to Mexico, where he remained a year; then returned and resumed his labors in the store at Holbrook. In 1893, with a part of his family, he went to the Gila Valley, where he entered into the mercantile business with I. E. D. Zundel. While there he was elected on the Republican ticket, a member of the house of the eighteenth Arizona legislature, and while in that body served as chairman of the committee on irrigation and a member of the judiciary and ways and means committee. While in the Gila Valley he also visited the different settlements as a home missionary. In 1896 he returned to Holbrook where he again took up the job of bookkeeping for the firm (Arizona C. M. I) . In 1905 he and others were arrested for living with their wives, but through the clemency of Judge Robert E. Sloan they were permitted to send in the fine of $100 without appearing in court; this saved much expense and annoyance. When the Eastern Arizona Stake was organized, he was chosen a member of the High Council. At the organization of that Stake he was also chosen Stake Recorder, a position he held until he moved to the Gila; in this labor he gathered up considerable historical data. In 1896 he began the collection of data for a historical work on Arizona, and later all works and items treating upon the early history of the Rocky Mountain region (down to 1850) that fell in his way were gathered up (nearly 400 volumes of books and magazines). From this collection and great numbers of letters, interviews, etc., etc., he has written a history of Arizona which contains about 700 pages of typewritten matter, but as he lacks the means to get it published, the work may never be presented to the public. About 1902 he commenced on a work which he entitles, "The Pioneers of the Rocky Mountains." This he estimated would take ten years of his spare time; he has already about 800 pages written.
