Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Smith, Joseph West

Smith, Joseph West, a president of the 83rd quorum of Seventy and a resident of Snowflake, Arizona, was born Sept. 6, 1859, at Minersville, Beaver county, Utah, the son of Jesse N. Smith, and Margaret T. West. The greater part of his youth was spent in Parowan. Iron county, Utah, where he was baptized Sept 8, 1867. His first ordination to the Priesthood was to the office of a Teacher and his second ordination to the office of an Elder, May 3, 1877, by Jacob Gates. In 1879 he married Miss Sarah Ellen Marsden, and the young couple immediately set out for Arizona, arriving at Snowflake Dec. 14, 1879, where they have resided ever since. Soon afterwards Bro. Smith was appointed a home missionary, and at the organization of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Eastern Arizona Stake, he was chosen as a member of the presidency, which position he held for many years, and also acted as head teacher in the Snowflake Ward. For four years (from July 1, 1894, to July 1, 1898) he served as government mail contractor and proprietor of the Holbrook and Fort Apache Stage Line. He has served two years as justice of the peace in the Snowflake precinct, and is now officiating as notary public in Navajo county. In 1884 (Dec. 14th) he was set apart as a president of the 83rd quorum of Seventy, which position he still holds. In 1898-1900 he filled a mission to Great Britain, laboring principally in Ireland and at the mission office in Liverpool. Soon after his return, he became an active worker in the Y. M. M. I. A. and was soon appointed Stake superintendent of that organization in the Snowflake Stake, which position he still holds. For thirteen years he taught school in different localities, and in 1886 (Oct. 29th) he married Della Fish. In financial matters Elder Smith has been very successful and has ever exhibited liberality and energy in all matters where the Church was concerned. In January, 1908, he was instrumental in effecting the organization of the Bank of Northern Arizona, at Snowflake, Arizona, and is at present its cashier, and most active supporter.
