Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Shumway, Wilson A.

Shumway, Wilson A., an active Elder in the Snowflake Stake, Arizona, was born April 22, 1877, at Johnson Kane county, Utah, the son of Wilson G. Shumway and Maria Averett. His parents were both of good pioneer stock and his grandfather Shumway was one of the one hundred and forty-three original pioneers who first entered Salt Lake Valley. Elder Shumway, in a sketch prepared for this work, writes: "In 1880 Grandfather Shumway received a call to go to Arizona, and my father and his family at that time, consisting of a wife and two children, preceded him with the cattle, arriving at the small settlement of Concho, Apache county, in the spring of 1881. Here my parents lived for two years, the poorest of the poor pioneers, in a dugout for a house and living on barley bread for a time, but later they were able to build a small log cabin and provided themselves with corn bread and molasses, sandwiched with flour-bread on Sundays. In the spring of 1883 we moved to the town of Shumway, where we still reside. I was six years old at that time, but did not have the advantage of attending the district schools for ten years later. During those ten years there was about as many months taught in terms of two or three months by some of the neighbors. I was baptized in April, 1866, by Israel Call, and was ordained to the different offices of the Lesser Priesthood in their regular order. During these years I was quite an active worker in the auxiliary organizations, acting as the president of the Y. M. M. I. A. from 1897 to June, 1899, when I received a call to go on a mission. I was ordained an Elder July 23, 1899, by Prest. Jesse N. Smith and started the next day on my mission, in company with Elder Chas. H. Ballard of Snowflake. We went by way of Salt Lake City, where I had the privilege of going through the Temple and being ordained a Seventy and set apart for my mission by Apostle George Teasdale. I arrived in Brooklyn, New York, the mission headquarters, Aug. 15, 1899, and was assigned to the West Pennsylvania conference, where I labored as a canvassing Elder until January, 1901, when I was taken ill with the typhoid fever. After a long and severe illness at Clearfield, Clearfield county, I took the train for the conference headquarters at West Elizabeth, where I labored as conference clerk until I was honorably released to return home in September, 1901. Like many other returned Elders I can say the time spent in the mission field was the best part of my life. After my return home I was placed on the home missionary list and called to act as Stake aid in the Sunday schools, one of the superintendency of religion classes and also in Ward capacities. I have spent my winters in teaching school and in the summer I have worked on the farm. In 1905 I was married in the Salt Lake Temple to Miss Ruth Smith, daughter of Pres. Jesse N. Smith and Janet M. Johnson. Our union has been blessed with two children. From that time I have been busily engaged in securing for us a home at Shumway."
