Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Reidhead, John

Reidhead, John, a Patriarch in the Snowflake Stake of Zion, was born June 9, 1825, at Castine, Hancock county, Maine, the son of John Reidhead and Louisa Peabody, both natives of Maine, and descendants of the old Puritan stock. John followed sea-faring life for a number of years and made several voyages to the Banks of Newfoundland. In 1849 he concluded to go west and landed at length in Minnesota, where he engaged in lumbering and farming. Returning to Maine, he married Lucretia Henderson and took her to Minnesota in the spring of 1850, locating at St. Anthony Falls, where he started the first meat shop; later he lost his property and two of his children by fire. After that loss he and his wife returned to Maine once more, going by way of California and Cape Horn. Later he visited Colorado at the time of the gold excitement at Pike's Peak. While living temporarily in Nebraska he first became acquainted with the "Mormons" and was, together with his wife, baptized at Florence, Nebraska, after which he emigrated to Utah, locating at Provo in the fall of 1860. Here, and subsequently at Richfield and Gunnison, he engaged in mercantile business. In 1861 his wife Lucretia died, after giving birth to six children. In 1862 he married Julia York, who subsequently became the mother of seven of his children. Entering the plural order of marriage he took Sarah Huggins to wife in 1864; she became the mother of two children. In 1876 Elder Riedhead removed to Arizona, and after residing a short time at Showlow he settled permanently at Woodruff, where he still resides. He helped to build the first dam in the Little Colorado river at Woodruff and has taken a most active part in both ecclesiastical and secular matters at that place. In 1898 he was ordained a Patriarch. For years he labored as superintendent of Church schools in Woodruff and as a missionary in Arizona and New Mexico. He has also filled a mission to the Eastern States, and was at one time a president of the 31st quorum of Seventy.
