Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Smith, Azariah

Smith, Azariah, a veteran Elder in the Church, was born Aug. 1, 1828, at Bolyston, Oswego county, New York, the son of Albert Smith and Esther Dutcher. In 1835 the family moved to Ohio, where they joined the Church in 1837, and gathered to Nauvoo, Ill., in 1840, where they resided until the exodus of 1846, during which Azariah, together with his father, joined the "Mormon" Battalion, leaving the mother and three children in the "Camps of Israel", and made the famous overland march to California in that body. After their discharge in 1847, they, with others, traveled north about 500 miles to Sutters Fort, whence they turned east toward Great Salt Lake Valley, but on the way they met an express, informing them that food was scarce in the Valley, so it was considered best for a portion of their number to return to California. Azariah, with one horse and a little food, left his father and went with a small company back to Sutters Fort, where they hired out to a Mr. Marshall, to help build a saw mill in the mountains. While thus employed they found gold in the tail race of the mill; this was Jan. 24, 1848. In the fall of that year Azariah arrived in Great Salt Lake City, where he found his father, mother, two sisters, and a brother. In 1849 (April 10th) he married Camilla Augusta Taylor and the following fall became one of the first settlers of Sanpete Valley, and one of the founders of the present city of Manti, which has been his home ever since. His first wife leaving him in 1855, he married Johanna Maria Christensen Oct. 9, 1871. For many years he was a faithful worker in the Manti Temple, together with his father, who died Oct 21, 1872; Azariah continued his work in the Temple after his father's death, and up to the present he has taken endowments for 2,100 of his dead relatives and friends. In 1903 his second wife died and later the same year he married Sevilla Stoy Mitchell. In 1898 he visited California (together with three others from Utah) as a special invited guest at the Golden State Jubilee held at San Francisco, he being one of the four "Mormon" Battalion boys who first discovered gold in that State fifty years before.
