Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Burton, Thomas Fielding

Burton, Thomas Fielding, a member of the High Council in the Star Valley Stake, was born May 12, 1871, in Ogden, Weber county, Utah, the son of William Walton Burton and Sarah Ann Fielding. In a sketch prepared for this work Elder Burton writes: "My mother was my father's third wife, he having married her two elder sisters-daughters of Joseph Fielding and Hannah Greenwood. I was baptized in 1879 by Henry J. Newman, and confirmed by John Hastings in the Third Ward, Ogden. In 1884 (August 14th) I was ordained a Deacon by John Hastings. About this time the anti-polygamy raid came and my father was compelled to leave home; later on my mother and her family were driven into exile, and vividly do I remember those trying times. July 24, 1886, we left Ogden to make our home in Star Valley. Uinta county, Wyoming where we derived after a tedious journey over a rough country and almost impassable roads. There were but few people who had entered before us. We underwent the trials and hardships incident to Pioneer life in blazing the way for civilization, establishing homes and reclaiming the wilderness. In the fall of 1888 I returned to Ogden and attended school. Shortly after my arrival I was ordained a Teacher by Bishop Thomas J Stevens of the Fourth Ward, and labored as a Ward Teacher until spring, when I returned to Star Valley. Here, also, I was called to labor as a teacher in the Afton Ward after my arrival home, which position I filled for four years when, on August 14, 1892, the Star Valley Stake was organized and I was chosen second counselor to Bishop Charles D. Cazier of the Afton Ward, Archibald Gardner, ex-Bishop of West Jordan Ward, being the first counselor. I was ordained a High Priest and set apart as Bishop's counselor by Joseph F. Smith on the above date. I labored in this capacity for two years. In 1894 (Aug. 12th) the Afton Ward was reorganized with George Waite as Bishop, myself as first and Clarence Gardner as second counselor. I filled this position five years, until August 14, 1899, when Bishop Waite was released and Osborne Low sustained in his stead. In 1899 (Nov. 13th) I was chosen an alternate member of the High Council. In 1898 (June 22nd) I married Alice Maud Call, in the Salt Lake Temple. In the fall of 1901, in accordance with a call from the First Presidency for a Mutual Improvement mission. I left my home for Salt Lake City preparatory to entering upon my labors, and was assigned to labor in the Alberta Stake, Canada. Elder Louis D. King being assigned to labor with me. While laboring in that Stake, I assisted Apostle John W. Taylor in organizing the Raymond Ward with Jesse William Knight as Bishop. In 1903 (Sept 12th) I was set apart as a member of the High Council by Anson V. Call, and still hold this position, besides which I am also a member of the Mutual Improvement and Sunday School Stake boards. I have been blest temporally and spiritually and I feel to give my best efforts in the establishment of God's work in the earth."
