Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Gordon, Robert John

Gordon, Robert John, counselor in the Bishopric of the Stirling Ward, Alberta, Canada, is of Scotch descent, his parents being William and Annie Frater Gordon. His mother, with her little children, came to Utah in the summer of 1863, crossing the plains in a company of ox-teams. Her husband was then presiding over the Glasgow conference and he came to Utah to join his family two years later. The subject hereof was born in Salt Lake City, June 18, 1869. When three years old, his parents moved to Meadowville, Rich county, Utah. While very young he filled the position of secretary of the Primary association there and later was president of the Deacon's quorum. When he was seventeen years old he was ordained an Elder. His boyhood was spent on the farm, where he was instructed in the principles of eternal truth by his faithful parents. At the age of twenty-six he entered the Agricultural College at Logan, Utah, in November, 1895, graduating from the civil engineering department of that institution with the degree of bachelor of science in June, 1899. June 23, 1897, he was married in Logan Temple to Fannie V. Schutt, daughter of Henry Schutt and Eliza Vernon. Immediately after leaving college, he, with his family and his brother James F. and family, went to Canada, filling a call made upon them by President Lorenzo Snow, to assist in colonizing southern Alberta. They settled in Stirling, where they have resided ever since. Feb. 24, 1901, Brother Gordon was appointed president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A., and in September, 1903, he became a Stake aid. Jan. 29, 1905, he was ordained to the office of High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Arthur E. Fawns in the Stirling Ward, which position he now holds. He passed the Canadian government examinations prescribed for those becoming dominion land surveyors and received his commission as such March 12, 1902; recently he received the appointment from the Provincial Government as district surveyor and engineer for southern Alberta. He is a widely known and respected citizen.
