Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Remington, Lydia Ripley Badger

Remington, Lydia Ripley Badger, a prominent Church worker in the Uintah Stake, Utah, was born March 16, 1831 at Charleston, Orleans county, Vermont, the daughter of John Badger and Lydia Chamberlain. Her parents received the Gospel in 1832 and gathered with the Saints to Kirtland, Ohio, in 1856, where Lydia attended school in the upper story of the Temple, and became well acquainted with the Smith family; the oldest brother, Rodney Badger, lived with Hyrum Smith's family and drove Hyrum's carriage team to Missouri. At Far West, Mo., Lydia's father and brother (Rodney) were called out to help protect the Saints against the mob. The Badger family were driven out of Missouri, together with the rest of the Saints, in 1839, and lived for some time at Montrose, Lee county, Iowa, where Lydia was baptized in the spring of 1840 and where her mother subsequently died through exposure, brought about by persecutions. Lydia was present when the corner stones of the Nauvoo Temple were laid in 1841 and often saw the Prophet at the head of the Nauvoo Legion. She came west at the time of the general exodus in 1846. While living with her uncle, Ephraim Badger, seven miles above Winter Quarters, she was married to Jerome N. Remington. After residing temporarily in Missouri her husband, who was sickly, went to the mountains with a sutler's train and returned to Missouri after his wife. They both came to the Valley in 1850. After residing in Salt Lake City ten years, they removed to Paradise. Cache county, in 1860. While residing in Cache Valley, Bro. Remington died, after which Sister Remington worked considerably in the Logan Temple for the dead. She also became an officer in the Relief Societies in Cache Valley from the beginning and continued as a Relief Society officer until 1879, when she, with her family, moved to the White river country, and finally moved to Ashley Valley in 1881. When the Merrill Ward was organized Sept 28, 1884, she was chosen president of the Relief Societies, in which capacity she acted until March, 1888. Her death occurred in Merrill Ward May 9, 1906. She was the mother of twelve children and at the time of her demise the had sixty-two grandchildren and seventy-one great grandchildren. She died in full fellowship in the Church.
