Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Moench, Louis Frederick

Moench, Louis Frederick, a prominent educator and superintendent of Religion Classes in the Weber Stake of Zion, was born July 29, 1847, at Neuffen, Germany, the son of Christian Moench and Elizabeth Barbara Hess. He finished his primary education in the grade schools and then entered a German gymnasium or high school. Like Dr. Maeser, he received the inspiration of teaching from German schools, but was compelled to leave before graduation because his parents emigrated to America. After he came to America his father's straightened circumstances compelled him to struggles for self-education. Under these conditions he had great difficulty to advance, but by hard self-application and by attendance at night schools in the best of institutions these obstacles were overcome. He took a course at Bryant and Stratton's college at Chicago and was acknowledged the best penman of that institution. His high standard in this branch is acknowledged by all who know him. He was on his way to California to teach when he was converted to "Mormonism," and remained in Salt Lake City. In 1868 and 1869 he taught in the first Church school of that city. From 1869 to 1871 he was a teacher in the Deseret University. The next year he came to Ogden. From 1872 to 1902-a period of thirty years-he was connected with the schools in Ogden the longest period of time any one man has been a teacher in the same town in Utah. Professor Moench was principal of the Ogden city schools for nine years, and while holding that position he brought the first school desk into Weber County. He was the first principal of the Central School and for ten years he acted as superintendent of the schools of Weber county. In 1882 the Edmunds law was passed and Professor Moench was debarred from holding office, in consequence of which he was compelled to resign his position. He assisted in founding the Weber Stake Academy and drew the plans for the erection of that institution. He became the first principal and held the position nine years. At first the school had to struggle against adversity for lack of means, but it had a gradual growth and increase until it was acknowledged to be one of the best in the State. Improvements were made at the Academy externally with lawns, flowers, and shrubbery, and internally with apparatus and furniture, until not only the interior of the building was well equipped, but the exterior also presented a most beautiful appearance. Professor Moench was deputy assistant superintendent of Utah Territory under Superintendent John Taylor. He was also a member of the Weber Stake Board of Education. For twenty-five years he was assistant superintendent of Sunday schools to Superintendent Richard Ballantyne, and for five years acted as clerk of the Weber Stake of Zion. He aided in establishing the Religion Classes in this Stake and was superintendent for four years. In 1884 he was called on a mission to Germany. He was absent four years one month and a half, during which time he acted as secretary of the Swiss and German mission and as assistant editor of "Der Stern." For a number of years he was one of the presidents of the 53rd quorum of Seventy, and is now senior president of the 77th quorum of Seventy. Professor Monech was to the north of Utah what Dr. Carl G. Maeser was to the south and Dr. John R. Park to Salt Lake City. He is a natural teacher and his students are found throughout the State, who praise him for his excellent work. His efforts in education place him among the leading educators of Utah.
