Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Tolley, George W.

Tolley, George W., Bishop of Orton Ward, Alberta, Canada, was born at Nephi, Utah, June 27, 1883, being a son of Victor and Sarah Jane Picton Tolley. The boy lived at his birthplace until seven years old, then went with his parents to a farm near Nephi, where he remained until sixteen years of age. He obtained a limited education, attending school a few weeks in the winter until fourteen. After his people moved to Mountain View, Alberta, he attended Sunday school and meetings and was ordained a Teacher, June 27, 1901, by Joseph H. Gold and acted enjoyingly in this calling until appointed to the mission field. He was ordained an Elder Sept. 27, 1902, by Jonathan Hunt. In company with nineteen other Elders on Jan. 11, 1903, he set out for Great Britain on a mission, his assignment being Belfast, Ireland, after eight months being transferred to County Armagh. The people were nearly all Roman Catholics and did not become greatly interested in the labors of the young missionaries; however, it contained gratifying experiences. A man named Alex McLean, who had been deaf for years, was administered to for his affliction and in three days his hearing was completely restored, although not a member of the Church at the time. After working in other parts of the "Emerald Isle," he was transferred to the Leeds conference, being placed with Elder Cecil Woodward in charge of the Halifax branch. His mission terminated with happy remembrances and he set sail for home April 27, 1905, being placed in charge of a company of emigrants at Montreal, Canada. He reached Mountain View in May and had just got work on his farm fairly begun when he received a call to go to Orton and be Bishop of the Ward. He reached there June 24, 1905, and was ordained a High Priest the same day by Henry L. Hinman, Patriarch. Brother Tolley was only twenty-one years old when he became a Bishop, being one of the youngest if not the youngest official of that class in the Church. Notwithstanding this, he has so far failed to observe Apostle Paul's declaration as to the marriage qualification but in other respects is doing good work.
