Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Stevens, Thomas Jordan

Stevens, Thomas Jordan, Bishop of Ogden Fifth Ward, Weber Stake of Zion, Utah, was born Jan. 24, 1848, at Bristol, England, the son of Jacob Stevens and Eliza Symons. He was baptized when about eight years of age, and emigrated to Utah in 1864, crossing the plains in Captain Warren S. Snow's company. Two years after his arrival in Utah (in 1866) he joined the militia, organized for the purpose of defending the people against the pilferings and aggressions of the Indians, and was sent to Sanpete and Sevier counties to assist in quelling uprisings in those sections and to protect the settlers from the depredations then being made. In 1872 he was sent on a mission to Arizona, remaining there about one year. Having previously been ordained a Seventy (1865), he was ordained a High Priest Jan. 21, 1883, by Joseph F. Smith and set apart as a counselor to Bishop, Edwin Stratford, of the Ogden Fourth Ward, and on the organization of the Fifth Ward of Ogden, he became its Bishop and held that office continuously until the time of his death. He was city recorder of Ogden for six years, three consecutive terms, commencing in 1885. Prior to that he had served as sheriff of Weber county. He was for a long time director of the Weber Stake Academy, was also a director of the Utah Loan & Trust Company's bank at Ogden and its cashier until compelled to resign on account of ill health. In politics he was a Republican, and was elected to the first State legislature of Utah. He possessed a well-developed liking for military life, the inclination dating as far back as the sixties, and he served as a member of Governor West's personal staff, being made commissary-general with the rank of colonel. So creditably did he discharge the duties of his office, that Gov. Heber M. Wells, on his succession to the executive chair, reappointed him to the position. Bishop Stevens married Maria Stringham Dec. 27, 1871, and Mercy R. Burton in December, 1885. By these wives he became the father of eleven children. Bishop Jordan died in Ogden Aug. 31, 1900.
