Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Sanderson, Owen Moroni

Sanderson, Owen Moroni, is the son of Henry W. Sanderson and Sarah J. Cole, and was born at Fairview, Sanpete County Utah, Nov. 23, 1863. He was baptized Aug. 6, 1871, by Andrew Rasmussen, at Fairview, where he attended the common schools, and assisted his father on a small farm, and in clerical work as tithing clerk. Oct. 2, 1885, he married Mary Anderson of Fairview, in Logan Temple. He was lessee of the Sanpete Coal and Coke Co. Mine, east of Fairview, and their toll road for two or three years, which he managed very successfully; he also contracted on the Sanpete branch of the Rio Grand Western R. R., and spent a year in the study of law in the office of Richards and Moyle at Salt Lake City. He was ordained a Teacher and later a Seventy by C. D. Fjeldsted and was set apart as one of the presidents of the 26th quorum; he was called to fill a mission to the State of Tennessee. With but two weeks notice he left home Feb. 1, 1895, returning April 1, 1897, having fulfilled a very successful mission, with many pleasing experiences, full of testimony and fruitful of much good; he presided in the Middle Tennessee conference the last year of his labors there and baptized many. On his return he took a course in the B. Y. U. at Provo, and took up the profession of school teaching; he taught in Provo, Oakley (Idaho), and Mona, and during this period he occupied many prominent Church positions such as Mutual president, assistant Stake Sunday school superintendent, of the North Sanpete Stake, etc. He also took a civil service examination and received an appointment in the Federal employ as meat inspector. First he was sent to Tacoma, Washington, then got a transfer to Ogden, where he now resides, having erected a nice little modern house and has been called to take active part in the Stake and Ward Sunday School work as well as other duties. Success has attended Brother Sanderson all along in his various labors. He is of a spiritual nature, and is devoted to his labors for the spread of truth, living carefully the laws of the Gospel; as a consistent Latter-day Saint he is a natural friend to children, although he has none of his own.
