Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Bingham, Sanford (senior)

Bingham, Sanford (senior), Patriarch in the Weber Stake of Zion, was born May 3, 1821, in Concord, Essex county, Vermont, the son of Erastus Bingham and Lucinda Gates. He and his parents joined the Church in 1833, being among the first converts to "Mormonism" in Vermont, and in 1836 they moved west and spent the summer near Kirtland, Ohio. That fall they went on to Caldwell county, Missouri, where they remained until the governor of Missouri issued his proclamation of extermination against the "Mormons," in 1838, when they moved to Hancock county, Illinois. When the exodus from Nauvoo occurred in the spring of 1846, the family followed the main body of the Church into Iowa and spent the winter on the Missouri river, 150 miles above Winter Quarters. In the spring of 1847 they went back to Winter Quarters and made preparations for the long trip across the plains. They were among the hundred commanded by Daniel Spencer, the father of the subject of this sketch being captain of ten wagons which arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley Sept. 19, 1847. Brother Bingham was reared up to the age of fifteen years in Vermont and New Hampshire. He was twelve and a half years of age when he became a member of the "Mormon" Church, and as such endured his share of the persecutions to which the Saints were subjected during the early life of the Church. When he crossed the plains with his parents he was twenty-six years of age, and made the trip on horseback, driving loose cattle. He was married by Apostle Parley P. Pratt when a little above Grand Island, on July 18, 1847, to Miss Martha Ann Lewis. After remaining a short time in Salt Lake City he came to Ogden in 1850 at the time his father did, and there Brother Bingham lived until 1862, when he settled in Riverdale. He served in the early days in Weber county, Utah, as constable and justice of the peace, and in 1856 was appointed by the county court as assessor and collector of Weber county, in which office he continued up to 1873. For four years he was school trustee and connected with all public enterprises. Brother Bingham has been twice married. His first wife, Martha Ann Lewis, died Nov. 18, 1898, leaving eleven children. His second wife was Agnes Fife, who bore him thirteen children. Brother Bingham has been most active in all Church work, holding almost every office within the gift of the Church, in all of which he has rendered faithful service. He was ordained a High Priest and High Councilor in 1861 and made president of the Riverdale district of the Weber Ward. In 1877, when the Wards were organized, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Riverdale Ward, and held that office till Jan. 20, 1902, when he was released owing to his age and infirmities, and ordained a Patriarch in the Weber Stake. He acted as president and Bishop in Riverdale over thirty-three years.
