Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Orr, Josiah

Orr, Josiah, first counselor to Bishop Riis of Orton Ward, Alberta Stake, Canada, is a native of Utah, having been born in Morgan City Sept. 11, 1870. He was baptized into the Church on June 3, 1883, by Evan S. Morgan. His father was Richard Charles Orr, his mother was Caroline Derrick. Brother Josiah was ordained a Deacon Feb. 5, 1886; a Teacher Dec. 30, 1895, an Elder on Sept. 11, 1895, by James Hart, Sr., and a High Priest June 23, 1903, by Apostle John W. Taylor. In addition to these he has held the position of first assistant superintendent of Sunday schools in Sharon, Bear Lake county, Idaho, where he was also president of the Y. M. I. A., and became presiding Elder at his present place of residence on Jan. 14, 1902. One secular office, that of school trustee for Orton, completes the roll as to public service. On June 17, 1895, he took unto himself a wife and as a result thereof is the father of five children. He has followed the occupation of farming, ranching and poultry raising, in all of which he has been quite successful. He has had but one missionary assignment, this being to the northern part of Alberta, Canada, having been set apart on Feb. 18, 1906, by Thomas Duce. Previous to his present residence he has lived in Morgan City and Manti, Utah, and Sharon and Liberty, Bear Lake county, Idaho. For his years Elder Orr has had a tolerably ample measure of colonizing and community building experiences. He is a pioneer of Orton, where he built the first house, raised the first crop of wheat, established the first merchandise store, and brought in and operated the first threshing machine. Besides this experience at initiation of substantial things he was also the town's first postmaster, and when the Sunday school was established, he was in charge at its inception, the same being true as to the Ward meetings. The first barn erected in Orton was by the labor of his hands and the expenditure of his means, and the first grove of trees which came to beautify and make glad the landscape was set out and cultivated by Brother Orr, from which as well as other things it may easily be understood that he is a useful as well as faithful member of his Ward.
