Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Ball, Thomas

Ball, Thomas, a Patriarch in the Summit Stake of Zion, was born March 29, 1822, at the small town of Ibstock, Leicestershire, England, the son of Thomas Ball (a comb-maker) and Ann Sheriff, who was a native of Worcestershire. His grandfather, whose name was Joseph Ball, was a noted wrestler of his time, and for several years won the wrestler's prize (the cutting and use of a small piece of meadow land, worth about eight pounds a year.) His grandmother's name was Bessie Shaw. These grandparents owned and occupied the "Old Farm," situated on the road between "Ashby De La Zouch" and "Ravenstone," Leicestershire. Thomas was married to Miss Susannah Chamberlain of Earl Shilton, Leicestershire, Nov. 1, 1847. A number of children were born to them, five of whom grew to manhood and womanhood. Thomas Ball and his wife joined the Church in 1848 and became members of the Whitwick branch in Leicestershire. Subsequently he presided over said branch for nineteen years (from 1850 to 1869) or until he emigrated to Utah. He was a sawyer by occupation and had charge of a small steam sawmill at the Whitwick colliery during half a lifetime. Soon after joining the Church he had rather an impressive dream, which portrayed to him some scenes of Church history, and the personalities of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, laying in their coffins, and others. In his dream a hymn was sung to him, the tune and words of which he was utterly unacquainted with. The dream having impressed him greatly he called the next day upon a Sister Bailey, to whom he related the dream and kindly asked her to sing over what Church hymn tunes she could think of. She did so, and at length came to the hymn commencing with "When we came to the place where the two martyrs lay." "That is the very tune and the very words that I heard in my dream," he said. He had never heard them before. In the early days when a great deal of outdoor preaching was done in England by the native Elders, Brother Ball, as president of the Whitwick branch, took a very active part in these meetings, devoting nearly every Sunday in the summer season to preach the Gospel in the villages and towns adjacent to his place of residence. Thus he became the means of bringing many to a knowledge of the truth. While thus engaged he and his associates were frequently subjected to rough usage from the hands of the populace. Emigrating to Utah in 1869, Brother Ball located at Coalville, Summit county, and was for a number of years employed by the railroad company as a transfer agent for the coal shipped from the old Summit county railway to the Union Pacific railroad at Echo. After acting a number of years as a home missionary and High Counselor, etc., in the Summit Stake of Zion, he was finally chosen as a counselor to Wm. W. Cluff, the president of the Stake. In 1876-78 he filled a successful mission to England, presiding a part of the time over the Nottingham conference. Soon after his return home he was ordained a Patriarch in the Summit Stake of Zion. During his residence in Coalville he filled several civil offices, such as school trustee, justice of the peace, etc. In 1882 he was elected county treasurer for Summit county and also served as a city councilor in Coalville, where he resided at the time of his death, which occurred July 17, 1905. His wife, Susannah, preceded him to the great beyond, she having died Sept. 14, 1893.
