Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Derricott, Joseph Thomas

Derricott, Joseph Thomas, of the Seventies' quorum, was born Sept. 13, 1872, at Liberty, Bear Lake county, Idaho. He was baptized on May 29, 1881, by Elder William A. Hymas. His father's name was Joseph Derricott and his mother's maiden name was Marintha Althara Lydia Watkins. Brother Joseph T. received his first official station in the Church Feb. 5, 1886, when he was ordained a Deacon, also by Elder Hymas; Sept. 30, 1897, he became an Elder; and on Oct. 20, 1897, he was made a Seventy through the ordination of Apostle John Henry Smith. He has held and holds several local stations under the Church, these being Ward clerk, first counselor in the presidency of the Y. M. M. I. A., and Sunday school superintendent at his present residence. In Liberty Ward he was Sunday school librarian, M. I. A. librarian, first counselor in the Deacons' quorum and Ward teacher. He has filled a mission to the eastern States from October, 1897, to April, 1900, during which-on September, 1899-his mother departed this life. Feb. 18, 1893, he was married to Lydia Ann Slight, the ceremony being performed in the Logan Temple by Elder Thomas Morgan. One child named Marintha Abigail was born to this union and lost soon after by death, the dates being respectively Feb. 12, 1904, and the day following. Brother Derricott follows the honorable and useful occupation of farmer and has not drifted to any extent into political life, having held but one civil position, and it not elective-secretary and treasurer of the Orton, Alberta, Canada, school district, this being and having been since the spring of 1901 his place of abode and of which he was one of the first settlers. While engaged in the ministry he was fortunate enough to witness some manifestations of the power of the Priesthood exercised in behalf of mankind. Under the ministrations of the Elders he has seen the sick healed instantly and the power of Satan overcome, and enjoyed many other testimonies to the truth of the Gospel whose words of eternal life it was his duty and pleasure to convey to his fellow men. Young as he is, he has not altogether escaped the pioneering experiences which in the earlier days of the people's abode among the mountainous regions of the west were common, his first and for some time his only place of residence being a tent, but like all his associates he is happily past all that now.
