Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Copley, Thomas

Copley, Thomas, a Patriarch in the Summit Stake of Zion, was born Sept. 18, 1827, at Pilley, Yorkshire, England, the son of Joseph Copley and Susan Harper. When about seventeen years old he heard an Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints preach for the first time, but he did not embrace the gospel until he was nearly twenty-one years old, being then baptized, Aug. 7, 1848, by James Wadsworth, and confirmed Aug. 12, 1848, by Mordeci Travis. Later he was ordained a Teacher and subsequently a Priest. From this time on he was an active worker in the Pilley branch of the Church, until he emigrated from England in January, 1851. He sailed from Liverpool in the ship "Ellen," going by way of New Orleans, and was on the ocean ten weeks. He traveled from New Orleans to Alton, Ill., where he with some others found work and stayed for one year. Some of the company returned to England. Speaking of this he says, "I am thankful I came to Utah." He arrived in Utah in 1852 and was ordained an Elder. He was ordained a Seventy April 9, 1853, and became a member of the Seventh quorum. In 1855 he engaged himself to work for Bryant Stringham, who at this time had charge of the Church cattle and horses. After this he always had a home to go to, and of this time he says: "I worked fifteen years for the Church, and this time of my life was as pleasant as any of my earthly career." Bro. Copley was one of those who responded to the call for men to go to Deer Creek in 1857. Early in May, before this call came, he with three companions were at the Church ranch in Cache valley one day when forty Snake Indians on the war path came upon them, but an alwise Providence overruled their decision and they rode away leaving their white brother unharmed. Bro. Copley served on the Deer Creek Mission during the summer of 1858, or until the United States took the mail from the people, when the brethren "moved in." In May, 1858, Bro. Copley attended the funeral of Pres. Joseph Young's oldest son. During the services Bro. George Grant came to him with a letter, saying, "Take this to William Godbe and tell him that he is called to go with you and that you are to go on until you get what you are going for." When they read the letter they learned that they were instructed to go to San Bernardino for certain articles belonging to Col. Kane. They went as far as Cedar City and here they met Apostles Amasa M. Lyman and Charles C. Rich, who advised Wm. Godbe to continue the journey with John Hunt and Bro. Copley to return to Salt Lake City with a letter to Pres. Brigham Young. On this trip Bro. Copley traveled six hundred miles in six days on horse-back. From 1858 to 1864 he lived in Salt Lake City and on Antelope Island in the Great Salt Lake. He married Mary A. Wignall March 18, 1861. In 1864 he was sent to take charge of the Church mine in Grass Creek Canyon. Here he lived and worked until 1873, when the management of the mine was changed. He then moved to Coalville, where he still resides. April 5, 1869, he married Mary Ann Beard, who is the mother of eight children, but only two of them are living. Later Bro. Copley was set apart as senior president of the twenty-seventh quorum of Seventy by Seymour B. Young. He held this position for eighteen years. He has also acted as teacher and assistant superintendent of Sunday schools at different times and was a Ward teacher 40 years. He was ordained a Patriarch Aug. 4, 1902, by Apostle Rudger Clawson. In 1911 he was called by the Bishop to act as a special teacher to visit the people in their homes whenever he could. This calling he is still filling with pleasure. Although Bro. Copley is nearing his eighty-sixth birthday his health is good, his mind bright and active, and his testimony of the divinity of the Gospel as revealed to Joseph Smith grows brighter as the years advance, with a full assurance of its final triumph on the earth.
