Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Hodson, William

Hodson, William, Bishop of the Coalville North Ward, Summit county, Utah, from 1889 to 1895, was born Aug. 30, 1841, at Quarrington, county of Durham, England, and became a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Dec. 5, 1853, at Schinkliff, county of Durham, England. Soon after he moved to Kelloe and was made branch clerk. Together with his father and mother, one brother and one sister, he left Kelloe Nov. 16, 1856, set sail from Liverpool Nov. 18, 1856, in the ship "Columbia," with a company of Saints numbering 223, in charge of John Williams, and arrived at New York Jan. 1, 1857. He attended a conference in New York City April 6, 1857, presided over by Apostle John Taylor, Apostles Parley P. Pratt and Geo. A. Smith also being present. In April, 1857, he, with his family, moved to Maryland, to a place called Eckhart-Mines. About that time Elder Angus M. Cannon organized a branch of the Church in which Bro. Hodson was appointed clerk. After residing there about two years he moved with his father's family to Mason City, West Virginia. While there he was ordained a Priest and made president of the local branch. Times being dull, he, in pursuit of work traveled by river and rail in the States of Kentucky, Missouri and Illinois during the winter of 1859-60, returning home to Mason City April 16, 1860. During the civil war he had to leave home on two occasions as the Confederate army was invading the country near by. He married Isabella Williamson Dec. 25, 1861. In the year 1862 he moved to Syracuse, Ohio. After a short time the work slackened and being very anxious to obtain means with which to purchase an outfit to go to Utah, he decided to leave home and go to Ironton, where he could earn more means. While there he met with an accident which disabled him from work for one week. He went home and after resuming work at Syracuse he did exceedingly well financially. A certain reader of the future at this time told his wife that she and her husband would soon take a long journey by water and would meet a man and woman who, according to the description given, were thought to be Bro. Hodson's uncle and aunt, John and Margaret Robinson. The four of them would then join a large company and travel by land a long distance. When about half way on this journey a mob would arise and all in the company would be killed except six and he would be one of that six and would reach his destination in six months. June 2, 1863 Bro. Hodson took steamboat passage on the Ohio river, together with his wife, and, traveling down the Ohio and up the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, they arrived in Omaha, where they met his uncle and aunt, John and Margaret Robinson, as predicted. At Florence the four of them joined John R. Young's independent company and started for Utah, July 7, 1863. While on the plains and near Ash Hollow the cattle stampeded, first in the night and then on the following day, while being hitched, two women and one man were killed and several others hurt. The company reached Coalville, Utah, which place Bro. Hodson made his home, and here he was blessed with a family of fourteen children-twelve by his first wife and two by his second wife, Julia Marie Christopherson, whom he married June 10, 1872. In 1870 his father's family came to Coalville, where his father and mother lived until their death. The father died Jan. 6, 1879, and the mother Nov. 14, 1895. Both were buried at Coalville. The brother now resides in Idaho and the sister in Salt Lake City. Elder Hodson held many important positions in Coalville. He acted as school trustee for several terms and was city surveyor two years (1877-78). He was elected city councilor three successive terms, from 1877 to 1893, and acted as one of the school board to examine school teachers as to their qualification for the years 1879-80. He assisted in organizing the Coalville Co-op. Mercantile Institution, where he worked several years, first as a salesman and afterwards as bookkeeper. He figured in the development of the coal mines, being a half owner in the Robinson coal mine, and in the Fletcher-Hodson coal mine on Grass Creek. He also opened and worked what is known as the Hodson-Olson coal mine in Coalville, thereby employing many miners and coal-haulers. He took an interest in every enterprise that was started in Coalville, for the building up of the country, to the fullest extent of his means; such as the Summit County Railroad, running from Echo to the mines in Coalville, also the Utah Eastern Railroad, which runs from Coalville to Park City. These roads gave considerable employment to the citizens of Summit county, which was a much needed help. To the owners, however, these roads were failures financially, as the U. P. Railroad paralleled those lines by building a railroad from Echo to Park City, necessitating the former lines to cease business. Elder Hodson also took part in organizing a cattle company and a grist mill company, expending considerable means therein, which also proved a loss financially, but all tended to the building up of the country and in the end was a great benefit, and he does not regret helping to start those enterprises. He acted as secretary and treasurer for the Summit Stake Tabernacle from its commencement in 1878 to its completion in 1898; this building cost about $60,000. He officiated as counselor to Bishop Robt. Salmon, of the Coalville Ward, from the organization of the Summit Stake July 9, 1877, until Coalville was divided into three Wards, when he was made Bishop of the Coalville North Ward. He was ordained Bishop by Apostle Franklin D. Richards Feb. 17, 1889, and acted in that capacity until the north and south Wards were joined together in February, 1895. He acted as Stake tithing clerk for several years, acted as superintendent of the Coalville Sunday school during the absence of Supt. John Boyden while on a mission to England and for some time after his return, when Elder Boyden resumed his position. Bro. Hodson acted as Ward teacher many years and also filled the position of Ward clerk. He did the first day's work on the Coalville tithing office foundation; with his compass he also gave the corners for the Summit Stake tabernacle at Coalville. The reorganization of the Summit Stake took place April 21, 1901. On Monday, May 6, 1901, he was sustained as a High Councilor and on Sunday, May 19, 1901, was set apart as such by Pres. Joseph F. Smith. This position he still holds. He has taken great interest in Temple work and has officiated for many of his dead relatives. At present (1913) he resides at Kamas, Utah, with his daughters, Margaret Elizabeth Pack (who has four, children), Mary Isabell Shepherd (who has three children) and Ethel Irene White (who has two children). Both his wives died many years ago at Coalville. Of the remainder of his family Ann W. Rhead resides at Plain City, Utah (she has three boys); Sara J. Carruth resides at Blackfoot, Idaho (she has four boys); John T. Hodson resides in Salt Lake City (he has three girls and two boys); Benjamin F. Hodson (has one boy), and Edward E. Hodson is as yet unmarried.
