Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

King, Thomas Owen

King, Thomas Owen, Bishop of Almo Ward, Idaho (Cassia Stake of Zion), is the son of Thomas King and Hannah Tapfield, and was born April 27, 1840, at Dernford, Dale farm, Sawston, Cambridgeshire, England. He was baptized in 1852 by Claudius V. Spencer. Together with his parents he emigrated to America in 1853, crossing the ocean on board the sailing vessel "Golconda," landing at New Orleans. They crossed the plains in Claudius V. Spencer's ox-team company and on arriving in Utah they settled in the Seventeenth Ward, Salt Lake City. Early in 1857 Thomas was employed with the Young Express company in carrying mail and express across the plains. During the so-called "Johnston War" he remained in active service from the beginning to its close, performing military duties under John D. T. McAllister and Thomas Rich at Fort Bridger, Green river, Fort Supply and Hams Fork. In 1860 he was engaged with the Pony Express as a rider. He also did his full share of pioneer work, and participated in the Indian troubles and wars of those days, having been especially active in 1858, when a band of horse-thieving Indians were pursued to the west by a company of about two hundred men, of whom he was one. Again in 1867, while at the South Pass mine, in company with James Brown and others, they were surrounded by hostile Indians and four of the company were killed. As a young man (in 1856-57) Brother King was engaged with the surveying parties doing work in Sanpete valley and on the Sevier river, but his chief occupation has been that of a farmer and stockraiser. Bro. King, at the age of seventeen, was ordained an Elder by Hiram Mikesell, the ordination taking place March 7, 1857, and for a number of years he acted as a Ward teacher in the Seventeenth Ward. He was ordained a Seventy Sept. 22, 1860, by John V. Long. From September, 1860, to November, 1864, he performed missionary work in Great Britain, where he labored in the Wiltshire, London and Bedfordshire conferences, serving as president of the latter conference. In 1878 he moved to Idaho, settling on Governor Emery's ranch on Raft river, Cassia county, where he remained till 1880, when he took up a ranch for himself, where Almo is now located; here he still lives. After taking an acting part in the building up of that new settlement, both spiritually and temporally, he was finally ordained a High Priest and Bishop in 1887 by Apostle John W. Taylor and set apart to preside over the Almo Ward. Bishop King married Dorcas Debenham May 23, 1868, who bore him eight children, five of whom are still living.
