Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Bromley, William Michael

Bromley, William Michael, president of the High Priests' quorum of Alpine Stake, Utah county, resides at American Fork. He is a son of John Bromley and Mary Oxenbold. Wm. M. was born Oct. 13, 1839, near Worcester, Eng., and baptized by Elder John Lyon in 1849. The family left for Utah in January, 1851, arriving at New Orleans after a long voyage and proceeding to St. Louis, where his parents and all but three of the family died. After working for some time he proceeded to Atchison, Kansas, where he engaged with Hooper & Williams to drive a merchant team to Salt Lake City, the company becoming stalled at Fort Bridger by reason of snow, where the goods were unloaded and the train moved on until Echo canyon was reached, where another snow blockade was encountered. He became one of a party to proceed to Salt Lake and obtained aid, which was successfully accomplished and the company got through safely after many hardships. In 1855, the year of the grasshopper raid, with the others he had a hard time of it, living on roots, greens, fish and wild game when these could be had, not tasting wheat bread for three months. In 1855 he walked from Salt Lake City to Springville where he went to work at blacksmithing, farming and bookkeeping; here he held several Church positions-president of Elders' quorum, member of the 51st quorum of Seventy, president of the High Priests, second counselor to Bishop Aaron Johnson and later holding the same position with Bishop William Bringhurst. He went on a mission to England in 1871 and presided over the Bristol conference, and in 1880 was called to preside over the Australasian mission, being there nearly three years, during which many new members were added to the Church, and the Gospel introduced among the Maoris. Returning to Springville, he held several secular offices, among them captain of militia in the infantry, then being commissioned colonel by Gov. Durkee, in which capacity he served in the "Black Hawk war." In 1883 he was ordained Bishop of American Fork and soon after got entangled in the meshes of the Federal court, charged with unlawful cohabitation, being fined $500 and serving seven months' imprisonment. He was subsequently arrested on the same charge, but it came to naught finally, after he had engaged in extensive travel in Mexico and Canada, keeping out of the way because of the improbability of getting a fair trial. Returning home after the manifesto was issued, his case was ended "for want of evidence," and he was appointed to preside over the High Priests' quorum of Alpine Stake, which position he holds at the present time.
