Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Tufts, Josiah

Tufts, Josiah, presiding Elder at Meadowville, Rich county, Utah, from 1870 to 1877, was born July 30, 1838, in the State of Maine, the son of Elbridge Tufts and Elmira Pinkham. In the spring of 1843, when about five years old, he removed with his parents to Nauvoo, Illinois, and throughout his life he had a distinct recollection of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Tufts family participated in the migration westward in 1846, being expelled from Nauvoo by the mob, together with their co-religionists. They came to G. S. L. Valley in 1848 and located in the Eighth Ward, where the father died Nov. 27, 1850. Josiah participated as a young man in many of the hardships incident to pioneer life. In 1851 he became one of the settlers of Brigham City, working there as a boy for the pioneer, Harvey Peirce. In 1856 he accompanied his mother on a visit to the States and returned to Utah in 1860. Later he crossed the plains again as a teamster, and still later hired out with a company of twenty-five others to help construct the telegraph line between Fort Bridger and Salt Lake City. In 1864 (Feb. 13th) he married Charlotte Spriggs, who bore him eight children. In 1869 he was called to settle in Bear Lake Valley, together with about two hundred and fifty others. He located at Meadowville, where he was appointed presiding Elder by Apostle Charles C. Rich. He filled that position about eight years, or until the Meadowville branch was regularly organized as a Bishop's Ward. From the time he joined the Church until the day of his death, Sept. 24, 1912, at Basalt, Idaho, Elder Tufts labored faithfully in the interests of the Church and raised a large family. Some of his children are, at the present time, active and faithful members of the Church. Bro. Tuft's main occupation was farming and stock-raising and as a public-spirited man he was elected to a number of civil offices. Thus he acted several terms as school trustee, justice of the peace, etc.
