Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Clark, George Sheffer

Clark, George Sheffer, first Bishop of Pleasant Grove, Utah county, was ordained to that position in 1851 by Prest. George A. Smith; previously, the same year he was appointed to the Bishopric of the northern end of Utah county by Prest. Brigham Young. Brother Clark's parents were Richard and Ann Elizabeth Clark, and he was born to them in Jefferson county, Ohio, Nov. 7, 1816. His early years were passed on a farm. Without opportunities for an advanced education, he made the best use of the chances he had, for some years walking three miles in the winter time to school. In 1842, at Indianapolis, he heard the Gospel for the first time, an Elder having visited that place, and Bro. Clark became convinced at once. In the spring of 1843 he was baptized in the Mississippi river at Nauvoo, by Bishop Hale. Soon after he was ordained an Elder. Returning to Indiana he succeeded in selling his farm worth $2,000 for a tenth of that sum, and after varied experiences he returned to Nauvoo, where he was made a city guard. In 1845 he was ordained a member of the Thirteenth quorum of Seventy by George A. Smith and others, and in 1846 he crossed the Mississippi river with the body of the Saints headed for the western wilds. When at the Missouri river the call was made for troops to go to Mexico in the service of the United States, he became one of the noted Mormon Battalion, serving in Company B; but at the Mexican line he was put on the sick list and returned to Pueblo. In the spring of 1847 he and the others of the sick detachment again started for the mountains, overtaking the pioneers at Green river, and arrived here with them. He was one of the company that returned to Winter Quarters soon after reaching Salt Lake valley, and the following year located on a farm in Iowa, where he remained two years, during which he was married to Miss Susan Daly. They finally reached Salt Lake City Sept. 13, 1850. In 1853 he was elected probate judge of Utah county. In the fall of 1853, the Indians being very troublesome, he was called to go to Cedar City to help strengthen that outpost, and made numerous sacrifices to respond. He remained there eighteen months and in 1856 was called on a mission to Australia, where he spent nearly three years. Returning, he engaged in various enterprises at Pleasant Grove, encountering some discouragements but in the main doing well, having left considerable property of different kinds. His wife died April 9, 1891, at the age of 60 years, leaving the husband and five sons and one daughter. The boys, like their father, are strictly honest and decidedly enterprising in their business methods. He was also the grandfather of twenty-seven children, all of whom but four are alive. Elder Clark died in Pleasant Grove, Utah, August 20, 1901.
