Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Eardley, James

Eardley, James, a Patriarch in the Liberty Stake of Zion, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Feb. 25, 1830, at Swadlingcote, Derbyshire, England, the son of Edward Eardley and Elizabeth Grocet. He was baptized Feb. 25, 1846, by Daniel Oakley and emigrated to America in 1850, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Hartley." On the voyage the ship encountered a terrible storm, during which the captain of the vessel lost all hope of being able to reach land with his precious cargo, and expressed himself to that effect to some of the brethren, but Brother Eardley, with a significant look, assured the captain that the vessel would not go to the bottom of the sea, but reach New Orleans in safety. Brother Eardley remained in the States four years, and finally came to Utah in 1854, crossing the plains in Horace S. Eldredge's ox train. While residing in the States he married Zurviah G. Fuller, who subsequently bore him ten children, Edward A., James W., Eunice E., Adaline Z., Bedson M., Mary E., Ruben H., Anna Z., Delia A., Louisa E. Soon after his arrival in Utah he became associated with the Territorial militia and rose to the rank of captain, and as such he participated in the so-called Echo Canyon campaign. In the general move in 1858 he went as far south as Payson, Utah county. He also established himself as a potter in Salt Lake City, which business he followed for twenty years. He was ordained to the office of a Teacher in England and was ordained a Seventy soon after his arrival in Utah. He also became identified with the Sunday school organization of the Third Ward at an early date and was superintendent of the school for thirty-three years. He also labored with great diligence and much success as a Ward teacher for a number of years. In 1872 he yielded obedience to the higher law of marriage by marrying Martha Preece, with whom he had five children (John A., Albert W., Martha M., Ernest L., George A.) In 1895 (March 6th) he was ordained a High Priest and in 1912 (Sept. 11th) he was ordained a Patriarch by Charles W. Penrose. In 1884-86 he filled a successful mission to Great Britain, on which he was gone from home twenty-seven months. While on this mission he received word from his wife that the officers were looking for him and in a meeting a certain Patriarch arose and said that he would like to give Bro. Eardley a blessing. He did so and in that blessing said that when Bro. Eardley came home, he would be arrested on the charge of unlawful cohabitation, but the law would not have power to touch him. They would never put him inside prison walls. Just after his arrival home he was arrested and tried; his children were brought to the court and many testified against him; but the judge and jury became so confused that they dismissed them all and the prosecuting attorney advised the judge to set Bro. Eardley free, as he didn't want any more to do with him. Elder Eardley is a man of sterling integrity, loves the work of God, and has ever been a faithful laborer in the interest of the cause which he espoused while a boy in his native land.
