Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Kenner, Scipio Africanus

Kenner, Scipio Africanus, an active Church member, author, editor and lawyer, was born at Saint Francisville, Missouri, May 14, 1852, the son of Foster Ray Kenner and Sarah Catherine Kirkwood. His ancestors were Virginians, but his parents were natives of Kentucky. The family was Southern in its tastes and sympathies, and the father, at the outbreak of the Civil war in 1860, was intent upon raising a regiment for the Confederate army. He was only dissuaded from his purpose by the pleadings of his mother, a devout and zealous Latter-day Saint, and his own convictions of the truth of "Mormonism," whose founder, Joseph Smith, had prophesied of the great conflict then pending. His wife was a blood relation of the noted Confederate raider, John Morgan, and other distinguished Southerners. From his fourth year up to the time of the family's removal west, Scipio went to school, and after his arrival at Salt Lake City in 1860 he continued his education as best he could in those primitive non-scholastic times. The migration of the family to Utah was mainly due to the influence of Scipio's grandmother, who for many years had been trying to get her children to "pull out for the valleys of the mountains." The family crossed the plains in Captain Warren Walling's train, commencing the journey from Florence, Nebraska, May 30, 1860, with 160 persons and 30 wagons, mostly drawn by oxen. Florence was at that time, in the language of the subject of this sketch, "a promising place, with as much as seven houses and twenty-four inhabitants." On the journey across the plains Scipio was a bosom companion of C. Edward Loose and his brother Warren, who subsequently gained renown as leading business men of Utah. Scipio made the most of the romantic journey across the plains, and enjoyed himself frequently by hunting. His arrival in the Valley he describes in his own unique style as follows: "One night the pilgrims reached a place not far from where is now the world-renowned Park City, and were informed that early next day we would obtain a view of the glorious valley, toward which we had been toiling. Next morning, without waiting for breakfast, the writer set out hot-footed for the summit, and reached it a long time ahead of the train, so much so that he felt something like one of the oldest inhabitants when it came lumbering along. The valley burst upon the vision all at once-Beautiful spectacle! Glorious panorama! Delightsome consummation! The end of travel and its attendant travail for three leaden-footed months outspread before the longing yet satisfied gaze! So absorbed was the youth in his reflections and emotions that for a time the customary method of expressing exuberance was unthought of, but not for long; and when it did come the outburst of enthusiastic hurrahing would have scared an Indian into retirement." Captain Walling's train reached Salt Lake City Aug. 9, 1860. It was the first company of emigrating Saints which crossed the plains that season. Scipio's first employment in Utah was as an apprentice in the "Deseret News" establishment, where he served out his time and became a journeyman printer. At different periods after that he served in almost every position in the establishment, including the editorial chair. He was baptized into the Church by Elder Lyman O. Littlefield in 1864, and subsequently ordained an Elder. Fond of the drama, with other youths of his acquaintance, he early took to the local stage, and while thus connected, was associated with the lady who became his wife and the other of his nine children-Miss Isabel Park, of Salt Lake City. They were married in 1871. While in the east Scipio had acquired some insight into telegraphy, and being apt and quick to learn, he completed the mastery of that art in Utah and became a skillful manipulator of the electric keys. Upon the completion of the Deseret Telegraph Line he was stationed as operator at Beaver, and afterwards served at Pioche and at Salt Lake City. Subsequently he edited the Provo "Times," the Ogden "Standard" and other country papers, all outside of Salt Lake City being country at that time; and later, while working as a printer, he took up the study of law, in which he was assisted to some extent by Judge J. C. Sutherland. In 1877 he was admitted to the bar of the Supreme Court of the Territory of Utah. Up to that time his was the only application of its kind first passed upon by the highest tribunal, and afterwards by the lower tribunals of the commonwealth. His first certificate gave him permission to practice in any State in the Union, which is of course out of the ordinary. After his admission to the bar Bro. Kenner practiced with success at Salt Lake City and in southern Utah. He held at various times, in addition to the offices named, those of city attorney, county attorney, Church attorney and assistant United States attorney. Among the leading papers for which he did editorial work are the "Ogden Junction" and the "Salt Lake Herald. He was the author of the "Union Pacific Hand Book of Utah," "The Practical Politician," "Utah as It Is," etc., the last named book, his most pretentious literary work, being issued from the press in 1904. After a lingering sickness of many years, Elder Kenner passed into the great beyond March 15, 1913, in Salt Lake City. Among the speakers at his funeral was Pres. Joseph F. Smith, who paid a high tribute to the ability and rare qualities of the deceased. Of versatile gifts, Elder Kenner succeeded not only as a lawyer, but as a journalist, in which lines he had a wide and varied experience in this western country. In his several books he exhibited literary merit and was a natural humorist, possessing much of the gift and considerable of the personal appearance of that king of American humorists, the late Mark Twain. He held various civic offices, from justice of the peace up to a member of the legislature, and was as much at home in politics as a fish in water. His tongue was as fluent as his pen; he was witty and eloquent in argument and on all occasions a ready and fearless debater. Courage was one of his personal traits. One of his sons served in the United States army in the Philippines, and another filled a mission to Holland during the years 1904-1906.
