Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Sudbury, Samuel John

Sudbury, Samuel John, a veteran Elder in the Church, was born Sept. 9, 1829, at Egmonton, County of Notts, England, the son of Samuel Sudbury and Mary Wardell. He was baptized in April, 1853, by Cyrus S. Wheelock and emigrated to America in 1853, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Golconda," which sailed from Liverpool Jan. 23rd and arrived at New Orleans March 25th. He crossed the plains in Capt. Joseph W. Young's company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 10, 1853. On the ocean voyage the ship encountered a terrific storm, which cleared the deck of its entire rigging, and while the storm was raging some of the Saints began murmuring because of their condition and expressed fears that they would never reach shore. Bro. Sudbury, being very much annoyed, remarked: "If you are going to the bottom of the sea, go like Saints that you profess to be. I started for Salt Lake, and to Salt Lake I'm going, let this ship sink or swim." They remained at anchor for several weeks until they finally succeeded in rigging up new sails. Bro. Sudbury in his young days was a man of great physical strength, and when the emigrants forded the rivers he carried many women and children across. Frequently he would take a woman in each arm and tell them to hold on to their babes. In going down steep hills he often walked along side of the wagons, and with a firm grip on the spokes of each wagon, he would practically lock the wheel and thus prevent it from sliding down the mountain side. After his arrival in the Valley, he was engaged by Pres. Brigham Young as a miller and ran the mill in Parley's Canyon, which was afterwards turned into a woolen factory. He also had charge of the Liberty Park mill, the Empire mill (in City Creek Canyon) and another mill in Tooele county. For a number of years he acted as superintendent of all Pres. Young's mills. At the time of "the move" in 1858 Bro. Sudbury was retained at the mill in Parley's Canyon grinding flour, boxing it and sending what he could to the Saints and storing the rest in the hillside. His faithful wife Emma and his daughter Lovine remained with him. For two weeks he was grinding flour so continuously that he had no time left for sleep. By Emma Lovine Crossland (daughter of John and Caroline Crossland) whom he married in Sheffield, England, about two weeks before sailing, he had eleven children. About 1857 he married Lydia Franklyn, who became the mother of two children, and about 1878 he married Wilhelmine Damcke (daughter of Frederick Clement Damcke and Christine Wilckin), who was born Aug. 21, 1851, at Rhodchendorff, Holstein, Germany. She only had one child. Altogether Bro. Sudbury was the father of fourteen children. He visited England in 1875 and again in 1904. While on this last trip he performed considerable missionary labor. During the anti-polygamy raid Bro. Sudbury had charge of the Gardo House, where he lived with his family for five years. He was a trusted employee of Pres. John Taylor and also Pres. Woodruff, and had many thrilling experiences. Jos. F. Smith told him that his faithfulness surely would secure him a martyr's crown. Bro. Sudbury was ordained a High Priest Dec. 13, 1901, by Jos. F. Smith, and died in Salt Lake City Dec. 26, 1910.
