Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Brown, James

Brown, James, a prominent Elder in the Church and a pioneer of Utah, was born Sept. 30, 1801, in Roan county, North Carolina, the son of James Brown and Mary Williams. His father was a veteran of the Revolutionary war. James received a common school education, was inclined to literary pursuits, taught school in his early manhood, was a Baptist preacher for a time and served several terms as sheriff of Roan county. He married Martha Stevens in 1823, migrated to Illinois in 1834 and became a member of the Church (Latter-day Saints) in 1838. His wife died in 1840, leaving him with eight sons and one daughter. Subsequently, he married again and took up his residence at Nauvoo, Illinois, from which place he filled a mission to the Southern States and also spent some time in gathering means for the Nauvoo Temple. He was with the Saints in their exodus from Illinois, and at Council Bluffs, in the summer of 1846, he enlisted in the Mormon Battalion, becoming captain of Company C. At Santa Fe he was placed in charge of the sick detachment of the battalion and ordered to Pueblo, where the winter of 1846-47 was passed. The next spring (1847) he marched with his detachment by way of Fort Laramie and the South Pass to G. S. L. Valley, arriving there July 29, 1847. Early in August he set out for California for the purpose of drawing the pay due from the government to the men in his command, the Battalion having been honorably discharged at Los Angeles. Returning from California late in 1847, he purchased from Miles M. Goodyear, an old frontier's man, a log fort and lands, on the Weber river, paying for them the sum of three thousand dollars. Thither he removed in January, 1848, and thus became the founder of Ogden. Captain Brown built the first bridges over the Weber and Ogden rivers, acted as assessor and collector in Weber county, and was a member of the Ogden city council from 1855 till the time of his death. In the fall of 1852 he went upon a mission to British Guiana, proceeding to San Diego, California, thence by sailing vessel to the Isthmus of Panama. Finding conditions unfavorable for the introduction of the gospel in British Guiana, he returned home by way of St. Louis, Mo., where he assisted in the Church emigration of 1853 and 1854. Captain Brown's main characteristics were honesty, truthfulness and integrity. After the death of his first wife he married four times, the names of his wives being Susan Foutz, Esther Rapier, Sally Wood and Mary Black. He was the father of twenty-eight children, sixteen of them boys. A number of his sons have risen to prominence, both in ecclesiastical and civil capacities. His death, which occurred in Ogden Sept. 30, 1863, was the result of an accident. He died on the sixty-second anniversary of his birth.
