Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

De La Mare, Philip

De La Marre, Philip, a Patriarch in the Tooele Stake of Zion, Utah, was born April 3, 1823, on the island of Jersey, England, the son of Francis De La Mare and Jane Esther Hier. He was baptized in February, 1849, by Wm. C. Dunbar; ordained an Elder soon after his baptism by Wm. C Dunbar; ordained a Seventy in 1850 by John Taylor and John Pack and became a member of the 8th quorum ordained a High Priest April 24, 1891 by Francis M. Lyman; ordained a Patriarch in 1902, by Francis M. Lyman. In his youth Elder De La Mar performed much successful missionary labor. Thus, in 1850, he accompanied Apostle John Taylor to Paris, France, where he assisted in rounding the French Mission and translating the Book of Mormon. In 1852 he emigrated to America, crossing the Atlantic ocean in the ship "Kennebec." Before leaving Europe, Bro. De La Mare, together with John Taylor and others, purchased beet sugar manufacturing machinery, which they imported to America at great cost. Elder De La Mare personally purchased the animals and wagons and conducted the train carrying the machinery across the plains to Utah. The train was composed of about fifty ox-team wagons. This machinery was the first beet sugar machinery ever imported into the United States. It was partly set up and operated in Salt Lake City, but through lack of funds and support it was never placed in complete running order. In 1853 Elder De La Mare settled in Tooele county, where he passed through the hardships of pioneer life and those of fighting Indians. Being an expert blacksmith by trade, he was engaged to take mechanical charge of Col. Steptoe's army outfits and finally accompanied the expedition into Nevada and Oregon. On returning to Utah at the time of the famine, he brought several thousand dollars worth of provisions from California, which he gave away freely to relieve the distressed in Tooele county. In 1860-63 he filled a mission to Europe and had charge of the Channel Islands conference. At home Elder De La Mare was always an energetic and consistent Church worker. For many years he labored as a Ward teacher, a home missionary and a High Councilor. In a civil capacity he served two terms as a member of the Tooele city council and as a tradesman he excelled in his work. Thus he built a large hay weighing scales for Johnston's army, machinery for a saw mill, etc. In 1857-58 he participated in the Echo canyon campaign. In 1846 he married Mary Parkin in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England; in 1852 he married Mary Chevalier and in 1857 he married Jeanette Mickeljohn. By these wives he became the father of twenty-one children, eleven sons and ten daughters. Elder De La Mare belongs to a type of men whose lives should prove an inspiration to posterity. He was always able to adjust himself to conditions as they confronted him.
