Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Hart, James Henry

Hart, James Henry, first counselor in the Presidency of the Bear Lake Stake, was born in Huntingdon county, England, July 21, 1825. His father was Thomas Hart and his mother's maiden name was Elizabeth Merritt. They were a highly respected family; the subject of this sketch was the youngest and has outlived them all. He was baptized into the Church of England when a few weeks old, with which he severed his connection when seventeen and joined the Baptists, causing thereby no little commotion. In 1845, when twenty-one years old, he made his way to London with strong testimonials of good standing. Here he had the good fortune to read some "Mormon" publications and soon became convinced of the truthfulness of the message thus borne to him, the result being his baptism December 17, 1847, by Elder John Banks; he was ordained a Priest Feb. 27, 1848, the same year being ordained an Elder and appointed to preside over Britton branch which he had been largely instrumental in creating, being honorably released therefrom November 30, 1850, with permission to go to Zion. In the meantime his missionary labors had been very extensive and fruitful and he was afterwards appointed to several important stations in the mission field, France being among them. While thus engaged, at Havre de Grace, December 3, 1851, Louis Napoleon executed his famous coup d'etat changing the form of government. December 20th of that year he was, at a conference in Paris presided over by Prest. John Taylor, ordained by him a High Priest, having previously (July 31st) become a Seventy under the hands of John Pack. December 31st, in company with President Taylor, Bro. Hart reached the island of Jersey, having in the meantime been appointed president of the Channel Islands conference, and several months later was appointed first counselor to Curtis E. Bolton, president of the French mission, which position he held until March, 1854, when he was again released. He came to Utah August 24, 1852, after having married Miss Emily Ellingham, in London; she had been an invalid for several years, but upon receiving the Gospel was healed at once. Four children were born to them, only one, James E., surviving. The faithful wife and mother, after undergoing hardships beyond number to reach the promised land and after reaching it, joined the children on the other shore May 11, 1892, in her 71st year. The departure for Utah took place from Liverpool, April 4, 1854. Reaching St. Louis, sickness and other troubles, a Stake Mo., via New Orleans after much was organized November 5, 1854, when Elder Hart became a member of the High Council, and soon after was appointed by Apostle Erastus Snow to edit the St. Louis "Luminary." August 3, 1855, by the same authority, Bro. Hart was appointed president of the Stake under the direction of Elder Orson Spencer. The subject hereof had a varied and an active experience in the Missouri metropolis, being finally released in 1857 and placed in charge of an ox train headed for the Valley, which was reached in safety. He had some frontiering and military experiences, operating chiefly against hostile savages, that were trying and dangerous, but performing them all with full credit, and after variously residing and engaging in different callings in April, 1864, upon the advice of President Brigham Young, Bro. Hart went to Bear Lake county, Idaho, settling in Bloomington, where he was appointed acting Bishop. Previous to this, in Salt Lake City, he was ordained a High Councilor, and in 1861 was married to Babina Schide, nine children being born to them, two of whom died. When Bear Lake Stake was organized, he became counselor to Prest. David P. Kimball. Subsequently, having met with many misfortunes, he accepted a position as bookkeeper in Provo. In 1873 he was married to Mrs. Elizabeth M. Keen and became president of a branch of the Church in Iron county, returning in 1875 to Bloomington. He served as representative in the Idaho legislature of 1876 and 1877, in 1878 as councilor therein, and was, returned to the House in 1880; was admitted to the bar in April, 1880; was prosecuting attorney in 1883-4. October 25, 1877, he became first counselor to Prest. Wm. Budge, but continued his labors in New York as emigration agent. He paid a visit to his native land in July, 1885, returning in August following. All in all, his was a most active, voluminous career briefly told. Elder Hart died in the fall of 1906.
