Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Fairbourn, William

Fairbourn, William, second Bishop of the Crescent Ward (Jordan Stake), Salt Lake county, Utah, was born Nov. 11, 1861, in Mill Creek, Salt Lake county, Utah, the son of Edward Fairbourn and Eliza Ann Wright. He was baptized May 1, 1870, by James C. Walker, received a common school education, and at the age of nine years, went to southern Utah, where he worked on a large ranch with his uncle about four years, after which he returned to Mill Creek and resided there until April, 1885, when he settled permanently in that part of the Great Salt Lake valley which is now included in the Crescent Ward. He was ordained successively to the office of Teacher, Priest, Elder, Seventy and High Priest; the latter ordination he received March 29, 1896, under the hands of Angus M. Cannon, and at the same time he was set apart as first counselor to Bishop James P. Jensen, of the Crescent Ward. In 1896-97 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in the East Tennessee conference. He returned home in January, 1897, on account of sickness, and resumed his duties as counselor to Bishop Jensen, acting in that capacity till May 6, 1913, when the Bishop died. Four months later, August 18, 1913, Bro. Fairburn was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Anthony W. Ivins, and set apart to preside over the Crescent Ward. Prior to that he had acted as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school for a number of years, and he had also served two terms as justice of the peace in the Crescent precinct. In 1885 (April 8th) he married Hannah M. Rynerson in the Logan Temple; she was the daughter of Andrew Rynerson and Ann Herbert and has borne him five children, namely, Wm. R. Edward, Nellie, Leslie D. and Alma. When Bro. Fairbourn first settled at Crescent, the place was a perfect wilderness covered with sage brush. Together with several others he first turned Jordan river into the East Jordan canal, which he had helped to dig. Now the desert blossoms as the rose in that part of Great Salt Lake Valley. Bishop Fairbourn has earned the distinction of having cleared and cultivated more land than any other one man in the Crescent Ward.
