Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Rich, William Lyman

Rich, William Lyman, second counselor to Prest. William Budge, of the Bear Lake Stake of Zion, is a son of the late Apostle Charles C. Rich, and Mary Ann Phelps and was born August 7, 1852, in San Bernardino, Cal. He came to Utah in 1857 with his parents and was baptized April 30, 1860, by his father in Centerville, where the family resided temporarily; in 1864 he went to Bear Lake valley, Idaho, with his parents and became one of the first settlers of Paris, that State, passing through all the trials and vicissitudes of pioneer life. He received as good an education as the schools in the county afforded at this time, finishing his studies in the Deseret University, which he attended in 1875, 1876, 1881 and 1882. He served as the first president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in Paris and was chosen a member of the High Council of Bear Lake Stake. He acted as second counselor to Bishop Henry J. Horne, later to Bishop George B. Spencer of Paris First Ward, and still later as first counselor to Bishop West of the same Ward. In 1886 he was called to preside as Bishop of Montpelier, being ordained and set apart to that position December 11, 1886, by James H. Hart. After serving in that capacity for upwards of six years he was chosen and set apart as second counselor to Prest. Wm. Budge, of the Bear Lake Stake of Zion, which position he held until recently. In 1898-1900 he filled a mission to the eastern States and presided for most of the time over the western New York conference. Elder Rich engaged in mercantile business while yet a young man and had stores both in Paris and Montpelier. He started the first implement house in the latter place under the name of Rich Bros. and Woolley, of which he was the manager. At present he is engaged in the stock business and is manager of the Paris Roller Milling Company. Among the numerous civil offices with which he has been entrusted and which he has honorably filled are those of county treasurer of Rich county, two terms (of two years each), as assessor and collector of Bear Lake county, chairman of the first town board of Paris and later as mayor of the city, and is now serving his third term in the latter capacity.
