Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Sharp, John William

Sharp, John William, presiding Elder of the Sandy branch of the Union Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, from 1877 to 1882, was born July 22, 1836, at Northampton, England. He was baptized at Northampton Oct. 16, 1852. By Samuel Parks, by whom he was confirmed the following day, and ordained a Deacon Feb. 4, 1855; and on May 25, 1856, he was ordained an Elder under the hands of James Lavender and Wm. Bayliss, and called to labor as traveling Elder in the Bedfordshire conference, under the presidency of Elder Wm. Bayliss. He continued in this conference until Jan. 1, 1858, when he was appointed to labor and travel in the Norwich conference. He worked there under the direction of Elders Edwin Scott and Wm. Jeffries, until June 20, 1859, when he was sent to the Newcastle-upon-Tyne pastorate, to travel under the presidency of Thomas Wallace and Joseph Stanford. There he labored in the Durham, Newcastle-upon-Tyne and Carlisle conferences until April, 1861, when he was released to emigrate to Utah. He crossed the sea on the clipper ship "Underwriter", which sailed from Liverpool, England, April 23, 1861, and the plains in Capt. Ira Eldredge's company, which arrived in Salt Lake City on the 15th day of September following. May 16, 1863, he was ordained into the 23rd Quorum of Seventy and subsequently set apart as one of the presidents of that quorum. Aug. 9, 1866, he was called to go to Sanpete county on an Indian expedition, and left Salt Lake City in Major Andrew H. Burt's company, for the purpose of protecting the inhabitants of that county from the ravages of the Indians, who had been preying upon the settlers there for years. He was gone on that expedition about two months. At the election at Sandy in August, 1874, when Robert N. Baskin ran against Geo. Q. Cannon for delegate to Congress, the Liberals took the ballot box by force from Judge Harrison; Bro. Sharp, at the risk of his life, jumped into the midst of the crowd, secured the box and returned it to the judge. In return Bro. Sharp received a terrible beating from the mob, but nevertheless remained at his post all day. At the general conference held in Salt Lake City in October, 1876, he was called to go on a preaching mission to the Southern States, and on the 20th of November following he left Salt Lake City, in company with Elders Henry G. Boyle, Wm. Calder, Joseph Argyle and a number of other brethren destined for the same field. He was appointed to labor in the State of Tennessee, with headquarters at R. R. Church, at Shady Grove on Duck River. He prosecuted his missionary work in that State for about one year. In January, 1877, his companion, Elder Wm. Calder, had to return home because of sickness, and Elder Sharp then traveled alone until Feb. 24, 1877, when he was joined by Joseph Argyle and appointed to labor in Tennessee. In that State he was treated very kindly by the people, baptized quite a number, organized a branch at Totty's Bend, and experienced the power of God on several occasions, and especially in one particular instance when a sister was miraculously healed. Finally, Elder Sharp himself was taken sick with ague and fever, and was brought down very low, so much so that nothing short of the power of God saved his life; in consequence of this he had to return home and did not fully recover from this attack until several years afterwards. In June, 1877, and while he was yet in Tennessee, he was appointed to preside over the Sandy branch of the Union Ward of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. In October, 1878, he was set apart as one of the home missionaries of the Salt Lake Stake, continuing that calling until the close of the year 1884. In 1881 he married Ann Maria Bailey, by whom he had six children. She died Feb. 23, 1910, at Union. Elder Sharp presided over the Sandy branch until it was organized as a Ward, Sept. 3, 1882, and Ezekiel Holman appointed and set apart as Bishop. In 1862 Elder Sharp was sworn in as a special policeman in Salt Lake City, and was once appointed deputy city marshal by J. D. T. McAllister. He went on the regular force of police in October, 1883, and was in the city marshal's office many years. He acted as policeman until 1890, and in that capacity he was for seven years the right hand man of the chief of police. He stood "No. 1" on the roll of honor as an officer who could always be relied upon and one who always performed his duties well and conscientiously. At the time of the anti-polygamy raid Elder Sharp was always on hand to render what aid he could to the brethren who were in danger. For twelve years he acted as registration agent for the 66th precinct of Salt Lake county, and for three years he acted as deputy assessor under B. B. Quinn. While Brother Sharp acted on the police force in Salt Lake City at the time of the anti-polygamy raid, his wife also rendered efficient service in protecting the brethren who were sought by the deputy marshals. As an officer in the Church, Elder Sharp is universally known among the Saints for his zeal and integrity to the truth. For six years he labored as a home missionary in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion and two years in the Jordan Stake. At the time of the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple (1893) he was appointed to examine all recommends at the entrance and while thus engaged he caught a number of persons who were trying to get in on false pretences, among others a regular tramp with a recommend which he had found on the street. Brother Sharp was ordained a High Priest March 26, 1910 by Robert Elwood. Since 1890 he has followed farming for a living at Union, Salt Lake county, Utah.
