Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Gardner, Archibald

Gardner, Archibald, second Bishop of the West Jordan Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, was born Sept. 2, 1814, in Kilsyth, Sterlingshire, Scotland, the son of Robert Gardner and Margaret Calinder. When Archibald was nine years of age, his parents moved to Canada, he of course accompanying them. In 1839 (Feb. 19th) he married Miss Margaret Livingston, and in the spring of 1845 he was baptized into the "Mormon" Church with nearly every member of his family. The same year he moved to Nauvoo, Ill, in company with his father, brothers, one sister and their families, 24 souls in all. He reached the illfated city just as the Saints were being expelled from their homes, so he went with his relatives across the river and settled temporarily at Winter Quarters in the latter part of 1846. Remaining there all winter (1846-47), the Gardner's prepared their outfits in the spring, and in June, 1847, they joined Bishop Edward Hunter's hundred and Joseph Horne's fifty and set out for Salt Lake Valley, arriving there Oct. 1, 1847. The following spring Bro. Gardner moved to Mill Creek, where he lived for ten years. At the time of the move south in 1858 Bro. Gardner took his family to Spanish Fork, Utah county, but he was not permitted to remain there long, as he was called to be Bishop of the West Jordan Ward. Being a man of sterling worth, he held that position with credit for 32 years. While in the East he had learned the trade of mill-building, and after coming to the West he followed that vocation and erected some of the first mills in Utah, two of them being in Mill Creek. In 1880 he was elected a member of the territorial legislature, and was an intelligent and able member of that body. A few years later he moved to Star Valley, in Wyoming, and did an immense amount of good in assisting to build up that country. A few years before his death he returned to West Jordan and lived the remainder of his life in the bosom of his family Bishop Gardner was the father of 48 children and had 201 grandchildren and 34 great-grandchildren when he died. During his useful life he built 36 mills; some of these he erected in Canada before he had reached the age of twenty. The last one he built at Spanish Fork when he was 85 years of age. Despite his venerable age, he never outlived his usefulness, having ever been one of the most valuable members of the community. He was a typical pioneer possessing to a large degree the wisdom, courage and industry that are essential in the founding of a commonwealth. The impress of his strong and rugged character had been made upon the State and time can never efface it. His was a large and generous heart and planning something for the public good was, with him, a passion. He was the principal promoter of the Jordan canal system, which made homes for hundreds of people. He died at St. Mark's Hospital, Salt Lake City, as an ordained Patriarch in the Church Feb. 8, 1902, of strangulated hernia. It is a fact of more than passing interest that Bishop Gardner died almost on the very spot where he spent his first winter in Great Salt Lake Valley.
