Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Farrell, John

Farrell, John, second Bishop of the Eden Ward, Weber county, Utah, was born Jan. 13, 1834, in the town of Ayr, Scotland, the son of Malcolm Farrell and Mary Banks. He joined the Church at the age of fourteen and in 1856 (Dec. 31st) he married Jennette Lindsay (daughter of Walter Lindsay and Jennette McClean), who was born in the town of Cardor Bray, Scotland, March 1, 1839. With his wife, Brother Farrell emigrated to America in 1857, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "George Washington", which sailed from Liverpool, England, March 28, 1857. They resided temporarily in Illinois two years and in Lexington, Missouri, three years, being residents there at the time of the battle of Lexington. While living in the East they earned money enough to send to England for nine of their relatives (four of Brother Farrell's and five of Sister Farrell's kinspeople), and came to Utah in 1862. After residing three years at Ogden, they made Eden their permanent home in 1865. Before emigrating from England, Elder Farrell labored among the people as a teacher and after his arrival in Utah he was ordained an Elder and subsequently a Seventy. From 1869 to 1874 he acted as a counselor to Brother Ballantine (presiding Elder at Eden), and when a reorganization of the Eden Ward took place in 1881 Bro. Farrell was ordained a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over Eden Ward by Franklin D. Richards. He also acted as an officer in the Eden Sunday school and was the first president of the Elder's quorum in Eden organized in 1866. Of secular offices. Bro. Farrell served as justice of the peace, constable, road supervisor, etc. His wife has been a very faithful Relief Society worker and acted for several years as first counselor to Christine Thompson, president of the Eden Ward Relief Society. By his first wife Brother Farrell became the father of eleven children, six of whom are living today. In the year 1865 Bro. Farrell married Marian Lindsay, who bore him six children, three of whom are now living; she died at Eden in 1904. Bro. Farrell died Oct. 5, 1901.
