Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Smart, Abel

Smart, Abel, Ward clerk of Georgetown, Bear Lake Stake, Idaho, is a native of England, having been born at Lea Wiltshire, Jan. 30, 1848. His father's name was William Smart and his mother's name Jane Stockham. He came to this country in the spring of 1867, remaining for one year in New Jersey and Michigan, coming to Utah in 1868, spending the first winter in Promontory Point, removing to Wellsville, Cache county, where he was baptized Sept. 20, 1869, by Robert Leatham; subsequently removing to Smithfield. Brother Smart was married Sept. 20, 1869, and ordained an Elder the same day by Samuel H. Smith; was ordained a High Priest March 27, 1883, by George Barber, and was associated with the High Priests' quorum of Cache county from 1883 to 1889, moving then to Ovid, Bear Lake county, Idaho, where he entered the High Priests' quorum; he was called to labor in the Logan Temple by president John Taylor, remaining there till the latter part of 1885, when the raids of the enemy became so persistent that Brother Smart went into retirement. He had a hard time of it, living chiefly in the mountains and not sleeping in a house for two years; at one time he got snowed in between Bear Lake and Cache counties and for three days and nights had no food or shelter; one of his feet was frozen and he contracted pneumonia, from which he has never fully recovered. The deputy marshals were quite active in searching his premises and on one occasion he was within three feet of them, but their intended victim escaped. It is worthy of note that when Brother Smart left home it was to make a trip around the world. Hearing at Omaha of Brigham Young and the Great Salt Lake he headed this way, heard the truth and embraced it. His first marriage, above spoken of, was to Sarah Giltens, who bore him twelve children; the next was to Emma Irene Staley, by whom he has become father to eleven children; and the third, Annie Christina Jensen, who became the mother of five children. The last and six of the children are dead.
