Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Schade, Christian Fischer

Schade, Christian Fischer, a veteran Elder in the Huntsville Ward, Weber county, Utah, was born April 13, 1827, at Kornum, Aalborg amt, Denmark, the son of Frederik Ludvig Schade and Marie M. Ravn. He was ordained a Teacher shortly after his baptism, ordained an Elder Oct. 7, 1863, by Apostle Geo. Q. Cannon, and emigrated to America in 1864, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Monarch of the Sea", which arrived in New York, June 3, 1864. While crossing the ocean with a large company of emigrating saints the measles broke out among the emigrants and nearly fifty of the children died. Bro. Schade crossed the plains in John Smith's independent company which arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 1, 1864. On the plains Bro. Schade's wife, Ablone Thorstensen (whom he had married Aug. 15, 1856) was very sick and had to ride eight hundred miles. That she recovered and reached the Valley was nothing short of a miracle. Elder Schade located at Huntsville and married Sophia Heder Sept. 15, 1866. He was ordained a Seventy March 27, 1869, and filled a mission to Scandinavia in 1872-74, during which he presided over the Aarhus conference, Denmark. After his return from Europe he was ordained a High Priest and called to act as second counselor to Bishop David McKay; he filled this position for fifteen years. In 1888 (June 23rd) he was arrested on the charge of unlawful cohabitation and sentenced to pay a fine of $300 and $150 as cost of suit. Bro Schade is the father of five children, namely, Stina M. A., Chr. F., Adam W., Mate E., and Maria E. At home Elder Schade has always taken a leading part in all matters pertaining to the interests of the Church; thus for a number of years he served as first assistant superintendent of the Huntsville Sunday school and acted as a home missionary. In secular affairs he has also been very active, serving for many years as director and treasurer of the Ward ecclesiastical organization, school trustee, sergeant in the State militia, etc.
