Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Nebeker, Ira

Nebeker, Ira, Bishop of Laketown, Rich county, Utah, was born June 23, 1839, in Vermillion county, Illinois. He is a son of John Nebeker and Lurena Fitzgerald, who were prominent among the pioneers and founders of Utah. The Nebekers were among the first settlers of Delaware and the Fitzgeralds originally settled in Pennsylvania. Both branches of the family are represented among the builders of the nation and it is from these sources that Ira Nebeker inherited the sturdy simplicity, tenacity of purpose and faithfulness to duty which characterized his life. John Nebeker and family became converts to the "Mormon" faith and in the fall of 1846 joined the Latter-day Saints, who were gathered near Council Bluffs on the Missouri river; the next year they crossed the plains. He was captain of ten in George B. Wallace's Fifty and Abraham O. Smoot's hundred, arriving in the Great Salt Lake valley on the 26th day of Oct. 1847. In 1885, Brother Nebeker joined Captain Robert T. Burton's company of Minute Men, a military body expected to start on short notice, to protect exposed settlements from attack or the depredations of hostile Indians and on other occasions of emergency, in which service he distinguished himself for courage and wisdom beyond his years. In the fall of 1856, being then only seventeen years of age, he went with George D. Grant's company to the relief of the belated handcart immigrants; from the exposures and hardships of this trip, many times wading in icy cold Sweetwater and carrying on his back enfeebled immigrants, he greatly undermined his otherwise strong constitution. In 1861 he married Delia Lane, and the children of this marriage now living are John, Hyrum, Frank K., Horace G., Noami, Clara, Ella, Effie, Laura and Ruby. With his family he lived for about two years in southern Utah and at the general October conference, in 1869, with others, he was called to remove to Bear Lake valley. He settled in Laketown and was shortly thereafter ordained Bishop of the Ward by Apostle Charles C. Rich, then presiding over the Bear Lake Stake. He held the position of Bishop until his death at Los Angeles, California, on April 29, 1905. He was an active and successful stockman and farmer; dignified, but unpretentious, practical, but self-sacrificing, possessing a keen sense of justice, yet sympathetic and considerate of others. He was always respected for his honor and integrity by those with whom he transacted business and greatly loved by all who enjoyed an intimate acquaintance with him. It is said by those who knew him best that in emergencies he always did the right thing at the right time, as if by intuition. While always engaged more or less in public work, he cared little, if at all, for public notice, believing, as he often expressed it, that a man's deeds should speak for themselves.
