Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Bingham, Erastus Perry

Bingham, Erastus Perry, a veteran Elder of the Huntsville Ward, Weber county, Utah, was born March 20, 1846, at La Harpe, Hancock county, Illinois, the son of Erastus Bingham and Olive H. Freeman. He was baptized in March, 1854; ordained a Seventy in 1865 by Franklin Cummings and a High Priest May 5, 1910 by Adam L. Peterson. Emigrating to Utah in 1847 with his parents he crossed the plains in Daniel Spencer's hundred, arriving in the Valley in September, 1847. After spending the winter in the Old Fort, he located in Cottonwood in the so-called Holliday Settlement, where he remained until the spring of 1850. In 1866 he went to the Missouri river after emigrants under Captain Horton D. Haight and returned to Utah with telegraph wires and three families of emigrants. Since his early youth Bro. Bingham has been a diligent Church worker. For more than twenty years he acted as one of the presidents of the 75th quorum of Seventy, and for the same length of time he acted as a president of a teacher's district in the Huntsville and Middleton Wards. He has practically been a Ward teacher since 1866. He has also been superintendent of the East Huntsville Sunday school when that branch was yet a branch of the Huntsville Ward. Among the many civil offices which he has held may be mentioned that he served as constable of the Huntsville precinct for six years and as school trustee in the Huntsville school district five years. His occupation, otherwise, has been that of a lumber dealer, farmer and stockraiser. On different occasions he has changed his places of residence. Being born at La Harpe, Ill., he has since resided in Punca, Nebraska, Salt Lake City, Cottonwood, Ogden, Bingham's Fort, Farr West, Slaterville and Huntsville. He became a settler of Ogden valley in the spring of 1864. During the Black Hawk Indian war he made a trip to the Missouri river after telegraph wire and emigrants, although he at that time served as a cavalry man in the Utah militia. Often since the Indian wars has he done military duty as a home guard.
