Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Gardner, James

Gardner, James, a president of the 15th Quorum of Seventy from 1884 to 1902 and an active Church worker in the Goshen Ward (Nebo Stake), Utah county, Utah, was born Dec. 19, 1837, in Glasgow, Scotland, the son of Alexander Gardner and Ann Knox. Together with his mother's family of five children he emigrated to America in 1856, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Enoch Train", which arrived at Boston, May 1, 1856, and crossing the plains in Daniel D. McArthur's handcart company, which arrived in G. S. L. Valley Sept. 26, 1856. When the handcart company reached the mouth of Emigration canyon, James and his brother Alexander, together with other young men, who were fired with enthusiasm because they at length had reached the place of their destination, engaged in a foot race with their handcarts to see who could reach the city first. While running they forgot all about their having lived on short rations for a month or so; in fact the boys were in excellent trim for running, not carrying any superfluous flesh. En route for the Valley James was baptized in June, 1856, on the camp ground near Iowa City, and soon after his arrival in the Valley he was ordained to the office of a Priest. Soon the family located temporarily in Tooele city, and stayed there till the time of the "general move" in the spring of 1858, when they moved to Goshen, Utah county. There on Dec. 25, 1860, James married Eliza Rogers, by whom he became the father of seven children, whose names are: Mary Ann, James A., Elizabeth, George, Charles, John W. and Walter. In the spring of 1857 Bro. Gardner was ordained a Seventy by John Shields and became a member of the 43rd quorum of Seventy. Later in 1884, he was chosen as one of the presidents of the 15th quorum of Seventy. Commencing with 1876 he worked as a quarryman at the Temple Quarry in Cottonwood canyon. He was thus engaged for ten years, and during the following four years he furnished charcoal for the Temple blacksmith shop, which the blacksmiths used until the capstone of the Temple was laid in 1892. At present and for the last twelve years Bro. Gardner has been chairman of the school board, and he has served as justice of the peace for fifteen years. He fought in the Tintic Indian war during the years 1857-58, also in the Indian war at Goshen and in the Black Hawk war in Millard county. He was ordained a High Priest Nov. 15, 1902, by Rudger Clawson. Bro. Gardner still resides at Goshen and is yet an active Church member, although advanced in years.
