Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Hancock, George Washington

Hancock, George Washington, a Pioneer and leading business man of Payson, Utah, was born March 8, 1826, in Columbus, Ohio, the son of Solomon Hancock and Alta Adams. He was baptized in 1834 by Levi W. Hancock, was baptized in Clay county, Missouri, after being driven from Jackson county. Later he moved with his father's family to Far West and later (1839) to Commerce, Hancock county, Illinois, whence he came west in April, 1846. Having arrived on the Missouri river, he enlisted in the Mormon Battalion in July, 1846, and marched all the way to California. After being discharged in 1847, he came to G. S. L. Valley, arriving there in October, 1847. Continuing the journey thence eastward, he reached Council Bluffs about New Year, 1848. Two years later he returned to the Valley and settled at Bountiful, Davis county. After returning from California, being then 20 years old, he married Betsey Jane Fackrell. Subsequently he assisted in the surveying of a road between California and Utah. In 1856 he was called by Pres. Young to settle at Payson, Utah county, and start a store and other mercantile enterprises. Among other things he started a tannery, a shoe and harness factory, a lumber yard and a butcher shop. He also built a grist mill, and later a creamery and canning establishment. He built the first electric plant in Payson and also helped to build the Opera House in that city. At the time of his demise he was particularly engaged in the coal and lumber business. All throughout his busy life Bro. Hancock endeavored to find employment for the poor, and in his dealings with the people in early Utah days he took their produce of every description in exchange for his goods, thus proving a great benefactor to many who otherwise would have suffered for the natural necessities of life. In his earlier days he was ordained a Seventy and acted as a president of his quorum. Later he was ordained a High Priest. His first wife died in 1851, and a year later he married Amy Hancock. By his two wives he became the father of fourteen children. Bro. Hancock died Nov. 15, 1901.
