Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Hancock, Amy

Hancock, Amy, wife of Geo. W. Hancock, was born May 12, 1835, near Liberty, Clay county, Missouri, the daughter of Joseph Hancock and Experience Wheeler Rud. She moved to Far West and passed through the persecutions together with her parents until driven out of Missouri. Later the family settled at Montrose, Iowa, opposite Nauvoo, where Sister Amy saw the Prophet Joseph Smith a few days before his martyrdom. She also witnessed his departure for Carthage when he bid the saints farewell, saying that he was going to Carthage like a lamb to the slaughter. She witnessed the bodies of the martyred Prophet and Patriarch lying at state in the Mansion House in Nauvoo. Together with her parents she participated in the exodus from Nauvoo in 1846, and after the arrival of the family at Council Bluffs, Sister Amy was baptized by Elder James Harmeson. Finally the family emigrated to Utah, 1851, arriving in G. S. L. Valley in September, 1851, crossing the plains with ox teams. After spending a short time in Payson, they moved to Provo, expecting to make that place their permanent home. Exposed to the trials and hardships incident to pioneer life, the mother took sick and died. Sister Amy was married to Geo. W. Hancock in 1852 at Bountiful, Utah, he being at that time a widower with two small children which she raised to man and womanhood. She is the mother of 12 children of her own. She also raised an Indian girl who became the wife of Kanosh, an Indian chief. The family moved to Payson in 1856, where sister Hancock labored diligently in the Relief Society, from the time said society was first organized in April, 1858. She was set apart as second counselor to the president of the First Ward Relief Society and later she was chosen as president of the Primary Association and teacher in the Sunday school. Still later, 1885, she was chosen as an assistant to Annie K. Smoot, Stake president of the Primary associations, and finally chosen as vice-president to Sister Peterson, president of the Payson First Ward Relief Society. Sister Hancock has done work for the dead in three Temples, and performed ordinances for a great number of her dead relatives. Though she is now 78 years of age, she is still an active worker in the Relief Society of the Payson First Ward.
