Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Fairbanks, John Boylston

Fairbanks, John Boylston, Bishop of the Payson Ward, Utah county, Utah was born April 28, 1817, in the town of Queensbury, Washington county, New York the son of Jeseph Fairbanks, and Polly White. In a short autobiography, written by John B. Fairbanks, we cull the following: "I removed from Queensbury with my parents in the spring of 1826 to the township of Paquannock, Morris county, New Jersey. In the spring of 1828 we removed to Fort Lee, Jersey county, New Jersey, and in the fall of 1830 we removed to Meads Basin (Mountain View), Bergen county, New Jersey. In the spring of 1832 I obtained employment as a clerk at Meads Basin by Jacob and Nathaniel Wilson, with whom I lived for twelve years. I was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints March 16, 1843, at Meads Basin, by John Leach. In 1844 Aug. 31st) I married Sarah Van Wagoner, of Pompton, New Jersey. In company with my wife, father, mother, sister and brother-in-law (Dr. Henry I. Doremus) I left New York Sept. 27, 1844, for Nauvoo, Ill., where we arrived Nov. 1, 1844. Here I was ordained into the 70th quorum of Seventy Jan. 12, 1845. Following are the names of the relatives of the Fairbanks family which left Meads Basin, New Jersey, for Nauvoo, Ill., in 1844: Joseph Fairbanks, father of John B.; Polly White Fairbanks, mother of John B.; David Fairbanks, brother of John B.; Susan Mandevie Fairbanks, sister-in-law of John B.; John B. Fairbanks; Sarah Van Wagoner Fairbanks, wife of John B,; Henry I. Doremus, brother-in-law of John B.; Harriet Fairbanks Doremus, sister of John B.; Nathaniel Fairbanks, brother of John B.; Henry Fairbanks, brother of John B.; Helmat Van Wagoner, father-in-law; Mary Van Houton Van Wagoner, mother-in-law; John Van Wagoner, brother-in-law; Clarisa Van Wagoner, sister-in-law; Hannah Van Wagoner Smith, sister-in-law; James H. Smith, brother-in-law and Ann Van Wagoner Haven, sister-in-law. In the winter of 1844-45 John B. Fairbanks worked on the Nauvoo Temple. Jan. 21, 1846, he and his wife received their endowments and on the 23rd they were sealed. In 1846 they came out to Winter Quarters during the general exodus. On Feb. 26, 1847, the father of John B. Fairbanks died; his wife's mother and their first child also died at Winter Quarters. In June, 1847, John B. Fairbanks was chosen captain of the 4th ten of the second fifty of the 3rd hundred, Willard Snow being captain of the fifty and Jedediah M. Grant captain of the hundred. The company arrived in Great Salt Lake City Oct 6, 1847. On their way they met the pioneers returning to the East. The first home of J. B. Fairbanks and his wife in Salt Lake City was a covered wagon box, the front end gate having been removed and a piece of carpet hung up for a door; at the rear was the bed under which were the trunks; in front was a small stove, and a piece of carpet covered the floor. One chair was the extent of their furniture; but Mrs. Fairbanks has often said that she never passed a happier winter than she did in this humble home. On the 20th of March, 1849, their third child, Henry, was born. While residing in Salt Lake Brother Fairbanks acted as Ward clerk, David, his brother, being Bishop of the First Ward. In 1851, John B., with others, moved south to Payson, Utah county, but the fifteen families then residing on Peteetneet creek objected to others settling there, on account of a scarcity of water; hence Bro. Fairbanks with his brother David, his brother-in-law Henry Nebeker (husband of his wife's sister Ann) and David Crockett with their families, went three miles east to a place where the water from a large spring flowed down a ravine. They made a dam across the ravine and took the water out onto the land which secured them good crops. This place was called Pondtown (now Salem); subsequently these pioneer settlers of Pondtown were compelled to move to Payson for safety on account of some troubles with the Indians. In 1853-56 Bro. Fairbanks was a member of the city council. March 5, 1855, he was set apart as second counselor to Bishop Hancock of Payson; he also acted as Ward clerk. In 1858 (March 25th) he left home on an exploring mission to the White Mountains. Feb. 15, 1862, he was ordained and set apart as Bishop of Payson. A few years later he was called on a mission to the Muddy, but later was told by Pres. Brigham Young that he did not want him to go, but that he might furnish a substitute. He accordingly equipped George Jackson with a team and wagon and farm implements and hired him to go; he kept him there until George A. Smith about four years later told him to send for him to come home. Bro. Fairbanks was a great friend to the Indians; he often gave them flour and beef, and they appreciated his kindness; many times they were seen to put their arms around him and hug him to their bosoms, and pat him on the back and shoulders. When told of his death tears would come to their eyes and they would turn away sorrowing. Nov. 19. 1869, Bro. Fairbanks started on a mission to the Eastern States to visit his relatives and preach the gospel. He returned April 10, 1870, after allaying much prejudice, and having a good visit. In 1871 (April 20th) he left home for a mission to Great Britain. He traveled in Liverpool a few months and was then transferred to Nottingham to preside over the Nottingham conference, later he was transferred to London to preside over the London conference which position he occupied until he was released to return home. Returning home he was given charge of a company of 510 Saints (291 British and 219 Scandinavian), which sailed from Liverpool Sept. 3, 1873. They came near being shipwrecked near Sable Island, as the ship ran on a sand bar and stuck fast there several hours. The coolness of Brother Fairbanks upon this occasion was such that it inspired faith and confidence in the saints as well as many of the other passengers and the ship's crew. He told them not to fear, as they would not go down. The captain himself took courage from his remarks The ship began to leak, but the pumps proved sufficient to keep it from filling. They landed safely in New York Sept. 29, 1873, and arrived in Salt Lake City, Sept. 29, 1873. When Bro. Fairbanks returned home, friends met him in vehicles between Spanish Fork and Payson, to escort and welcome him home where a banquet had been prepared by his friends and relatives. When he returned he was no longer Bishop, as one of his counselors had refused to act in his absence and the other was not living at Payson. It being necessary to have a presiding officer, Josep S. Tanner had been appointed in his stead. Bro. Fairbanks was elected a member of the city council in 1875, which position he occupied until his death, which occurred May 14, 1875; the cause was typhoid pneumonia. The attendance at his funeral was the largest that Payson had ever known. He left a wife and eight children, four sons and four daughters to mourn his loss.
