Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Fairbanks, Nathaniel

Fairbanks, Nathaniel, one of the original pioneers of Utah, was born May 10, 1823, at Queensbury, Washington county, N. Y. the son of Joseph Fairbanks and Polly White. He moved in the spring of 1828 with his parents to Pequannock, Morris county, New Jersey. From there he moved to Ft. Lee, Bergen co., N. J., and in the fall of 1830 he moved to Meads Basin, Bergen (now Pasaic) county. Leaving his father May 28, 1830, he started for Glens Falls, N. Y., arriving there June 2, 1839. While there he served a two years' apprenticeship at the mason and stone cutting trade, as did also his brother Jonathan W. Fairbanks, who was a Methodist. "I partook somewhat of the same spirit' writes Bro. Nathaniel "and returned to my father in the summer of 1843, where I first heard the sound of the everlasting gospel. I stayed there about four weeks and then went to New York City, accompanied by my Brother John. Here I listened to several discourses by Elders Orson Pratt, Brigham Young, John E. Page and others and believing their testimony I was baptized in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Aug. 28, 1343, by John Cairns; confirmed by Reuben Hedlock. On the same day I returned to Glens Falls, where I stayed about four weeks, and then returned to New Jersey, where I remained till May 16, 1844. Starting with my Bro. David and Henry for Nauvoo, Ill., I arrived in that city July 4, 1844. I was ordained into the original 19th quorum of Seventy Jan. 12, 1845." Bro. Fairbanks participated with his co-religionists in the general exodus from Nauvoo in 1846, and was chosen in the spring of 1847 as one of the pioneers to seek a new home for the Saints in the Rocky Mountains. Under Pres. Brigham Young he left Winter Quarters in April, 1847, and entered G. S. L. Valley in July, 1847. The same fall he started for the East, but meeting his brother John B. and family en route he returned with them to the Valley, and thus became one of the real founders of G. S. L. City, participating in the hardships and trials of pioneer life. While driving a herd of cattle from the Valley to Sacramento, California, he was accidentally thrown from a mule and drowned in a river, near Sacramento. This sad accident happened in 1853. Bro. Fairbanks was universally known among his associates as a brave man and a great hunter. One day, while engaged in hunting, he heard some rustling in the brush. With rifle in hand he crawled silently into the brush and soon spied a bear with two large cubs. He shot one of the cubs, while the mother and the other cub escaped. In a short time Nathaniel surprised the company by dragging the dead cub into camp.
