Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Evans, Thos. David

Evans, Thos. David, a Utah hand-cart pioneer of 1856, and a resident of Spanish Fork, Utah county, Utah, was born Feb. 14, 1853, in Myrther-Tydvil, Wales, the son of David Evans and Jane Morris. When about sixteen years old he heard the first Later-day Saint Elder preach on a street corner and he believed the testimony he heard at once and was baptized April 16, 1849. After his baptism Bro. Evans received the Priesthood and labored as a missionary in Pembrokeshire, Wales, about five years. During that time he met Miss Priscilla Merriman and married her April 3, 1856. With his young wife he emigrated to Utah, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Samuel Curling", which sailed from Liverpool April 19th and arrived at Boston May 23, 1856. They crossed the plains in Capt. Edward Bunker's handcart company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 2, 1856. Though Bro. Evans had lost one of his legs when a boy, he and his faithful wife pulled a handcart all the way across the plains. He came directly to Spanish Fork, where the people acted very kind to him and his wife, giving them plenty of food to eat, but on account of the hunger and fatigue he had suffered while crossing the plains the food thus given him proved too rich for his body and sickness followed. In 1857 (May 19th) he was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the 50th quorum of Seventy. He remained in that quorum, until his death which occurred in Spanish Fork, Utah, Aug. 2, 1896. For a number of years Bro. Evans acted as superintendent of the Sunday school in Spanish Fork and in 1875-77 he filled a mission to Wales; while away on that mission he never received any financial aid from home. Bro. Evans was the father of twelve children, whose names follow: Emma P., Jennie A., Caroline L., David T., Joseph J., Thomas A., Charles A., Sarah, Mary E., John W., Ada M. and Clara A. They were all born in Spanish Fork and they are all alive except Thomas who died at the age of six months.
