Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Jones, Nathaniel Vary

Jones, Nathaniel Vary, the second Bishop of the Fifteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, was born Oct. 13, 1822, in the town of Brighton, (afterward Rochester), Monroe county, State of New York, the son of Samuel Jones and Lucinda Kingsley. He worked as a ship-carpenter until about seventeen years of age, when he went to live in Potosi, Wisconsin. He was there baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by Elder William O. Clark. In the spring of 1842 he went to Nauvoo, Illinois. There he was ordained an Elder in June, 1843. He immediately left Nauvoo on a mission to the Eastern States, from which he returned in September, 1844. In 1845 (March 14th) he married Rebecca M. Burton, at Nauvoo. He remained in Nauvoo, working most of his time on the Temple, until May 1846, when he, with his wife, moved west with the Saints, who were being expelled from Nauvoo, Illinois, to Council Bluffs, Iowa. July 16, 1846, he enlisted in the Mormon Battalion and marched to California under command of Colonel P. St. George Cooke. While in California he was selected, in company with three men from each of the several companies in the Mormon Battalion, under direction of General Kearney, commanding the U. S. Army on the West coast, to act as an escort for the general and to take Colonel John C. Fremont, then under arrest by order of General Kearney, back to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. The party accomplished its march and arrived at the Missouri river, in the later part of August, 1847. General Kearney with his party crossed the northeast corner of what afterwards became the Territory of Utah, traveling along Bear River, between the 17th and 22nd days of July, 1847. They camped on Green River, July 12, 1847. May 6, 1849, in company with others, he started by team from Council Bluffs, Iowa, for the Great Salt Lake Valley, arriving there in August, 1849. He resided in Utah the rest of his life. In November, 1850, he was elected 1st lieutenant of a cavalry battalion of life guards, Nauvoo Legion. In April, 1851, he was elected the first alderman of the 2nd Municipal Ward of Salt Lake City. In September, 1852, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the 15th Ward of Salt Lake City. In August 1852, he was called by the authorities of the Church to take a mission to Hindoostan, India, to establish the Church in that country. He acted as president of that mission until 1855, when he returned to Salt Lake City. In November, 1855, he was appointed city councilor in Salt Lake City, and in the spring of 1856 he was called by Pres. Brigham Young to go to Los Vegas (now in Nevada), to manufacture lead, which he did and brought back many wagon loads of bullion at that time called lead, but which contained large quantities of silver; returned to Salt Lake City in March, 1857. In April, 1857, he was again elected city councilor in Salt Lake City. In the summer of 1857 he was detailed to carry the U. S. Mail from Salt Lake City as far East as Deer Creek, Wyoming, and to build a station at that place for the protection of those carrying the mails; he returned the following August. He was then appointed a colonel and detailed to take part with the Utah Militia in what was then known as the "Echo Canyon war"; he remained on duty until the Utah Militia was recalled. In the spring of 1858 he was detailed to remain in Salt Lake City, as one of the guards in charge of the city which had been practically evacuated by its inhabitants. In August, 1858, he was elected selectman for Salt Lake County. In April, 1859, he was elected alderman of the Second Municipal Ward of Salt Lake City. In the fall of 1859 he was called to go to England on a mission by the First Presidency of the Church; he returned in the fall of 1861. In November of the same year he went, by request of Prs. Brigham Young, to Parowan, Utah, with a view to erect a plant and machinery for the manufacture of iron. After manufacturing a limited quantity of iron, which was found to be of superior quality, he returned from Parowan by request of Pres. Brigham Young in the summer of 1862, with a view to undertake the manufacture of iron at a point nearer Salt Lake City. Remaining in Salt Lake City until the month of February, 1863, he was taken ill with pneumonia, and died Feb. 15, 1863, at the age of forty years. Bro. Jones was survived by four wives with their children. The children of his first wife (Rebecca M. Burton) were Clara L., Harriet C., Nathaniel V., jun., Mary A., Frederick B., and William B. The only child by his second wife (Caroline M. Garr) was Mark V. Jones. His children by Mary E. Brown were Charles B., Seth C., and an adopted daughter (Eliza F.). The only child by his wife Eliza Reed was Maria A.
