Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Mitchell, Benjamin Thomas

Mitchell, Benjamin Thomas, second Bishop of the Fifteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Jan. 12, 1816, in Muncy township, Lycoming county, Pa. the son of Abraham and Anna Mitchell. He joined the Church at an early day and migrated to Great Salt Lake Valley in 1848, crossing the plains in charge of a company of emigrants. In 1851-53 he filled a mission to Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. On his return to Utah he led another company of emigrants across the plains. He was one of the first settlers of the Fifteenth Ward (Salt Lake City) and became Bishop of said Ward, Dec. 24, 1856, succeeding Nathaniel V. Jones. During this time he was appointed captain of a company of fifty of the Nauvoo Legion which held drills west of the Jordan river. He served in that office until the companies were disorganized. He afterwards moved to the Sixteenth Ward, where a portion of his family still reside. Bro. Mitchell was closely associated with Pres. Brigham Young, Truman Angell and others in drawing the plans for the Salt Lake Temple. He served as one of the committee appointed to decide whether sandstone or granite should be used in the construction of the foundation of the building, and he had active charge of the stone cutting for a number of years, more particularly from the year 1861 to 1863. He also assisted in the construction of various other important buildings in the city, among which were the Deseret National Bank building and the old city jail. He was also a stockholder of the Zions Cooperative Mercantile Institution and was interested in the establishment of the paper mills, in what is now known as Sugar House. Bro. Mitchell was master of four different trades and very active in the up-building of Zion. He had a very large family consisting of seven wives and forty-two children. Some of his boys worked for a great number of years in cutting stone for the Temple, learning their trade under his guidance. He with some of his family were instrumental in the settlement of Kamas, Summit county, commonly known in the early days as Rhodes's Valley, where he was interested in the tilling of the soil and the raising of cattle and sheep. A number of his descendants are inhabitants of that place at the present time. Bro. Mitchell left a large posterity, numbering into the hundreds and scattered in various parts of Utah. He died March 9, 1880, in Salt Lake City, and was buried in the city cemetery, where a number of beautiful headstones bear evidence of his skill as a stone cutter to this day.
