Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Cunningham, Andrew

Cunningham, Andrew, third Bishop of the 15th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Sept. 22, 1816, near Clarksburg, Harrison co., Virginia, (now in West Virginia). His ancestors on both sides were Virginians from the Colonial period, and his mother's progenitors were of Dutch descent. His parents were farm owners in a small way, and Andrew's boyhood was spent upon his father's farm. He had very little schooling,-about four winters in all, at the only school taught in his neighborhood. About the year 1829 his father was accidentally drowned while returning from Clarksburg with a marriage license for his daughter Sarah, who was about to marry Jacob Bigler. Ten years later Andrew went West to grow up with the country. He proceeded to Western Illinois, and settled near the town of Quincy, returning thence to Virginia in the fall of 1840 to move his mother and her family to his new home. The next spring found them on their way west, the party consisting of Andrew, his mother, his four brothers (John, William, Addison and Granville) and his two sisters (Susan and Sarah). About July, 1841, he married Lucinda Rawlins. His residence in Illinois brought him into contact with the Latter-day Saints, who in the winter of 1838-39 were driven out of Missouri and for a while congregated in and near Quincy in large numbers. Andrew Cunningham and his wife were both converted to "Mormonism" and joined the Church not long after their marriage. Their eldest child, James Alma Cunningham, was born June 14, 1842. Six years later the Cunninghams emigrated to the Rocky Mountains, starting in the spring of 1848, from Council Bluffs. The head of the family was captain of a company of ten, who were the owners of 27 wagons. His own outfit consisted of two wagons, one drawn by a pair of horses and the other by a yoke of oxen and a yoke of cows. They arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley Oct. 12, 1848, and settled first near the old Pioneer Square. They became identified with the 15th Ward, where Bro. Cunningham from 1851, to 1852 acted as counselor to Bishop Nathaniel V. Jones, and after Bishop Jones went on his mission to India in 1852, Bro. Cunningham was acting Bishop of the Ward until September, 1855, when he went upon a mission to Illinois, and the neighboring States; from this mission he returned in August, 1857, after making Florence (formerly Winter Quarters) an outfitting place for the Saints crossing the plains. Prior to going upon his mission he was deputy sheriff under Sheriff Robt. T. Burton and the two built by contract the Salt Lake County court house. Contracting, freighting and farming were Bro. Cunningham's principal occupations. The year he returned from his mission was the year of the "Echo Canyon war," which began in the latter part of September, 1857, so far as Utah was concerned, with the investment by the militia of the mountain passes of the Wasatch, in response to Gov. Young's proclamation placing the Territory under martial law. About the time of this movement a small company of men numbering about fifty were called to go to the Snake River country to form a new settlement there and to watch any movement that might be made by Johnston's army or other hostile forces in that direction. At the head of this company was Capt. Andrew Cunningham. They settled near the present town of Blackfoot, Idaho, but returned to Salt Lake City the same winter. In the move that preceded the arrival of the government troops at this point the Cunningham family went to Lehi, Utah co., but returned to their former home in the summer of 1858. In January, 1859, Andrew Cunningham became Bishop of the 15th Ward and served in that capacity for about nine years, until early in 1868. From 1859 to 1862 he was marshal of Salt Lake City and he also served two terms as a member of the city council. Among his business associates were Robt. T. Burton and Robt. J. Golding. He had just resigned his office as Bishop, owing to fast failing health, when he died at his home in the 15th Ward, March 2, 1868. Bishop Cunningham was the father of several children, five of whom are living, namely: James Alma (the well known mining man), Mrs. Lucinda Ann Ure, Hyrum R., Joseph R., and Mrs. Eustacia Weiser. His widow, Mrs. Lucinda Rawlings Cunningham, died in October, 1901.
