Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Kimball, Sarah Melissa

Kimball, Sarah Melissa, wife of Hiram S. Kimball, was born Dec. 29, 1818, in Phelps, Ontario county, New York, the daughter of Oliver Granger and Lydia Dibble. Her parents moved to Kirtland, Ohio, soon after the Church was established there, and became closely associated with the Prophet Joseph. Thus Sarah was with the Church from her early girlhood and figured in its history up to the time of her death. She attended the Hebrew school in Kirtland together with the Prophet Joseph and others who were among the foremost leaders of the Church. As a young girl she had excellent opportunities for advancement and cultivation, and the knowledge acquired served as a good foundation for her subsequent career as a teacher and as a leader among women. When the Saints were gathering to Nauvoo Miss Granger became acquainted with Hiram S. Kimball, who was a resident and land owner of the town of Commerce, as it was then called. They were married in Kirtland, Ohio, but came to dwell in Nauvoo, where they had a lovely home, and Mr. Kimball figured conspicuously in business and was very prosperous. Sister Kimball was ambitious in good works and especially anxious to contribute towards the Temple which was to be erected in that City, and her zeal in this respect was one of the factors in bringing about the organization of the Relief Society, which has since become such a large and flourishing institution. She was present at its organization in the Masonic Hall in Nauvoo March 17, 1842, and in fact the preliminary meeting was held in Sister Kimball's own house. Sister Kimball came to the Valley in 1852, and settled in Salt Lake City, where she resided until the day of her death. When the Relief Societies were organized in Utah, Sister Kimball was chosen to preside in her own Ward, the Fifteenth. This was on Feb. 9, 1857, and she was from that time one of the most able presidents and indefatigable workers in the cause throughout all Zion. Perhaps there was no more judicious economizer of means, yet withal liberal in bestowing to the needy and unfortunate, than she was. Her own Ward can testify to her good words, her unbounded charity and motherly care of the sick and afflicted, better than those who knew her in a wider sense. Notwithstanding the many public duties Sister Kimball performed and the positions she filled, her home was never neglected; she was a model housekeeper and knew the art of making home attractive; yet there was no stronger-minded woman in all Israel than Sister Kimball. She maintained the principle of equality of the sexes and contended for it with all the advantages pertaining thereto. She did not believe in half measures. She stood solidly for the largest freedom of opinion and of the press, without waiting to see what other people thought. As a public speaker she was concise and always to the point, never made long speeches, but said what she felt forcibly and always with effect. She was especially gifted in conversation, was well read, had traveled much, met many celebrated people, and at one time quite familiar in Washington society. Sister Kimball taught school in Salt Lake City for several years, and under very trying circumstances, and while thus engaged in teaching she became even more than ever convinced of the need of changed conditions for women engaged in work that came in competition with men, and determined to push the matter to the utmost. And she knew there was no other method that could be so effectual as the elective franchise. She was an ardent admirer and champion of Susan B. Anthony and after her active work as president of the Utah Suffrage Association, her name was on the roll of honor of the National American Suffrage Association as honorary vice-president. Sister Kimball was a member of the Utah Constitutional Convention of 1882 and was for some years a member of the Territorial Committee of the People's Party. She was one of the foremost in all progressive work of elevating, uplifting and advancing society and humanity. After the Relief Society had been organized throughout Zion in Stakes and branches a central organization was effected and Sarah M. Kimball was chosen by Sister Eliza R. Snow (the president) as secretary, June 19, 1880. When the society was incorporated Oct. 10, 1892 she was elected one of the vice-presidents, which position she occupied at the time of her death which occurred Dec. 1, 1898, in Salt Lake City.
