Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Felt, Nathaniel Henry

Felt, Nathaniel Henry, a prominent Elder in the Church, a successful missionary and one of Utah's earliest legislators, was born Feb. 6, 1816, at Salem, Essex county, Mass, the son of Nathaniel Felt and Hanna Reeves. He was the youngest of twelve children. The father, a merchant trader with the West Indies, died when Nathaniel was seven years old, leaving his family in straitened circumstances, having lost his property, even to his family home, through misfortunes in business, added to an unusually liberal disposition and a conscientious desire to satisfy every claim made against him and the firm of which he was a member. Nathaniel attended the common schools of his native place, and before and after school hours acted as errand boy for a draper and tailor's establishment. He was not very robust, but full of ambition to gain a collegiate education. He worked hard in that direction, but owing to the reduced circumstances of the family had to abandon his purpose just as he was about to enter the high school and was apprenticed to a tailor at Lynn, five miles from Salem. He was then fifteen years of age. Six months before attaining his majority, and through the help of his only surviving brother, he bought out an establishment in Salem, and was soon employing twenty hands. He increased his means by some fortunate ventures in the African and China trade, it being the intention of himself and brother to found a commercial business. He also became interested in military matters, joining the "Divisionary Corps of Independent Cadets," which was organized with the Boston cadets in Colonial times under British rule. Under their charter they were required to wear scarlet coats and were entitled to the right of line in parade., much to the annoyance of several other volunteer organizations. Through his musical interests Nathaniel became acquainted with Miss Eliza Ann Preston, a member of another of the old New England families, whom he married on the third day of October, 1839. His mother's family was divided in religious belief, but he, though often solicited to do so, would not identify himself with any of the popular churches. After carefully investigating "Mormonism," however, he was converted and baptized a Latter-day Saint; his wife also joined the Church. In the winter of 1843-44 he was appointed president of the Salem branch. During this period he became acquainted with such men as Brigham Young, Orson Pratt and Heber C. Kimball, who were frequent and welcome visitors at his home, and left it the morning that word was received of the martyrdom of the Prophet and the Patriarch, Joseph and Hyrum Smith. He had been advised by President Young to remain at Salem for the present; but as the clouds gathered around Nauvoo, and the mobs grew more threatening, he determined to join the main body of the Church at that place. Accordingly, on the 5th of June, 1845, after closing out his business at a great sacrifice, he with his wife and son, Joseph Henry, set out for Nauvoo. There he entered into business, and continued his labors in the ministry, being ordained one of the presidents of the 29th quorum of Seventy. Meantime the completion of the Nauvoo Temple was being hurried on and his baggage having arrived from Salem, by way of New Orleans, some of his furniture, such as carpets. tables, chairs, sofa and mirrors, were used to furnish the sacred house preparatory to the performance of ordinances therein. He took part in the defense of Nauvoo and was under fire as well as on regular guard duty. Through over-exertion in assisting the remnant of his co-religionists across the Mississippi, after the departure of the vanguard-which he was preparing to follow-he was taken down with fever and ague, and his physical condition became such that he was counseled to take his wife, then almost an invalid, to St. Louis and postpone his journey to the West. Accordingly he turned over his wagon outfit to John Taylor, one of the Twelve Apostles, and with his wife and two sons proceeded to St. Louis, arriving there early in November. Feb. 14, 1847, he was appointed president of the St. Louis conference, then numbering from seven to ten thousand Latter-day Saints, and the only organized conference in the United States. St. Louis was not only a gathering place of the Saints driven from Nauvoo, where they went to remain until a more permanent place was selected by the pioneers, but it became the outfitting point for those traveling westward, and also where the missionaries, still sent out by the Church, looked for and received substantial assistance to take them on their journey, both going and returning. At that point the immigrating Saints were received from foreign lands, by water from New Orleans, and there secured their outfits for the crossing of the plains. Upon Nathaniel H. Felt devolved almost entirely the duty of advising these immigrants, purchasing outfits and supplies for them, and chartering the necessary steamboats to take them to Kanesville. It was always a matter of congratulation with him that no accident occurred to and no scourge of sickness prevailed on any of the vessels thus engaged by him. There were instances, however, in which steamboats were secured by other persons, contrary to his advice, and in one of these instances, as soon as he learned of it, he went to the wharf and urged the Saints to come ashore, telling them the boat was unsafe. Many took his advice, while others remained on board, and the steamer had hardly left her moorings when she blew up, several lives being lost, and much baggage destroyed. At St. Louis President Felt opened a correspondence with Colonel Thomas L. Kane, who afterwards mediated between Utah and the General Government. Included in the St. Louis conference were the branches of Alton and Gravois; the latter his especial pride. There were gathered the coal miners, sturdy, reliable men, such as John Sharp, Adam Sharp, Adam Hunter and others. In 1848 President Felt took his family on a visit to their old home in Massachusetts, where he was received very kindly by friends and relatives, and every inducement offered him, but without avail, to induce him to give up "Mormonism" and remain. After his return to St. Louis the city was visited by that terrible scourge, the cholera. Every morning was heard from the "dead wagon," as it passed around, the awful cry, "Bring out your dead." Accompanying these wagons were immunes, who would enter, take the corpses, sometimes without any preparation, to the vehicles, and thence to the cemetery, where they were buried in trenches, hundreds at a time. The president of the conference was constantly called for by the afflicted people, and responded by visiting, administering to and comforting them, scarcely taking time to eat or sleep. While many thousands of the citizens died, and many of the Saints were attacked, not one of the latter died through this scourge at that time. During the great fire which followed, not one of the Saints was burned out, although, as in the case of President Felt, the fire came right up to their houses. He lived in a frame building, and the fire, skipping it, destroyed a brick building opposite. The conflagration while it swept away much property, was looked upon as a great scavenger, which purified the city after the plague. In the spring of 1850 the Felt family, consisting of father, mother, two sons and an infant daughter, started for Salt Lake City, escorted as far as Council Bluffs by Ballou's band discoursing sweet music in their honor. At the Bluffs, with two wagons, four yoke of oxen and two cows, they joined Heywood and Woolley's Church merchandise train, which arrived at their destination on the 6th of October. They located, on Upper Main street (just opposite Pres. Heber C. Kimball's residence) which is still the old family homestead. During the following winter they lived in wagons and tents, and in the spring built an adobe house of two rooms. Brother Felt's appointment as alderman of Great Salt Lake City came Jan. 9, 1851, from Governor Brigham Young, under the charter incorporating the city. Later, he was elected alderman from the Third Municipal Ward, which he represented for years. In August, 1851, he was elected to the House of Representatives in .the first Legislature of the Territory of Utah. Both in the Territorial and City governments, he served on many important committees, receiving dignitaries from the East, arranging for memorial services on the day of President Lincoln's funeral, and taking preliminary steps for establishing the water and lighting systems of the municipality. Nor was he idle in ecclesiastical matters. In 1851 he was appointed a traveling Bishop, and as such visited nearly all the settlements and towns in Utah, instructing the Ward. Bishops relative to tithing methods, records, reports, etc. In the militia he was commissioned by Governor Young, April 12, 1852, chaplain on the general staff of the Legion, with the rank of colonel. He had previously accompanied George A. Smith to Little Salt Lake Valley, where they laid out the town of Parowan. The winter of 1854-5 found him in New York City, assisting John Taylor to establish the paper known as "The Mormon," and laboring in emigration matters. During this mission, in company with Apostle Taylor and Delegate Bernhisel, he called on President Franklin Pierce, in Washington, D.C., at which time the President made the following statement relative to his recent appointment of Colonel Steptoe to succeed Brigham Young as Governor of Utah: "Gentlemen, you are well acquainted with the immense outside pressure that popular prejudice has arrayed against your people; this obliges me as Chief Magistrate to make some show in responding to it, so I have appointed Colonel Steptoe as Governor of Utah; but you will readily conceive that Colonel Steptoe, holding an honorable position in the United States army, will not be willing to resign that position for the uncertain tenure of a four years Governorship of that distant Territory." Elder Felt returned to Salt Lake City in October, 1856. Having secured Government contracts to furnish supplies for the troops at Camp Floyd, he now engaged in the grain and produce business, with David R. Allen, establishing stores at Salt Lake City, Nephi and Ephraim. In the years 1865-6-7, he was upon a mission in Great Britain, where he labored in the office of the "Millennial Star," and later as pastor of the London district. From November, 1869, until May, 1870, he was a missionary to the New England States, laboring principally in his native State, Massachusetts. For a long period he was a member of the High Council, and was actively engaged in public affairs, both of State and Church, until 1873, when he was stricken with a severe illness, from the effects of which he never entirely recovered. During his remaining years he acted as a home missionary and contributed various articles to the press. He died January 27, 1887, leaving a posterity of eight sons, five daughters and sixteen grandchildren. He was the husband of three wives-Eliza Ann Preston, who died June, 19, 1875; Sarah Strange and Mary Louisa Pile, whom he married respectively March 17, 1854, and Dec. 7, 1856. In addition to his first wife, two sons and two daughters preceded him into the great beyond.
