Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Howe, Amos

Howe, Amos, a member of the Church Auditing Committee for several years, was born Feb. 19, 1830, in the State of New York, the son of Eli Howe and Hannah Cook (possibly Cock), and removed when a boy to St. Louis, Missouri, where he attended night schools and became a mechanical engineer. He also learned the art of pattern making. While here he became acquainted with Julia Cruse, a young Mormon girl who had just arrived from England; she became his wife in June, 1850. For 14 years after that the family lived in St. Louis and New York, where Bro. Howe was engaged in construction work involving great responsibility and where his superior abilities along that line where highly appreciated. During these years five children were born to Bro. and Sister Howe; the eldest two died in infancy leaving three sons, Edgar, George and Charles. The Howes kept an open house for the Elders and had the pleasure of entertaining many distinguished members of the Church, among them being Apostles Erastus Snow, Geo. A. Smith and Joseph F. Smith. In 1865 the family came to Utah, crossing the plains in Captain Jos. A. Young's company, which arrived in Salt Lake City, Oct. 25, 1864. They located in Salt Lake City, where they found a warm welcome awaiting them by the many whom they had so hospitably entertained in the East. Bro. Howe soon became one of the strongest business men of the community. Not long after his arrival in the Valley, he was sent to Ephraim, Sanpete county, to commerce a mercantile business. After moving back to Salt Lake City, he went east with one of Pres. Young's sons and brought back a train of merchandise. Later, he went to the States after a threshing machine which was one of the first horse power machines ever brought to Salt Lake Valley. In 1876 (Oct. 19th) he married Amy Mellor. He became a member of the first Church Board of Education and served as school trustee in the Seventeenth School District for several terms. He began a foundry business in the 17th Ward (Salt Lake City) in 1872, a business which soon grew to great dimensions and was known at the time of his death as one of the most successful foundries in the State. Bro. Howe died in Salt Lake City, June 16, 1908, as a member of the Third Quorum of Seventy.
