Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Howe, Julia Cruse

Howe, Julia Cruse, wife of Amos Howe, was born June 17, 1823, in Boxford, near Newbury, Berkshire, England, the daughter of James Cruse and Mary Joyce. When a young girl she was spiritually-minded and had very high ambition. It was hard for her to believe the teachings of the Church that her parents belonged to, and one day as she came home she found her mother in tears, weeping on account of the oldest sister having joined the "Mormons." The father, being spiritual-minded, said to the mother: "He that judgeth a matter before hearing, is not wise." It was not long after this that Julia became a Latter-day Saint, being baptized April 6, 1849. Soon after that both her parents joined the Church. Julia and her sister left England for America in June, 1849. Before their departure they were blessed by their father and Julia was given a promise that she should live to do a work of great importance. Upon arriving in America they located in St. Louis, Mo., where they passed through many interesting and some trying experiences. While there Julia met Amos Howe, a skilled mechanic, who was identified with the local branch of the Church. In June, 1850, she became his wife and for fourteen years lived in St. Louis and New York, where Brother Howe was engaged in construction work. During these years five children were born to them. (One child born after arriving in Utah.) The eldest two died in infancy, leaving three sons, Edgar, George and Charles. Bro. and Sister Howe kept open house for the Elders and entertained many distinguished members of the Church, such as Apostles Erastus Snow and George A. Smith and Elder Joseph F. Smith and others. In 1864 they came to Utah and located in Salt Lake City. Sister Howe took an active part in the Seventeenth Ward Relief Society for many years. In this association she organized a sewing class, to assist the Relief Society, which was called the Junior Retrenchment Association, and afterwards became a regular Y. L. M. I. A., of which Sister Howe was president for a number of years. When the Ward Primary Association was established, she was made president of the same, and she also served as an aid in the Relief Society board of the old Salt Lake Stake, and was a Sunday School teacher for many years. She has also done a great deal of Temple work for her kindred.
