Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Harding, Charles Don

Harding, Charles Don, one of the seven presidents of the 3rd quorum of Seventy, and an active Elder in the 17th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Nov. 10, 1868, at Willard, Box Elder county, Utah, the son of Charles Harding and Matilda Zundell. He was baptized June 17, 1876, by, Benjamin Jones, received a common district, school education and attended the B. Y. U. at Provo for one and a half years. While a boy he helped his father on the farm and also in the Willard co-op. store, of which he was superintendent. He was ordained a Deacon by Solomon B. Warner, Feb. 7, 1883, and ordained a Seventy by Heber J. Grant, March 11, 1890. In 1890 (Feb. 27th) he married Emma Jane Lloyd daughter of Benjamin Lloyd and Mary Palmer. Shortly after their marriage they were both called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands. They departed April 1, 1890. Brother Harding received a special calling to teach school and after successfully passing the examinations at Honolulu he commenced teaching at Laie, in the district of Koolauloa, on the island of Oahu. Here he labored three and a half years. His wife having studied obstetrics, she devoted the major portion of her time among the sick. Bro. Harding and wife returned home July 21, 1893. About this time a number of Hawaiians who had emigrated to Josepa, Skull Valley, Utah, were returning disheartened to their native land and the rest of the Hawaiian Saints were also feeling discouraged, hence, Brother Harding received a special call to labor among them, to teach school and also take charge of their mercantile business. This position he held for about one year and was the means of doing a great deal of good in pacifying these foreign saints. Brother Harding has followed merchandising since he came to Salt Lake City in 1889. He acted in the presidency of the 17th Ward Y. M. M. I. A. for five years, and since the spring of 1912 has been one of the seven presidents of the third quorum of Seventy. He is the father of seven children, four boys and three girls.
