Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lake, James

Lake, James, a Patriarch in the Church, was born Oct. 7, 1788, at White Creek, Vanrencelor co., New York, the third son of James Lake and Elizabeth Hagerman. The family had descended from the early German colonists of New Jersey. James Lake was a perfect type of the sturdy New England farmer and the energetic citizen who had contributed to the strength and progress of the great republic, which was yet in its infancy at the time of his birth. While yet a boy, his parents moved to Canada, and he became inured to the hardships incident to a pioneer life. He married at twenty-one, but in a few short years was bereaved of his wife and left a widower with three small children, namely, Dennis, Cyrus and Mary. His second wife, Elizabeth Stover, died after bearing three children, Julia, Lawrence and James. In 1823, he married Philomela Smith. This union was blessed, with six more children when they became members of the Church. At Kirtland, Ohio, Bro. Lake, with his sons, helped to haul the stone and to build the Temple, receiving their blessing therein. Dennis and Cyrus Lake were members of Zion's Camp. When the Saints were expelled from Kirtland, the family went to Scott county, Illinois, where they rented land to enable them to gather with the Saints at Nauvoo, which city they helped to build and to beautify, sharing with the Saints in all the privations and suffering at that place. They crossed the Mississippi river on the ice in the month of February, 1846, with a company of about six hundred wagons. At Council Bluffs, Iowa, Bro. Lake arranged a hand mill on the stump of a tree, and day after day ground corn to the relief of many who would otherwise have suffered. In 1850 he was appointed captain of fifty to cross the plains and arrived with his company in safety in Salt Lake Valley, Oct. 7, 1850. He settled at Ogden. Subsequently he chose Ogden Valley as his home, and was later a member of the High Council of the Weber Stake. He was also ordained a Patriarch, because of his undaunted faith, amounting to great power in the exercise of his Priesthood insomuch that many sick were healed, and many received, blessings under his hands. Bro. Lake and his wife were highly esteemed by the authorities of the Church, and the love and reverence of their posterity toward them was akin to adoration; their memory and the faithful testimonies which they bore to the truth will brighten forever as they are burnished by the stream of time. Bro. Lake died at the age of eighty-five and was buried beside his wife, Philomela, at Oxford. Idaho, in 1873. (Samantha T. B. Foley, a granddaughter.)
