Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lake, Philomela

Lake, Philomela, wife of James Lake, was born April 13, 1794, at Brockfield, Prince co., Vermont, the daughter of Parker Smith and Sally Loomis. She descends from noble ancestry, those of her kindred being some of the leading families of New England. The faith of the Pilgrim parents had been kept burning in the souls of her progenitors, from whence she had inherited a goodly portion, which being blended with a love of home and a good practical education in every branch of industry had a tendency to develop in her those womanly instincts which made her the queen-of-home-woman that she was in very deed. At an early age she was bereaved of her mother and left to the guidance of her aged grandmother, Sarah Huntington Loomis, whose influence was to implant in her daughter's children an implicit faith in God; therefore, several articles which she wrote are yet preserved in the genealogy of the family. At the age of eighteen years Philomela married Ira Smith. Their children, were Lyman, James Harvey, Elizabeth Boardman, Josiah William and Esther. Ira Smith died in the thirty-sixth year of his age and Philomela married James Lake, Sept. 8, 1823; he was a widower with several children. By this marriage two families of children were united with the loving care of fond parents, who were afterward blessed with other children; namely, Sabra, William Bailey, Barnabas, Clarissa, Jane, Lydia, Moroni, Samantha, George and Sarah Amanda. Their prosperous home was in Camden, Canada, wherein they were visited by the Latter-day Saint Elders in the year 1832. Among these Elders were Brigham, Joseph and Phineas Young. The Lake family were all obedient to the message of the gospel, and were baptized by Elder Eleazer Miller. Their home became a place of rest and comfort for the Elders traveling in Upper Canada until a company of Saints were led from that place by Brigham Young in 1833, with which company they came to Kirtland, Ohio, where two of their children, Moroni and Samantha, were born, the former dying in his infancy. A no less noble and dignified woman than Philomela Smith Lake could have been adequate to the management of so large a family of children as theirs. Though delicate and sensitive to every hardship, her skill in household economy enabled her to overcome privation, whilst her husband and sons assisted in building the Temple at Kirtland. Their four younger children were born and reared amid the turmoil of persecution incident to those days. They followed faithfully in the footsteps of the Prophet. They had embraced the gospel as a thing worthy of all earthly sacrifice; they loved the Truth; they sought the Truth, and they knew the Truth when it was presented to them. After the awful scene at Nauvoo, when they saw the forms of the Prophets they had loved so well laid in the grave, they sought a testimony from God as to their future procedure, and this testimony they received at the great meeting held in the grove at Nauvoo, Aug. 8, 1844, where they witnessed the sublime personality of Joseph Smith as it cast its mantle of splendor around the chosen form of Brigham Young, he being transformed before the eyes of the people, as a heavenly witness to them that God had caused the Majesty of His High Priesthood to fall upon "whom he would," that His work might continue. Father and Mother Lake received that testimony and took up their march again with the Saints. Their son, Barnabas, was a member of the Mormon Battalion, and their son, William Bailey, died a martyr whilst performing a mission among the Indians on Salmon River in 1858. Their son George filled an honorable mission to England in 1870-73, while members of their numerous posterity are found in almost every settlement among the Saints. (Samantha T. B. Foley, a granddaughter.)
