Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lake, William Bailey

Lake, William Bailey, a martyr of the Church, who lost his life while in the discharge of his duty, was born Feb. 16, 1826, in Camden, Ontario, or Upper Canada, the eldest son of James Lake and Philomela Smith. He came with his parents to Kirtland, Ohio, when he was seven years of age, and grew to manhood in the early days of the Church. He was of a kind and obedient disposition and a great help to his parents in those days when they, in common with the rest of the Saints, were being driven from place to place, and it has been said of him that at times, when they were almost disheartened on account of their suffering, he would cheer them on with words of comfort in which he always displayed an abiding faith in God. Some of the facts in this article are gleaned from his lifelong friend Pleasant Green Taylor of Harrisville, Weber Co., Utah, who was his brother-in-law. As young men they often obtained employment together in order that they might assist their parents to gather with the Saints, and the two came to Utah in the company of James Lake. After the arrival in the Valley, Bailey Lake married Sarah Jane Morler. He belonged to many organizations of the Priesthood, and was a member of the 38th quorum of Seventy. In the year 1856 he and his friend Pleasant Green Taylor were called to go among the Indians on Salmon River, where a mission had been established under the direction of Pres. Brigham Young. They had been in the mission about two years when trouble arose with the Indians, and the lives of many men, women and children being in danger (two of the brethren having already been killed), Bailey Lake was sent with nine others of the brethren to bring the news to Brigham Young. These brethren were overtaken by the Indians on Bannock Creek, March 31, 1858; several of the brethren were wounded, but Bailey Lake was the only one left asleep in death upon the glittering snow. Several days passed before the main company of the returning refugees found his lifeless form, almost beyond recognition, but for his friend, Pleasant Green Taylor, who drew the arrows from his body and placed him in a bed of snow and took him home to his wife and four children and, aged parents. Bailey William Lake was five feet eight inches in height and 180 pounds in weight; he had a clear complexion, brown eyes and hair, regular features and a pleasant face. He was a man of great faith and purity of mind and character. His faithful wife became a member of the family of Pleasant Green. Taylor, with whom she still lives, surrounded by a numerous posterity.
