Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Davis, David Lazarus

Davis, David Lazarus, a member of the Salt Lake Stake High, Council and a resident of the 17th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Jan. 31, 1841, in the parish of Llanwenog, Cardiganshire, South Wales, the son of Titus Davis and Mary Bowen. He was raised under the influence of the Baptists, and when fourteen years of age he was apprenticed to learn the grocery business, following that until he left his native land. In November, 1857, he was baptized as a convert to "Mormonism," being then sixteen years old. Soon afterwards he was ordained to the Priesthood and commenced out-door preaching; labored in various capacities, and also as secretary of the branch. After being ordained an Elder, his field of labor was extended, and subsequently he presided over the Carmarthen conference, occupying that position until he emigrated to Utah in 1864. He crossed the Atlantic in the ship "General M'Clellan" and drove a 12-ox team over the plains in a freight train, which arrived in G. S. L. City in October, 1864. He located in that city where he has resided ever since. After being in the employ of Wm. Jennings and Z. C. M. I. for several years, he became a member of the firm of Barnes & Davis, which carried on an extensive business on East Temple Street. At the dissolution of the Barnes and Davis Co. Bro. Davis started in business for himself. In 1865 he joined the 24th quorum of Seventy and in May, 1887, he was ordained a High Priest by Angus M. Cannon, and set apart to act as an alternate member of the Salt Lake Stake High Council; in 1889 he became a regular member of said Council and when the Salt Lake Stake of Zion was divided in the spring of 1904, he became the senior member of the new High Council in the Salt Lake Stake. For a number of years Elder Davis acted as a home missionary and he also served two terms (1886-1888) as a member of the City Council of Salt Lake City. Bro. Davis has been engaged in the mercantile business for many years. In November, 1865, he married Hanna Jeremy, a daughter of Thos. E. Jeremy and Sarah Evans. In 1866 he married Esther Jeremy, a sister of his first wife. Bro. Davis is the father of eleven children; five of these are living today.
