Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Richins, Mary Ann Holladay

Richins, Mary Ann Holladay, one of the noble daughters of Zion, was born Sept. 17, 1880, at Hooper, Weber co., Utah, the daughter of Geo. T. Holladay and Alveretta C. Jones. She was baptized when about eight years of age, received a good education and was from her earliest youth a very studious and intelligent child; for three years she never received a tardy or absent mark in school. Her favorite studies were those of penmanship, painting and drawing; she also possessed musical talent and became a member of the Tabernacle choir when only fourteen years old. She made two trips with said choir to California, during which she helped the Elders to tract and do missionary work. She possessed a great deal of magnetism and her smiling face and happy disposition gained friends for her wherever she went. Possessing also dramatical ability, she took leading parts in several local opera plays, and when the Book of Mormon play known as Corianton was put on the boards, she went with the company East, visiting Denver, Independence, Omaha and St. Louis. On this trip also Sister Mary took great delight in assisting the Elders in their missionary labors. After accompanying the Corianton company to California Mary remained in that State for some time studying and teaching music. After her return to Utah she gave music lessons for two years, after which she spent a year and a half in Arizona. In 1909 (June 25th) she became the wife of Osborne Richins, a returned missionary whose acquaintance she made while in Arizona. After her marriage she settled with her husband at Union, Oregon, where she resided for nine months, during which time she gained the love and respect of all classes, especially the young people in whose interest she labored to the utmost extent of her ability. She became the mother of one child and by fulfilling the great law of motherhood she gave her own life, as she died in childbed March 12, 1910, at her home in Union. Her remains were shipped to Salt Lake City for interment.
