Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Jacobs, Zebulon

Jacobs, Zebulon, an active Elder of the 17th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Jan. 2, 1842, at Nauvoo, Illinois, during a crucial period of Church history. He was the oldest son of Henry Bailey Jacobs and Zina Diantha Huntington and in the exodus of the saints left Nauvoo Feb. 9, 1846, with his parents and reached Mt. Pisgah, Iowa, the following May, where his grandfather, William Huntington, died. At this place his father was called on a mission to Europe and responded, although so weak from hardship and exposures that it was necessary to carry him to the missionary wagon in a blanket. His faith was sufficient, however, and he performed a good mission. The family continued the journey to Winter Quarters, where a stay was made; later the plains were crossed, and with his beloved mother, his baby brother (Chariton), who was born during the journey, and relatives, Zebulon reached Salt Lake Valley, when six years of age, in 1848. He endured the privations of the early years in the Valley with a light heart, and such peculiar experiences as trudging barefooted six blocks in the snow to school, catching fish and trapping game, on which to subsist, taught him to care for himself at an early age. In 1861, 1862 and 1863 he made three trips to the Missouri river, assisting in the emigration of the saints. March 17, 1866, he was married to Frances Weeds Carrington (daughter of Albert and Rhoda M. Carrington), by whom he became the father of five children. Soon after he was married he was called to Sanpete county for duty in the Black Hawk Indian war and rendered effective service as sergeant of cavalry. In 1867-68 he filled a successful mission to England, laboring in the Birmingham conference. For eighteen years Brother Jacobs was a valued employee of the Utah Central Railway Co. (afterward the Oregon Short Line), the greater part of the time as passenger conductor, in which position he was extremely popular with the traveling public. After leaving the railway service he acted as guard at the State penitentiary for many years until the fall of 1903, when he was severely injured, being brutally beaten on the head by a convict who was the leader of a jail break at the State prison. From the effects of this attack he has never fully recovered. The log cabin, now in the Deseret Museum, known as the "oldest house in Utah." in which his wife was born in 1849 and where he and his wife lived for a short time, was transferred to the Museum in 1910 by Brother Jacobs. Many generous offers had been made for the old cabin, but he felt that the best place for so valuable an historical relic was the Museum. Zebulon Jacobs has resided continuously in Salt Lake City since his first arrival in the Valley and has always been a loyal member of his Church.
