Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Holt, Robert Mabey

Holt, Robert Mabey, second Bishop of the 23rd Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Sept. 6, 1869, in Salt Lake City, the son of Albert Holt and Maria Mabey. He was baptized Sept, 6, 1878, by Edward D. Holt. At the age of nine years he moved with his parents to South Jordan, where he worked on a farm and also as a clerk and pay-master for A. Holt & Sons, contractors and merchants, from his twelfth to his seventeenth years, After that he worked with his father, contracting and grading for the railroads. In 1891-93 he attended the Brigham Young Academy at Provo, and graduated in a business course. In January, 1894 he established himself as a dealer in general merchandise at South Jordan. He continued that business until 1903. In 1898 he took charge of the South Jordan Milling Co. In 1903 his mill was destroyed by fire and after buying another mill at North Salt Lake, now known as the Salt Lake & Jordan Mill and Elevator Co., he took charge of the same and occupies the position of superintendent at the present time. While residing at South Jordan he was postmaster for five years. There also he acted as president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. for about two years, and was second assistant superintendent of the Jordan Stake Sunday schools, when that Stake was first organized in 1900. Brother Holt was ordained successively to the office of Deacon, Priest and Seventy, the latter ordination taking place in 1889 under the hands of Brigham H. Roberts. Later he was ordained a High Priest by Francis M. Lyman and set apart as a counselor to Bishop Thomas Blake, of the South Jordan Ward, which position he held until 1904. In 1904 he moved to Salt Lake City, locating in the 19th Ward. Later he moved to the 17th Ward, where he acted as senior teacher in the parents class of the Ward Sunday school. In December, 1909, he was ordained a Bishop and appointed to preside over the 23rd Ward. Aug. 15, 1900, Brother Holt married Sarah Edna Palmer, daughter of Morris Palmer and Mary Frost, by whom he became the father of four children. At the age of fourteen years, while conversing with the block teachers in the South Jordan Ward, Brother Holt was asked by one of them if he knew that the gospel was true. He answered "I do not, and I don't believe some of the boys who say that they know are telling the truth." He was advised to pray earnestly to the Lord in order to obtain a testimony for himself in regard to the truth of the gospel as it had been restored by the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Brother Holt followed the advice and commenced to pray, and during the following five years he received many great and glorious testimonies from the Lord in regard to the divinity of the work, and throughout all his life these testimonies have been multiplied unto him. Thus he has witnessed many miraculous cases of healing at different times. Before he attended the school at Provo he had made arrangements to study at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, but suffering with a severe headache he did not succeed with his studies as he had expected. This was partly owing to the fact that he had fallen from a horse, after which accident he lay unconscious for a long time, but through the administrations of the Elders his fractured skull was restored to its natural shape, after which he was impressed to attend the B. Y. University of Provo. Following this impression he soon gained in strength, his headache spells left him, and he was able to continue his studies successfully. Ever since he commenced praying to the Lord for a testimony, Bishop Holt has been a praying man and has witnessed many remarkable answers to prayer.
