Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Davis, Allbert Wesley

Davis, Allbert Wesley, first Bishop of the Center Ward, Salt Lake Co., Utah, was born April 25, 1841, at East Rochester, Columbiana co., Ohio, the son of Nathan Davis and Sarah Woolley. His parents joined the Church in 1851 and emigrated with their children to Utah that same year. Albert was baptized May 29, 1852, and continued to labor for his father until the spring of 1861, when he was called to go to the Missouri river after the poor, as a Church teamster. He made the down trip in Joseph W. Young's company and returned, in Ansel P. Harmon's company. In the spring of 1862 he went east as a member of the expedition sent out to guard the mail lines under Lot Smith. The following year he was again called to go to the Missouri river after the emigration; this time he made the round trip as a night herder in Capt. John M. Woolley's company. Again in the spring of 1865 he crossed the plains, going with a company of missionaries to Omaha, and returned in Miner G. Atwood's company in charade of ten wagons loaded with freight. On their return trip they had, an encounter with the Indians about twenty miles west of Fort Laramie, during which several men were wounded and one woman was carried away by the Indians. In 1866 Elder Davis went to Sanpete as a member of an expedition sent out to guard the frontier settlements against Indian depredations. In the fall of 1868 he was called to assist in making a settlement (West Point) on the Muddy, in Arizona (now Nevada). He remained there until 1870, when the settlements on the Muddy were broken up; he then returned with his family to Salt Lake City. Shortly afterwards he was called to act as a teacher in the Seventeenth Ward, Salt Lake City, and on June 29, 1877, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as second counselor to Bishop John Henry Smith. Nov. 6, 1880, he was set apart as first counselor to Bishop John Tingey. Having been called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands, he left his mountain home Jan. 28, 1885, and returned March 27, 1887, after performing a laborious mission on the Islands. While on this mission, he with others witnessed a miraculous healing in the case of a little girl, a daughter of Elder Geo. A. Wilcox, who had accidentally taken a quantity of strychnine. The accident was not discovered until the child was in a dying condition. The Elders administered to her and she was instantly healed. Elder Davis has witnessed many other marvelous manifestations of the power of God on former occasions. In March, 1884, Bro. Davis moved his families across the Jordan river, making homes for them on the west bank of that stream, and when the Center Ward was organized, Nov. 22, 1891, he was ordained a Bishop by Joseph F. Smith, and set apart to preside over the same. He held that position till 1895, when he was ordained a Patriarch by Jos. F. Smith. Bro. Davis has been an ordinance worker in the Salt Lake Temple since 1893, and accompanied Pres. Joseph F. Smith to the Hawaiian Islands in 1899. In 1865 Bro. Davis married Melissa Jane Lambson, who has borne her husband nine children. Later he married Annie Lois Bacon, who is the mother of five of his children.
