Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Reed, Levi Ward

Reed, Levi Ward, first Bishop of the North Point Ward, Salt Lake co. Utah, was born Nov. 15, 1831, at Rome, Ashtabula co., Ohio, the son of John Reed and Rebecca Barsh. His parents were among the early members of the Church and he was associated with "Mormonism" during his entire life. He migrated to Utah in 1848 and was one of the first settlers west of the Jordan river. He was also one of a party that first explored the western shores of the Great Salt Lake, to ascertain whether or not it had an outlet. At the organization of the North Point Ward, Dec. 11, 1887, Bro. Reed was chosen and ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the new Ward. This position he held till the time of his death, which occurred at North Point Nov. 30, 1893. The following is from an obituary published in the "Deseret News" at the time of his demise: "Bishop Reed was known and loved as a good man. Modest and retiring in his disposition, his associates in every capacity were drawn to him by the affinity which gives attractiveness to the honest stalwart and true. In his capacity of presiding officer of the Ward, where he resided, the poor were the especial objects of his love and kindness. He extended aid in a quiet way, his private means being liberally used for the benefit of others, the objects of his generosity not being confined to his own Ward. An instance of his practical ideas and method of helping others may be cited. He furnished means for a considerable number of people to emigrate from Europe. This was advanced to them in the nature of a loan. When they came here he would provide a home for them and find them employment. He thus enabled them to earn means to pay off their indebtedness and become established in the country. When they became sufficiently acquainted with the circumstances in the new land, they would start out as they chose; but his kindness did not stop on merely enabling them to come here; it extended to opening the way for them to get a start. The deceased leaves a wife and several children, some of them quite young." Bishop Reed was twice married. His first wife was Matilda Pettit (daughter of Ethan Pettit and Margaret Ellsworth) who was born April 4, 1839; she bore her husband eleven children, namely, Matilda E., Mary R., Ira A., Elizabeth R., Caroline A., Levi A., Harriot A., Tamson R., Clarissa R., Rachel R. and Laura R. The Bishop's second wife was Augusta Larson (daughter of Lars Johnson) who was born June 8, 1851; she bore her husband five children (three boys and two girls) and now (1914) resides at Elwood, Box Elder co, Utah. The names of her children are: Charlotte A., John W., Edith B., Lawrence L. and Henry.
