Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Murdock, Gideon A.

Murdock, Gideon A., Bishop's councilor, in Frisco Ward, Beaver Stake of Zion, son of John and Electa Allen Murdock, was born at Lima, Adams county, Illinois, Aug. 1, 1840. When about one year old he was taken by his parents to Nauvoo, Ill., the family being expelled with the rest of the saints in 1846. His older brother having gone with the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican war, at the age of six and a half years, he had helped his father drive an ox-team freighting to Winter Quarters, leaving there June 10, 1847, and reaching Salt Lake valley Sept. 24th, following, the boy driving an ox-team all the way. All the hardships of that trying time were experienced but can scarcely be told. In the spring of 1851 his father went on a mission to Australia and the mother having died in the boy's fourth year, he went to live with a brother at Lehi. At fifteen, he was enrolled in the military and served in the Walker Indian war; he afterwards became a captain in the militia. Freighting east and west was followed and in 1864 he went with a Church train to the Missouri river for emigrants, and the following year moved to Beaver, where, besides making a location, he again served extensively as a military officer and took part in the Blackhawk war. In 1872 he made an exploring trip to Arizona, and the same year, Dec. 7th, was ordained a High Priest by Bishop John R. Murdock, serving also as a member of the High Council. In 1866 Brother Gideon moved into Sevier county and July 22, 1877, was ordained Bishop and set apart to preside over Joseph Ward by President Wilford Woodruff and apostle Erastus Snow, holding the position for sixteen years. In 1894 he returned to Beaver county and for the last nine years has been Sunday school superintendent and is now Bishop's counselor in Frisco Ward, though his family lives in Minersville. Brother Murdock was married March 1, 1866, to Lucinda C. Howd, and fifteen children have been born to him.
