Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Carlquist, Carl Arvid

Carlquist, Carl Arvid, second counselor to Bishop Jesse R. Pettit, of the Fifth Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Jan. 7, 1857, at Flo, Skaraborgs län, Sweden, the son of Carl Olson Carlquist and Johanna Larson. He was baptized Sept. 19, 1865, by Alfred Dahlman; ordained a Deacon Nov. 24, 1872, by Niels P. Lindelöf; ordained a Priest Oct. 25, 1874, by E. G. Johnson; ordained an Elder July 4, 1885, by Samuel Johnson; ordained a Seventy by Seymour B. Young, and ordained a High Priest Jan. 5, 1908, by James Leatham. He has been an active Ward teacher, served as president of a Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and filled many other responsible positions in the Wards in which he has resided. From October, 1874, to June, 1877, he labored as a local missionary in the Göteborg conference, until he emigrated to Utah. He filled a mission to Scandinavia, 1892-94, presiding a part of the time over the Göteborg conference and part of the time over the Scandinavian Mission. He filled a second mission from Utah to Sweden in 1910-12, during which he presided over the Göteborg conference ten months, and later over the Stockholm conference sixteen months. Sept. 3, 1877, he married Hulda A. N. Ostergren, who has borne him nine children, namely, Karl Hjalmar, Hulda Therisia, Edith Nathalia, Ernest Nimrod, Alice Viola, Walter Rufinus, Robert Hamlet, Daniel Elsworth and Myrtle Deborah. At home Elder Carlquist has taken an active part in ecclesiastical, civil and political affairs, but never held any political office. During his last mission to Sweden he had an interview with King Gustaf in behalf of the Church and explained to the King the work and motives of the Elders who were laboring in Sweden. Following the track of an anti-Mormon agitator who bad been employed by the Swedish Government to lecture against the "Mormons," Elder Carlquist delivered a number of lectures in different parts of Sweden, answering the falsehoods of the slanderer, who preceded him and followed him to 30 cities and towns. Brother Carlquist held many large and well attended meetings in defense of the Church whose cause he espoused. Elder Carlquist is a fluent and intelligent speaker, and on his various missions he has made many friends and converts. For a number of years he acted as counselor to the president of the Scandinavian meetings in Salt Lake City.
