Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Reiser, Henry

Reiser, Henry, a prominent Elder in the Church and a resident of the Sixth Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born July 29, 1832, at Strahlegg Fischenthal, Canton Zurich, Switzerland, the son of Henry Reiser and Susanna Ottiker. In February, 1850, he went to live at St. Imier, Canton Berne, to learn the French language and also the trade of a watchmaker. In 1856 (June 14th) he married Susanna Rupp, of Sigriswyl, Canton Borne, and together with his wife was baptized by Elder Henry Hugg May 16, 1859. He was ordained a Teacher June 3, 1859, by Elder Jabez Woodard, president of the Swiss, German and Italian mission. Later he was ordained to the office of a Priest and subsequently to that of an Elder. He started for Utah in 1860, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "William Tapscott", which sailed from Liverpool, England, May 11, 1860. After thirty-five days' sailing, the company with which he traveled arrived at New York, where the emigrants were detained a week on account of the small pox, which had broken out among them, twelve persons being attacked by the disease. Finally they were permitted to land in Castle Garden, and the next day they started for Florence, Nebraska, the outfitting place for the journey over the plains. There Elder Reiser met an Apostle for the first time in his life, which made a deep and lasting impression upon him. It was Elder Geo. Q. Cannon, who had charge of the Church immigration on the frontiers that season. After a tedious journey over the plains Bro. Reiser arrived in Salt Lake City, Oct, 5, 1860. In December following he received his endowments and was also chosen second counselor to Carl G. Maeser, president of the German meetings in Salt Lake City. He was ordained a Seventy Feb. 16, 1861, under the hands of Albert P. Rockwood and became a member of the 62nd quorum of Seventy. When the Seventies were reorganized about 1887, he became a member of the 2nd Quorum. In 1863, he was chosen first counselor to Pres. Maeser. In 1872, he was called an a mission to Switzerland, for which he left home May 1, 1872, together with 26 fellow missionaries; he arrived at Berne, Switzerland, May 25, 1872, and was appointed to preside over the Jura and Berne conferences by Pres. Huber. While laboring in that capacity he baptized 102 souls. His wife died in Salt Lake City Jan. 1, 1874, and on the 3rd of June following he was released to go home. He traveled in company with Pres. Huber and 150 Swiss and German saints, and arrived in Salt Lake City, July 2, 1874. After his return he resumed his position as first counselor to Pres. Maeser in the presidency of the German meetings, and when Pres. Maeser was called to take charge of the B. Y. Academy at Provo, Elder Reiser was appointed to preside over the German meetings in Salt Lake City. In 1886 when John Q. Cannon was appointed president of the German meetings, Elder Reiser was chosen as first counselor. He was arrested under the Edmunds law, Aug. 24, 1886, on charge of unlawful cohabitation and on Sept. 17, 1886, he appeared before the grand jury in the Third District Court; when arraigned on the 28th, he pleaded not guilty. He was placed on trial Feb. 14, 1887; by advice of his attorney he then withdrew his plea of not guilty and pleaded guilty. When Judge Zane asked him if he had anything to say before sentence was passed, he replied that he had eighteen souls depending entirely on him for their support, and that about a year ago he was robbed of about $800 worth of watches; hence he was pretty well reduced in means. The judge asked if he would promise to obey the law in the future. Elder Reiser replied that he could not give any such promise conscientiously. He was then sentenced to six months imprisonment and to pay a fine of $300 and cost of suit, the latter amounting to $43. Having served his term in the Utah penitentiary, he was released July 13, 1887. He was ordained a High Priest Feb. 29, 1892, by Elias Morris. While he was incarcerated Elder Arnold Schulthess was appointed president of the German meetings, and Henry Reiser chosen as his first counselor, which position he held until his death, which occurred in Salt Lake City, Aug. 29, 1904. He died highly respected by all who knew him. Bro. Reiser was a man of few words, but rich in noble deeds. He left a family of fifteen children, namely five sons and ten daughters, also nineteen grandchildren. Before his demise Bro. Reiser did work in the Temple for his relations back to the sixteenth century, numbering about two thousand souls.
