Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Reiser, Magdalena Schneider

Reiser, Magdalena Schneider, wife of Henry Reiser was born Nov. 19, 1836, at Almendingen, an alpine village of Canton Berne, Switzerland. Her father Johannes Scheneider was born Sept. 7, 1801, at Almendingen, was a farmer by avocation and died March 22, 1866. Her mother Magdalena Miller was born March 17, 1799, in Dierschen, Canton Berne, Switzerland. Sister Magdalena was the second daughter of a family of six and received a good education. She was an active worker in the Zwingli church, and exercised great influence among the younger church members. She taught school and was an ardent Bible student. At the age of twenty, while visiting friends in Thun, she first heard the true gospel of Jesus Christ expounded and became converted to it against the wishes of her parents and associates. When it was found that nothing could shake her faith in her religion, her minister of the old faith asked that she be refrained from associating with her former friends and leave her home town, or give up her religion. Never thinking that she would leave her home for any creed, the sorrow among her loved ones was great indeed, when she showed them that she chose the gospel before everything else. She spent four years in sorrowful banishment from her home, during which she frequently saved the Elders from bodily harm, and as she gave the greater part of her earnings to her invalid mother, she almost despaired of ever emigrating to Utah. But on a certain occasion in the fall of 1860, after walking 18 miles to meeting, one of the Elders, who knew of an invalid sister that needed a companion on the voyage to America, offered her the position. As her mother had recently died, Sister Magdalena gladly embraced the opportunity and after a rough voyage across the North Sea, she reached England, and thence crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Underwriter". She walked all the way from Florence to G. S. L. Valley, traveling with an ox train. While on the plains she narrowly escaped death by Indians. Driving a cow and falling a short distance behind the rest of the company, she fell asleep while resting in the shade of a tree and on awaking she found that the rest of the company had gone out of sight. She prayed earnestly to the Lord and her prayer was answered by one of the brethren coming back to look for her. A few minutes after they bad joined the company four or five Indians were seen galloping along the trail and they stopped at the very point where she bad been lagging behind. She always after that felt that her life had been spared so that she might devote it to the benefit of her fellow man and to serve the Lord. Sister Reiser was baptized in the lake of Thun, Switzerland, after the breaking of the ice in the winter of 1856 by Elder Buhler in Canton Berne. She married Henry Reiser March 9, 1861, the ceremony being performed by Pres. Brigham Young, in Salt Lake City. She became the mother of seven children, namely, Joseph, Emma B., Josephine J., Ephraim A., Albert S., Orson S., and Mary M. Sister Reiser died Aug. 3, 1893, in Salt Lake City, where she had spent her married life, and where all who knew her highly honored and respected her. Four of her children preceded her into eternity. Her son Albert S. died July 9, 1911, and now only two of her children (Josephine J. Macintosh, and Mary Reiser Gallager) are living. Sister Reiser was a diligent Temple worker, officiating for hundreds in that holy edifice. She was an ardent worker in the Relief Society and Primary Associations in her Ward. She was particularly noted for her sympathy and kindness to the poor; hundreds of hungry souls, some of them Indians, were fed at her table. A day or two after her death eleven Indians were seen around her bier shedding tears in memory of her kindness to them while alive.
