Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Reiser, Anna Catherine Auer

Reiser, Anna Catherine Auer, wife of Henry Reiser, was born July 19, 1850, at Eichberg, Rhein-Thal, St. Gallen, Switzerland, the daughter of Jacob Auer and Anna Elizabeth Dietrich. In the fall of 1859, when she was nine years old, she left her home in Canton St. Gallen, together with her parents, to emigrate to America, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Emerald Isle", which sailed from Liverpool, England, Aug. 20, 1859. While crossing the ocean her sister Anna C. Barbara died, and after landing in America, and while stopping temporarily in New York during the winter of 1859-60, her sister Anna and her father (Jacob Auer) and mother (Elizabeth) died. Sister Anna was thus left an orphan girl in care of her two brothers, Ulrich and Henry, who brought her across the plains. They left Florence June 19, 1860, in Captain J. A. Murphy's oxtrain, which arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 28th, the same year. Sister Anna walked all the way across the plains. On her arrival in the Valley Joseph Toronto took her and her two brothers to Pleasant Green, west of Salt Lake City, where they spent the winter. In the spring of 1861 Sister Anna located in the Twentieth Ward, Salt Lake City, remaining there two years. After that she lived two years in the Eleventh Ward, and in 1865, moved back to the Toronto home in the Twentieth Ward, Salt Lake City, where she met her future husband, Brother Henry Reiser, to whom she was married Feb. 16, 1866. By him she became the mother of eight children, and as long as he lived she proved a faithful and devoted wife to him, assisting him to do Temple work for a number of years in the Logan and Salt Lake Temples. She is now a resident of the Thirty-third Ward and has been an active Relief Society worker for a number of years. The names of her children are: Hyrum (who died Sept. 14, 1869), H. Alma, Sidonia (who died May 5, 1900), Arnold A., Theodore G., Heber J. (who died Sept. 19, 1888), D. Paul and Selena M.
