Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Woodbury, Orin Nelson

Woodbury, Orin Nelson, a Utah pioneer of 1847, was born Aug. 10, 1828, at New Salem, Franklin county, Mass., the fifth and youngest son of Jeremiah Woodbury and Elizabeth Bartlett, and a descendant of William Woodbury and Elizabeth Patch, who came from South Betherton, England, to America about the year 1630. Orin was eighth in line from William Woodbury. His father was a prosperous farmer and active in town and county affairs, as well as a prominent member of the Baptist Church until the fulness of the gospel reached him in 1841, when, with his family, he joined the Church and the following years moved to Nauvoo, Ill. Here he engaged in farming until 1846, when the people were driven west. Providing themselves with an outfit and eighteen months' provisions they crossed the plains and mountains in Abraham O. Smoot's Hundred, arriving in Salt Lake City Sept. 26, 1847. They built an adobe house in the pioneer fort. The roof of this primitive building was covered with roots, grass and dirt, which served a good purpose except in case of heavy rains. During the winter of 1847-48 Orin herded stock on the Mill Creek bench and in the spring of 1848 the family moved there for the summer, erecting a temporary house of poles, willows, mud and dirt. Just as their crops began to look promising, the crickets came in great numbers and began to devour them, but through the efforts of the family and the blessings of the Lord in sending the sea gulls the crops were saved. The next winter was spent in the fort and the following spring the family located in the Seventh Ward, where the father resided until his death which occurred Oct. 8, 1883, at the advanced age of 92 years. In 1853 (Feb. 7th) Orin married Miss Ann Cannon, daughter of George Cannon and Ann Quayle and niece of the wife of Pres. John Taylor, with whom she lived. Her mother had died on the ocean in 1842, while crossing the Atlantic on the ship "Sidney", and her father died in St. Louis, Mo., in 1844, leaving her an orphan at the age of twelve years together with three brothers and two sisters. In the spring of 1853 Orin and his young wife moved onto a farm south of Salt Lake City, and in the fall of 1857 Orin participated in the Echo Canyon expedition, serving in Lot Smith's company, whom he accompanied in many of his daring adventures in the mountains. They had some very narrow escapes from being surrounded and captured by the enemy and in some cases Orin had to ride in the saddle continuously for 48 hours. Through exposure in this campaign he took sick and contracted ailments from which he never fully recovered. In 1861 he was called to take his wife and four children to southern Utah to help colonize that country. He sold his property in Salt Lake City for almost nothing, and becoming one of the future founders of St. George he made a new home there while suffering many privations and hardships incident to pioneer life. In the fall of 1863 Orin married Miss Frances Goddard who bore him ten children, the two eldest sons dying in their infancy. Bro. Woodbury was associated with Harrison Sperry in the superintendency of the Fourth Ward Sunday school when it was first organized. In St. George he acted as captain of the guard and devoted much of his time to drilling his company. In 1890 he was arrested on the charge of having more than one wife, but he was taken sick with blood poisoning and died Aug. 25, 1890, the day set for his trial. He left two wives, 17 children and 30 living grandchildren. The names of his children are as follows: Eleanor, Orin N., Annie M., Geo. J., John T., Leonora, Frank B., Alice C., Angus C. and Clara; these were the children of his first wife. By his second wife he became the father of William, Abraham, Mary, Florence, Charles, Elizabeth, Joseph, Clarence and Rose.
