Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Fenton, Thomas

Fenton, Thomas, a veteran Elder of the Sixth Ward, (Pioneer Stake). Salt Lake City, Utah, was born April 7, 1822, at Wheatley, Nottinghamshire, England, the son of Robert Fenton and Mary Anderson. His early boyhood was passed at Carlton, his native shire, and what scholastic training he received was in a village school. His father was a working farmer in comfortable circumstances and Thomas was naturally inclined to farming and gardening. In these pursuits and the kindred pursuit of floriculture he received a thorough practical education. He also had some experience in railroad building. Both as a boy and young man he was an earnest inquirer after religion, and when about 18 years old he was much impressed with the principles of the Wesleyan Methodist church, which he afterwards joined, becoming a class leader therein. The more he read the Bible, however, with the contents of which he was very familiar, the more dissatisfied he became with his religious status. The first time he heard the gospel preached by a Latter-day Saint he was converted and after prolonged and prayerful consideration was baptized July 19, 1848. From that time he was not only a firm believer, but a faithful worker in everything pertaining to his calling and standing in the Church. His religion, spiritually and temporally, was the first thing with him all the time. Prior to hearing of the Latter-day Saints he had wanted to know of life in America, and a few months after his baptism he emigrated to New Orleans and thence passed up the Mississippi river to St. Louis, Mo. In May, 1851, he started for Utah. His wife, Emma Alcroft Fenton, whom he had married in 1843, was with him in these journeyings. He engaged for himself and wife part of a wagon owned by Alexander Robbins and drove an ox team across the plains. The company in which he traveled was commanded by Capt. John Brown, one of the Utah Pioneers and afterwards Bishop of Pleasant Grove. He arrived at his journey's end in September, 1851. The Fentons rented part of a house in the Fifteenth Ward, but in 1852 they purchased a house and lot in the 6th Ward. In 1856 they removed to Ogden, intending to settle there, but after buying a house and two lots in that city, and finding themselves unable to purchase farming land in the vicinity, they returned in February, 1857, to their old home in Salt Lake City. Having purchased two and a half lots to his home and planted a good fruit orchard, Mr. Fenton next seeded, planted and established a first class nursery. Afterwards, as his sons grew old enough to go into business with him, he purchased 30 acres of land a few blocks away for nursery stock, and kept his green and hot houses, rose gardens, etc., in the Sixth Ward. While conducting his private business Mr. Fenton performed various duties of a public character, and he was never known to neglect a duty, secular or ecclesiastical. He was ordained a High Priest in 1853 and took an active part in the Ward of which he was a member. He also served as an officer of militia in early years. He was thrice married (twice after coining to Utah) and was the father of eighteen children, twelve of whom are living. He married his second wife, Emma C. Fenton, in 1854, and his third wife, Annie Marie Wilson, in 1866. Bro. Fenton died in January, 1890, in Salt Lake City.
