Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Buchanan, Alexander, junior

Buchanan, Alexander, junior, Stake clerk and a member of the High Council of the Pioneer Stake, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Feb. 4, 1874, in Glasgow, Scotland, the son of Alexander Buchanan and the late Margaret McCreadie. In his early childhood he attended the common schools of his native city and in 1882 emigrated with his parents to Utah, settling in Salt Lake City, which has been his home ever since. As a child he was an apt pupil in the public schools and was regarded by his teachers as having an unusually bright future educationally. At the age of fifteen, however, at a time when friends urged him to take a normal training at the University, Alexander became possessed of a desire to do for himself and accordingly entered the employ of the Star Printing Company as a printer's devil. He continued with this firm for a period of five years, during which time he became a skilled pressman and an excellent proofreader; but the work of the printshop being somewhat distasteful to him he sought a more congenial occupation and on July 8, 1895, entered the employ of the "Deseret News" Company as proofreader and general reporter. In the latter capacity he soon made many friends, and when the mining boom struck Utah he became mining editor of the paper, which position he filled with marked ability until called to go on a mission to Great Britain. In his early boyhood Alexander was closely associated with the auxiliary organizations of the Church, being for several years librarian and assistant secretary of the Fifth Ward Sunday school, and later assistant superintendent to the late Elder George Clark, well known as a pioneer barber of Salt Lake City. He was assistant secretary of the Ward primary association for some time and will be remembered as the small boy who read the minutes of his association at the Relief Society meetings in the Fourteenth Ward hall. He was also secretary of the Y. M. M. I. A. for a period of seven years. Elder Buchanan left on a mission to Great Britain July 15, 1899, and oil his arrival at Liverpool was assigned to labor in the Scottish conference then under the presidency of Elder David O. McKay. The first nine months of his time were spent in the city of Edinburgh, after which he was transferred to Glasgow, his native city, where he became clerk of the conference, in which capacity he served for about a year. On the 18th of May, 1901, Elder Buchanan was called to Liverpool as associate editor of the "Millennial Star", which position he filled, under the presidency of Apostle Francis M. Lyman for a period of one year. His labors in the mission field were highly satisfactory to his presiding officers, and he left for home May 22, 1902, with the blessing of all with whom he had been associated in Great Britain. Returning to Salt Lake City June 8, 1902, Elder Buchanan resumed his position with the "Deseret News", continuing therein until Feb. 9, 1906, when he left the newspaper field to engage in other lines of activity. When the Pioneer Stake was organized in 1904 Elder Buchanan became Stake superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A., to which position he was set apart May 1, 1904, by President Wm. McLachlan. This place he filled with untiring energy for two years, when he was chosen as a member of the High Council, being set apart April 30, 1906, and which position he still holds. On the first of January, 1910, he became clerk of the Pioneer Stake, the duties of which office he still continues to discharge. He was a member of the council of the 110th quorum of Seventy for four years, president of the Scottish Missionary Society, which he was a leading spirit in organizing, and a member of the old Salt Lake Stake Mutual Improvement board, under the superintendency of Elder Geo. Albert Smith. In short, his life has been one of incessant activity in Church affairs. He was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints June 14, 1884, by Elder Robert F. Turnbow, the ordinance being performed in what was known as the Fourth West canal, at a point midway between Seventh and Eighth South streets. He was confirmed a member of the Church June 17, 1884, by his father. His ordination as a Seventy was under the hands of Apostle George Teasdale July 14, 1899, and as a member of the council of Seventy under the hands of Elder Jonathan G. Kimball June 30, 1902. Elder Buchanan was chief clerk of the House of Representatives during the seventh and eighth sessions of the Utah State Legislature in 1907 and 1909 and has held a responsible position under the county administration for several years. He was married to Miss Rose Bowers (daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Jno. S. Bowers) Sept. 11, 1907, the ceremony being performed in the Salt Lake Temple by President John R. Winder. He is the father of three children, two boys and a girl, and is now a member of the Thirtieth Ward, Salt Lake City.
