Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Spencer, Hiram Theron

Spencer, Hiram Theron, second Bishop of the Pleasant Green Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, was born Nov. 13, 1835, at West Stockbridge, Berkshire co., Mass., the son of Hyrum and Mary Spencer. He was baptized Feb. 5, 1844, and migrated to Utah in 1847, crossing the plains in the company led by Daniel Spencer. His father and sister died in the camps of the saints while journeying from Nauvoo to Council Bluffs; both were burried at Mt. Pisgah, Iowa. In crossing the plains Hiram and other boys drove the loose stock and the Bishop relates interesting incidents when the buffaloes were so plentiful on the plains that it was difficult for the trains to pass through them. The company with which Hiram traveled arrived in G. S. L. Valley Sept. 23, 1847. The family lived in the fort two winters. In the fall of 1848 while Hiram was hauling corn fodder from the farm to the city he was thrown from his wagon into a ditch and run over by one of the wagon wheels which crushed his head most terribly. He was taken to the fort and a doctor summoned, who, after examining the boy, said it would be impossible for him to live till morning, and he consequently refused to dress the wound, saying that such an act would only add more misery to the boy whose jaw was broken in five places, his eyes crushed out of their sockets and the skull crushed: but in a short time Pres. Brigham Young came into the house and ordered the doctor (who was again sent for) to dress the wounds, saying that the boy should live and not die, and furthermore that he should live longer than the doctor himself. Pres, Brigham Young, assisted by Chas. C. Rich and Daniel Spencer, administered to Hiram and Pres. Young, who was mouth, said the boy should live to a good old age and do a great work on the earth-a prophesy which surely has been fulfilled. Whenever Bro. Spencer and the doctor met after that, the physician would always remark that Bro. Spencer was a living miracle. After residing temporarily in the Thirteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, and on the Little Cottonwood creek (now Murray), Bro. Spencer moved to the Point of the Mountain west and settled at a place now included in the Pleasant Green Ward. In 1857 (March 31st) he married Mary Barr Young who bore him five children, four of whom are now living. Early in 1857 Bro. Spencer went to the Devils Gate to bring in some goods that had been left there the previous fall by the handcart companies. In 1859 and 1860 he made two trips to the States after freight. In 1857 he went out into Echo canyon to meet the Johnston army, and he watched the army till it arrived at Ft. Bridger. He was also one of seven men who stampeded the horses and mules of the enemy. In 1858 he accompanied General Burton on an Indian expedition. He was ordained an Elder Feb. 9, 1858, by Heber C. Kimball, and ordained a Seventy May 1, 1866 by Joseph Young. In 1866-68 he filled a mission to Great Britain, laboring principally in Scotland. He was ordained a Seventy May 1, 1866, by Angus M. Cannon and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Lehi N. Hardman. Finally he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Pleasant Green Ward, July 23, 1892, by Joseph F. Smith. Bro. Spencer has acted as school trustee twelve years, president of the Utah and Salt Lake Canal Company four years and been a director in the same company fifteen years.
