Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lambert, Charles John

Lambert, Charles John, an active Elder in the Granger Ward (Granite Stake), Salt Lake county, Utah, was born Nov. 5, 1845, at Nauvoo, Illinois, the son of Charles Lambert and Mary Alice Cannon. He came to Utah with his parents in 1849, settling in Salt Lake City, and worked with his father at stone cutting, masonry and farming, until he was married Oct. 26, 1867, to Lily H. E. Druce, the daughter of John Druce and Julia A. Jinks. The same year he was called on a mission to the Muddy. While on his way he was stopped by Pres. Erastus Snow and called to St. George to help erect the tabernacle there. In 1868 he worked as a foreman on the railroad; in 1870 he started to work in the paper mill in the Sugar House Ward, where he worked as foreman for a number of years. Under his direction the paper mill at Big Cottonwood was built, which cost one hundred and fifty thousand dollars. He was foreman of this mill until 1888, when he moved to Granger, where he has resided ever since. In 1866 he took part in the Black Hawk war in Sanpete. In 1878 (Nov. 28th) he married Mary L. Hovey, the daughter of James G. Hovey and Susannah Goodridge. He was ordained to the office of an Elder Dec. 18, 1864, by Apostle Amasa M. Lyman; ordained a Seventy April 8, 1870, by George Q. Cannon, and ordained a High Priest May 15, 1910, by Nathaniel V. Jones. The following experiences in his life are well worth noting: Once, while a boy, he and a little friend of his were swimming in a big creek on Sixth West Street, between Ninth and Tenth South St., and while ducking each other under a large bridge timber, Charles mysteriously became lodged under the timber. His companion searched for him, but could not find him: hence he ran about a mile and brought a man from the neighborhood to help in the search. After hunting for a few minutes, they turned the timber over and there discovered the body of Charles Lambert, which they carried up on the bank and began working with it; in a few minutes they brought it back to life again. Charles says that he plainly saw the men hunting for his body, which he could see through the log, and tried to tell them where it was, but they did not seem to hear him. He also saw them roll his body and saw the water pour from his mouth. He knew not how his spirit left the body, nor how it entered the body again. On another occasion, while working at the paper mill, he was kicked by a horse, which fractured his skull. He was delirious for a long time and not expected to live, but through the administration of the Elders and the prayer of faith, and then being baptized in the Temple for his health, he again regained full control of his mind and body. Many times in his life's experience he has been saved from accidents by being obedient to the promptings of the still voice. Being the owner of forty acres of wet, alkali land west of the Jordan river in Granger, Elder Lambert endeavored to drain the same by an open drain system; but as that was a failure, he made the drains successfully, thus making the land productive. That swampy, unproductive land can now produce 75 bushels of oats to the acre and other cereals in proportion.
