Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Miller, William

Miller, William, first Bishop of the Hunter Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, was born Aug. 21, 1837, at New Lisbon, Columbiana county, Ohio, the son of Geo. Miller and Martha Jane Courley. He migrated to Utah in 1861, crossing the plains in David H. Cannon's company and drove a four-yoke oxteam from Omaha to Salt Lake City. He located on the present site of Morgan City, Morgan county, in the fall of 1861, which settlement at that time consisted of a few small log houses. He assisted in building the first saw and flouring mills in the Weber Valley. In June, 1862, he was baptized by Nelson Arava and confirmed by Bishop Abiah Wadsworth. In 1865 (Nov. 12th) he married Lucinda M. Wadsworth, by whom he has had nine children (four sons and five daughters). At the present time (1914) they have twenty-six grandchildren and one great grand child. Bro. Miller was ordained an Elder April 25, 1868, by John D. T. McAllister, and a Seventy, by John S. Gleason Aug. 18, 1869, at Farmington, Davis co., Utah. In 1869-70 he filled a short mission to the Northern States. After returning from that mission he settled at Hooper, Weber co., where he resided until the fall of 1881, when he moved to Pleasant Green, Salt Lake co. Here he followed farming and also taught school in the Hunter district several terms. He was ordained a High Priest and Bishop Aug. 26, 1888, by Apostle John W. Taylor and set apart to preside over the Hunter Ward, with John T. Evans and Alfred A. Jones as counselors. He acted as Bishop of Hunter eleven years, his home being across the road in the Pleasant Green Ward. He was finally released as Bishop of Hunter July 23, 1899, and chosen as a counselor to Bishop Hiram T. Spencer, of the Pleasant Green Ward. In 1901 he filled a short but very successful mission to the Northern States, laboring principally in Illinois, Iowa and Missouri. In April, 1902, he moved to Alberta, Canada, where he was chosen counselor to Bishop Frank D. Grant in the Stirling Ward. He was also appointed overseer (a civil office), occupying that position for two terms. In 1905 he moved towards the north and located in the Bingham branch of the Claresholm Ward, Alberta, where he acted as presiding Elder until the branch was given a Ward organization in 1907, when Geo. W. Pack was chosen Bishop and the new Ward named Star Line. While residing in Canada Elder Miller engaged in farming and stockraising, together with his sons. By obeying the counsel of Pres. Jos. F. Smith "to keep out of debt", writes Elder Miller, "we have been very successful. I am today 76 years old. I have at home and abroad received many great and true testimonies of the gospel as revealed through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, I know it to be true". At present Bishop Miller is a resident of the Fourteenth Ward, Salt Lake City.
