Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Bertoch, James

Bertoch, James, a veteran Elder in the Hunter Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, was born July 29, 1838, at St. Germain, Piedmont, province of St. Segon, Italy, the son of John Bertoch and Marguerite Bounous. He received a good education, learned the French and Italian languages and also studied some music. He joined the Church in the spring of 1853, being baptized by John Malan and emigrated to America in 1854, leaving England, in the ship "John M. Wood", which sailed from Liverpool March 12th and arrived at New Orleans May 2, 1854. Bro. Bertoch crossed the plains in Robert L. Campbell's company and arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 28, 1854. While crossing the plains, he met with an accident near Fort Laramie, falling from his wagon; his legs were run over by the wheels, which pained him severely. Just before arriving in the Valley, he, together with his sister and a German lady, strayed from the train and were lost in the mountains, which made them two days late in arriving in the Valley. Bro. Bertoch obtained employment from Joseph Toronto and worked on Antelope Island for two years, he then moving to Pleasant Green, where he lived until 1905, when he moved to Hunter. In 1866 (May 19th) he was married in the Endowment House to Ann Cutcliffe. This union was blessed with thirteen children, nine boys and four girls. Bro. Bertoch was ordained to the office of an Elder in 1862 by Elijah F. Sheets, ordained a Seventy March 22, 1884, by William W. Taylor and ordained a High Priest April 30, 1898, by Charles W. Penrose. In 1891-1893 he filled a mission to Switzerland and Italy, laboring fourteen months in Switzerland and ten months in Italy. He has acted as first assistant superintendent of the Pleasant Green Ward Sunday school for fifteen years and was counselor in the Y. M. M. I. A. for a number of years; he has been an active Ward teacher for thirty-five years. For about nine years he served as a school trustee and has followed the occupation of a farmer continuously.
