Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Godfrey, James

Godfrey, James, a Patriarch in the Granite Stake of Zion, and a resident of the South Cottonwood Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, was born Jan. 5, 1840, at North Petherton, Sommersetshire, England, the son of Charles Godfrey and Caroline Trott. He was baptized and confirmed March 2, 1864, by Wm. Willis at Bristol, England; ordained an Elder in October, 1865, by John D. T. McAllister; ordained a Seventy Oct. 24, 1867, by James Winchester, at South Cottonwood; was set apart as a president of the 73rd quorum of Seventy, Feb. 7, 1877, and acted as assistant president of the mass quorum of Seventies, being appointed to that position Sept. 5, 1880. He filled a short mission to the Northwestern States in the spring of 1881, and returned home on account of ill health in 1882. While on this mission, he and his missionary companions hired a hall at Montecello, Minnesota, to hold meetings in. While the Elders were preaching they were attacked by a mob who threw a rope on Elder Godfrey and dragged him quite a distance; but fortunately the rope broke, and Elder Godfrey escaped unhurt. He brought a piece of the rope, nine feet long, away with him as a souvenir. Soon after his return from that mission he was transferred from the 73rd to the 72nd quorum of Seventy and was set apart as president in the latter quorum Dec. 4, 1890. He was ordained a High Priest May 20, 1906, by Chileon L. Miller and ordained a Patriarch Aug. 27, 1911, by Hyrum M. Smith. Elder Godfrey has always been an active and faithful worker in the Church. He was the first president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in the South Cottonwood Ward, filling that position fourteen years; he also acted as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school four years. For several years he presided over the lesser Priesthood in the South Cottonwood Ward, kept the fast offering books for twenty-one years and filled a special mission by appointment to look after the poor people of the Ward. Furthermore he acted as school trustee in Murray for fourteen years and was a City councilman in the same place four years. For many years he served as a cavalry man in the Nauvoo Legion, and took part in the Black Hawk Indian war.
