Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Labrum, John George

Labrum, John George, first counselor to Bishop Jos. S. Rawlins of the South Cottonwood Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, from Dec. 22, 1886, to Sept. 16, 1888, was born Nov. 29, 1849, at Simpson, Buckinghamshire, England, the son of Thos. Labrum and Elizabeth George. He was baptized in 1861 by William Turner. While yet a youth he made straw braids for hats and later sewed some of these into hats. He followed the hatter's business until he emigrated to America in 1862, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "William Tapscott", which sailed from Liverpool May 14, 1862, and arrived in New York six weeks later. He crossed the plains in Joseph Horne's company, arriving in Salt Lake City Oct. 1, 1862. While journeying to the Valley and while stopping temporarily at Florence he undertook to swim a branch of the Missouri river, together with some teamster, and was on the verge of drowning when he was saved before going down the third time by one of the teamsters, Robert Ogden. The family settled first temporarily in Mill Creek; but located permanently in South Cottonwood in 1863, where John was ordained a Seventy in the year 1870, and became a member of the 73rd quorum of Seventy. At this time he took an active part in the Church as Ward teacher. He was ordained a High Priest Dec. 22, 1886, by Angus M. Cannon and acted as first counselor to Bishop Joseph S. Rawlins for two years, in the absence of counselor William Boyce, senior, who at that time was on the underground. He was finally set apart as second counselor to Bishop Rawlins Sept. 16, 1888, and acted in that capacity until Bishop Rawlins died Nov. 16, 1900. While acting as a member of the Bishopric he had charge of all the amusements in the Ward. Elder Labrum assisted in building the Union Pacific Railroad through Echo Canyon and later worked on the Denver and Rio Grande Railway when it was built through Utah; he also hauled rock for the Salt Lake Temple. As an officer in the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and Sunday school he was a very diligent and successful worker for many years. He also acted as first assistant in the Y. M. M. I. A. and assistant superintendent to Wm. G. Young in the South Cottonwood Sunday school.
