Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Richards, Willard Brigham

Richards, Willard Brigham, a resident of the Sugar House Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Jan. 25, 1847, at Winter Quarters, Nebraska, the son of Dr. Willard Richards (who was with Joseph Smith at the time of his martyrdom in Carthage, Ill.) and Sarah Longstroth Richards, and with his parents entered Great Salt Lake Valley in 1848. At the age of eight years he was baptized in Salt Lake City and as a boy was employed on Captain William H. Hooper's ranch in Skull Valley. He attended school at irregular intervals till 1867, when he was called to fill a mission to Europe and in that year was ordained an Elder by Heber C. Kimball; later (but before departing for Europe) he was ordained a Seventy. In order to reach the mission field he walked most of the way across the plains; after his arrival in Europe he spent one year in the London conference and the remainder of the time in the Swiss and German Mission, where he acquired a good knowledge of the German language. After returning home from Europe in the fall of 1869, he was employed by the engineering department of the Utah Central Railroad and the following year did ranching in Skull Valley. Shortly thereafter he took charge of the Utah Live Stock Company's ranch for two years. From 1874 to 1885 he was engaged in farming and stock raising at Mendon, Cache Valley, and is known as one of the leading stock raisers of the West; one stallion (L. C. Lee) raised by him is numbered with the world's record holders. Aug. 22, 1877, he married Annie Fairbanks Doremus (daughter of Dr. Henry I. and Harriet Fairbanks Doremus) who became the mother of six children, namely, Willard (who died in infancy), Willard B. Preston D., Albert Zabriskie, Alta May and Annie D. Sister Richards died May 25, 1888. In 1899 Bro. Richards married Louie Snelgrove (daughter of Edward Snelgrove and Mary Joy Snelgrove) who became the mother of six children, namely, Sarah L. and Mary Joy (twins), Pauline, Paul S., Martha S. and Louie Gill.
