Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Haigh, William Henry

Haigh, William Henry, second counselor to Bishop Heber Bennion of Taylorsville, Salt Lake county, Utah, from 1890 to 1910, was born July 18, 1844, at Huddersfield, Yorkshire, England, the son of Abraham Haigh and Elizabeth Cartwright. William was but a child when his mother died, and his father was engaged in the woolen manufacturing business in Yorkshire, England. William spent his boyhood days at home and received a liberal education in the common schools and academies of his native land. His father died in 1855 and William started out in life for himself at the age of twelve years. After working in the furnishing department of the woolen manufacturing business for a few years, in the vicinity of his birthplace, he, at the age of eighteen years, went to Dewsbury, England, and took up the same line of work. Being of an ambitious turn of mind, and desiring wider fields of operation, he left his native home and sailed for America in 1866, coming by way of New York. While in that city he came across some of the "Mormon" emigrants; at once he took up with them and crossed the plains in Capt. Thomas E. Ricks's train, arriving in Salt Lake City in the fall of 1866. Having been converted to "Mormonism", he was baptized Sept. 30, 1866, by Joseph Harker and settled west of the Jordan river, where he has resided ever since. He was ordained an Elder Dec. 6, 1869, by Samuel H. Smith; afterwards he became a Seventy and was ordained a High Priest Jan. 30, 1890, by Charles W. Penrose and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Bennion, in which capacity he served for twenty years. He has also acted as assistant superintendent of the Ward Sunday school, Ward clerk, etc. In 1879-1889 he filled a mission to England, laboring with good success in the Liverpool conference, where he also assisted his brethren in shipping emigrants to America. Elder Haigh married May Ann Harker Dec. 6, 1869; she was the daughter of Joseph Harker and Susannah Sneath and was born June 22, 1853, at Taylorsville. Elder Haigh has from the beginning taken an active part in the building up of Taylorsville Ward, having erected two fine houses. For a number of years he followed sheep business and also worked at the woolen factory at the mouth of Parley's canyon. Bro. Haigh has worked as a guide in the Bureau of Information on the Temple grounds since the spring of 1911.
