Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Snell, Rufus Phillips

Snell, Rufus Phillips, president of the High Priests' quorum in the Big Horn Stake of Zion, was born at Sackville, New Brunswick, May 27, 1840. His father's name was Cyrus Phillips and his mother's maiden name was Rhoda Barnes. While living at Sackville, Conn., in 1836, they first heard the Gospel, it coming from the mouths of three missionaries-Lyman E. Johnson, Milton Holmes and John Herrit. These made the Phillips home their headquarters and a mill belonging to the father was improvised as a meeting house. Here the Elders spent some three weeks in mission work, during which time they baptised eighteen persons, among them Brother Rufus' father and mother and others related to him. It is worthy of note that at this same place the late Apostle Marriner W. Merrill also received the Gospel, at a subsequent time. After trying for some time to find a purchaser for his property, the father finally succeed ed, and in April, 1853, with his family, set their faces toward Utah, arriving at Salt Lake City Aug. 27, 1854, having spent the intervening time chiefly among apostate relatives in Wisconsin and strengthening their equipment for the journey. At Elkhorn river Elias Williams and family were picked up and brought on, they having lost their animals, but with the exception of this, some little sickness and an occasional "hold-up" by the Indians, the trip was made, without special incident. The subject hereof was baptised in the spring of 1855, by Jonathan Midgley. The family left Salt Lake City in 1855, and went to Spanish Fork, being among the first settlers there, the occupation being chiefly farming and other things incidental to pioneer life, having numerous vicissitudes and many experiences long to be remembered. Brother Rufus has held every civil position in the gift of Spanish Fork municipality from mayor down, and has honorably filled many offices in the Church. He was ordained a Priest by A. K. Thurber and G. W. Wilkin, in 1857; an Elder by Philip Sykes in 1867; president of the Spanish Fork Elders' quorum in 1873 by G. W. Wilkin; a Seventy in 1892 by Wm. Stokes; a High Priest in 1892 by A. O. Smoot; counselor to Bishop Henry Gardner; High Councilor of Utah Stake in 1896 by Abraham H. Cannon; High Councilor in Nebo Stake in 1901 by Hyrum Lemon; and president of the High Priests' quorum of the Big Horn Stake in 1901 by Abraham O. Woodruff. He has had two wives, but not coincidently, the first, Ellen C. Hillman, to whom he was united Feb. 8, 1869, and who bore him ten children, having died June 11, 1887; in March, 1892, he married Mrs. Emma H. Moore, a widow with three children who bore four to him. His residence is Cowley, Wyoming, and his occupation that of a farmer.
