Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Armstrong, Francis

Armstrong, Francis, a prominent Elder in the Church and one of Utah's most successful and prosperous business man, was born at Plain Miller, Northumberland, England, Oct. 3, 1839, the son of William Armstrong and Mary Kirk. His father was a machinist and worked for Stephenson and Hartshorn, in the machine shops at Newcastle-on-Tyne, where he helped to construct the first locomotive made in England. In 1851 the Armstrong family, consisting of father, mother and twelve children, emigrated to Canada and settled near Hamilton, Wenthworth county, where the father carried on his trade of blacksmithing and was also owner of a large farm. Francis could have had every advantage of education, had he remained at home, but at the age of sixteen he was seized with a desire to travel and proceeded to the State of Missouri, where he remained until he was twenty-one. At home he had worked upon his father's farm, attending the village school during the winters. In Richmond, Missouri, he worked for a Dr. Davis in a flouring mill and subsequently in a sawmill, continuing in the lumber business with that gentleman until he came to Utah. While residing at Richmond he also formed the acquaintance of David Whitmer, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and also the descendants of John Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Hiram Page and other families well known to the readers of early Church history. Mr. Armstrong started for Salt Lake City in the spring of 1861, crossing the plains in Captain Homer Duncan's independent company. This company had left the frontiers at Florence, Neb, before Mr. Armstrong and others from Richmond arrived there, but they soon overtook it and traveled with the train to Salt Lake Valley, where they arrived Sept. 13, 1861. Soon after his arrival in Salt Lake City, Mr. Armstrong became a member of the Church and was subsequently ordained to the Priesthood and became a member of the 13th quorum of Seventy. His first secular labor in the Valley was hauling wood from the mountains, and was next engaged in Pres. Young's flouring mill at the mouth of Parley's Canyon. In the spring of 1862 he began working for Feramorz Little at his lumbering mill in Big Cottonwood Canyon. He subsequently purchased the mill from Mr. Little for twenty-one thousand dollars and started in business for himself, forming a partnership with Charles Bagley, and conducting a general lumbering business. The firm of Armstrong & Bagley prospered and the senior partner next purchased an interest in the business of Latimer, Taylor & Romney, manufacturers of doors and sash. Later he engaged in other enterprises, which met with handsome returns. In 1864 (Dec. 10th) he married Isabella Siddoway, a lady of sterling qualities. They became the parents of eleven children and the family maintained a permanent residence in Salt Lake City. In 1878 Bro. Armstrong was elected to the city council and was re-elected in 1880. In 1881 and again in 1885 he was chosen as selectman of Salt Lake county. In 1886 he became mayor of Salt Lake City and served as much for two terms. On the day of his re-election, Feb. 13, 1888, an attempt was made by certain real estate speculators to jump the city lands on Arsenal Hill and in other parts of the town. Mayor Armstrong and a posse of officers promptly ejected the intruders and effectively vindicated and maintained the rights of the municipality, both with physical force and in the legal proceedings that followed. After retiring as mayor he again served the county as selectman, and at the time of his death, which occurred at his home in the Eleventh Ward June 15, 1899, he was serving as county commissioner. At this time also he was president of the Utah Commercial and Savings Bank, the Western Loan & Savings Co., the Utah Power Co., and the Blackfoot Stock Co.; was vice-president of the Taylor, Romney, Armstrong Co., a director in the Salt Lake City Railroad Co., and the Salt Lake Livery & Transfer Co., and prominently connected with the Utah Sugar Co. and numerous other business affairs. Francis Armstrong was emphatically a self-made man. Pushing, energetic and fearless, he made his way in life by sheer force of his native ability, coupled with hard and persistent toil, for which he was peculiarly well-fitted, being a man of powerful physique. Aggressive and even combative when need be, he was far from quarrelsome in his disposition. He was generous-hearted and liberal, not only in his views, but with his means, and as a rule was brimming over with jovial good nature. In his death at scarcely three score years the community suffered a distinct loss. While Elder Armstrong strictly speaking was more of a business man than an ecclesiastical his integrity to God and to the Church to which he gave his allegiance, was never doubted by those who knew him. He would have given his life for the cause of Christ, had it been required of him, and his whole life might be called the versification of the promise made by the Savior of the world: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness and all other things shall be added unto you."
