Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Armstrong, Isabella Siddoway

Armstrong, Isabella Siddoway, wife of the late Mayor Francis Armstrong and the second president of the Daughters of the Handcart Pioneers, was born Nov. 28, 1849, in North Cumberland, England, the daughter of Robert Siddoway and Elizabeth Dawson. Her parents joined the Church in 1855, and Isabella was baptized in 1859. The family being anxious to gather with the Saints in Utah emigrated to America in 1865, but owing to sickness they were forced to stop in the States, living one year in New York and four years in Pennsylvania. In the meantime Sister Siddoway, (the mother of Isabella) died in Pennsylvania, and the father found it a difficult task indeed to cross the plains with his three motherless children (Isabella, ten years, Richard, eight years and Robert, six years old). They left Florence June 7, 1860, in Capt. Daniel Robinson's handcart company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 27, 1860. Isabella, who walked nearly all the way across the plains, gives the following brief account of the journey and her early experience in Utah: "The journey being longer than we expected, our clothing, shoes and provisions grew very scanty long before we reached our destination. Our shoes were so badly worn that at night, after a long day's walk over the rough ground, I would have to pick the pebbles from my little brother's torn and bleeding feet, as well as my own. When we were near Laramie, Wyoming, our provisions grew very short, so much so that each person was rationed to one-half pound of flour a day. Sister Hannah Lapish, one of the members of our company, had some jewelry she had brought from England with her. She took it to a trading post, and exchanged it for seven hundred pounds of flour, which greatly relieved our want until we were met by a relief party at Green River, sent out by President Brigham Young, with 2500 pounds of flour and 500 pounds of bacon which lasted us until we reached the Valley. We were very fortunate in only having one death during our journey, and that being a little child. After arriving in Salt Lake Lake City, we looked upon the then almost barren country, and compaired it to the green fields and comfortable homes we had left in old England. Was it any wonder that we were hart-sick and disappointed with our new surroundings! With a little band of people, a scattered house and a green field here and there, very little to eat and less to wear, the first few years of our new home-making was very trying. But with one aim, and having been driven from place to place on account of their religious belief, which made them almost as united as one large family, this little band of courageous people turned a desert into the beautiful city we now have." In 1864 (Dec. 10th) Sister Isabella was married to Brother Francis Armstrong and became the mother of eleven children, three boys and eight girls. At the present time (1914) she is the mother of thirty-seven grandchildren and seven great-grandchildren. In 1910 the society known as the Daughters of the Handcart Pioneers was organized with Hannah Lapish as president. Two years later (1912) Sister Armstrong was chosen president of that society, and still acts in that capacity. "Of this position," writes Sister Armstrong, "I am very proud, as it has been one of the greatest pleasures of my life to help, in a small way, to build up an organization which will perpetuate the names of the most courageous people the world has ever known".
