Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Thomas, Chas. John

Thomas, Chas. John, a prominent and active Elder in the 13th Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Nov. 20, 1832, in Burnley, Lancashire, England, the son of Joseph K. Thomas and Margaret Spotswood. When but seven years of age, he exhibited natural ability for music and at the age of nine he played with his father in an orchestra at the Theatre Royal, New Castle-on-Tyne. While still a lad he went to London and studied harmony under the tutorship of Professor Thirwall of the Theatre Royal Covent Garden, and he graduated with honors. Soon after becoming a convert to "Mormonism" in 1851, Charles took sick and continued to grow worse until his life was dispaired of and the doctor said he would die. His father's heart was touched and he exclaimed: "My son, if there is anything on earth that you wish and I can get for you, you shall have it." Charles asked that the Latter-day Saint Elders be sent for to pray for him. The Elders came, and after they had administered to him, he was instantly healed. This miraculous manifestation of the power of God led his father to investigate the claims of 'Mormonism", and soon afterwards the whole family joined the Church. Commencing with 1853 Charles traveled with an Italian opera company for three years from London to Scotland under the direction of the great Carl Anchutze. In 1854 he published some of his compositions which were played at several London theatres. In 1856 he was offered the position of band master on board "H. M. S. Great Marlborough" but had to decline the honor on account of poor health. After being a member of the Church for ten years, he set sail for America with a large company of emigrating saints who crossed the Atlantic in the ship "William Tapscott" which sailed from Liverpool May 11, 1860, and arrived in New York June 20th following. During his temporary sojourn in the State of New York, he filled a number of engagements in several theatres in the city of New York. To Professor Thomas belongs the distinction and honor of being the first orchestral leader for the Salt Lake Theatre and for being the first to receive a testimonial benefit in that historic house. He was also musical director of the first male glee club in Salt Lake City, which was organized, under the name of the "Union Glee Club", March 17, 1876, with a membership of sixteen, which soon increased to twenty-four. Most of the members were considered at that time the best vocalists in the City, including Messrs. Henry Gardener, Duncan M. McAllister, William Foster, A. C. Smyth, Orson F. Whitney, Ebenezer Beesley, and a number of other well known names; the object of the organization was mutual improvement in the Divine art of vocal music and to assist in charitable purposes. From 1875 to 1885 Brother Thomas had charge of the Temple block by special appointment from the presidency of the Church. In 1885 to 1887 he filled a mission to Great Britain, laboring principally in the Yorkshire, Birmingham and London conferences. After his return from that mission, he was again placed in charge of the Temple block, which position he held till 1908. From the time of the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple in 1893 to the present time he has led the Temple choir. In the musical world Bro. Thomas is widely known as a composer of music, having written for orchestral, instrumental and vocal works. As early as 1858 he wrote his famous anthem on the Book of Mormon, commencing with "Harken, O Gentiles". This was undoubtedly the first anthem ever written from that sacred volume. He also composed "Harken and Lo a Voice" from the Doctrine and Covenants in 1859, which perhaps was the first poetical effusion which had that book for its basis. While yet a young man he was sent to St. George by Pres. Brigham Young to teach vocal and instrumental music, remaining there about three years. After that he resided in Beaver two and a half years, after which he was called back to Salt Lake City. Soon after his arrival in Utah in 1861 he attained to the captaincy of a band which was called the Thomas band. Before he left his native country he married Charlotte Gibbs in London (in 1854), by whom he became the father of one son. Bro. Thomas is remembered as the man who led a male chorus of seventy voices to victory in June, 1892, taking the first prize at a singing contest given under the auspices of the mutual improvement associations in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City. One of his colleagues in the music world, speaking of Prof. Thomas, says: "In summing up this noble, earnest teacher's work, it may be said that his advent into these valleys marked an epoch in the early musical history of Utah." For many years Elder Thomas has been a faithful and enthusiastic Temple worker and is well and favorable known by thousands of the Saints for his unflinching integrity and faithfulness as a servant of God and as a man of talent and influence.
