Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Jennings, Priscilla Paul

Jennings, Priscilla Paul, wife of William Jennings, was born March 25, 1838, in the borrough, (now the city) of Truro, parish of Kenwyn, County of Cornwall, England. Her father William Paul, was born May 2, 1803, in the parish of St. Agnes, county of Cornwall, England. He was an architect and builder by profession in his native country and in Utah among the principal of his architectural works may be named the Jennings "Eagle Emporium" and the Devereaux House. William Paul joined the Church about the year 1845, when Mrs. Jennings was seven years of age. His family were, therefore, trained up in the faith of said Church. Previous to joining the Latter-day Saints, he was a Methodist local preacher and a class leader. He bore the reputation of being a pious good-living man, and sustained a highly respectable social standing in his native country. The mother, Elizabeth Goyne Paul, was born March 13, 1804, in the parish of St. Agnes, county of Cornwall, England. She was an excellent pious woman and a fine friend to every one. In Liverpool, her house was ever open to the Saints, and the emigrants going on ship board had often cause to bless her. The family residence was also constantly full of the traveling Elders. There were eight children in the family, four sons and four daughters. Mary Jane married Mr. James Linforth, who at that time was chief clerk of the Liverpool office. He was a man of exquisite refinement, of a keen brilliant intellect, with considerable literary culture. His work-"Route from Liverpool to the Great Salt Lake," illustrated, is even today the most complete book in existence upon "Mormon" emigration. For many years he was known as one of the principal men of California and a leading merchant of San Francisco. His wife, Mr. Jennings' sister, Susan Paul, later became Mrs. Brooks of Salt Lake City. Wm. Paul's whole family emigrated to Utah. His daughter, Elizabeth Paul, married Henry W. Naisbitt, the well known writer, who eventually became the head of the grocery department of the Z. C. M. I., but Mrs. Linforth, at an early day, about 1857, left with her husband for California, where she died. The subject of this sketch, Mrs. Priscilla, emigrated with her parents to Utah in the year 1854, and in 1855 (July 28th) she was married to Wm. Jennings. Previous to this he had married a Miss Jane Walker at St. Joseph, Mo., through which relationship he became acquainted with the Latter-day Saints; and was led to Utah before joining the Church. Wm. Jennings therefore had two wives. Being called on a mission to Carson Valley, with a number of others, he was accompanied by his second wife, (Priscilla Paul Jennings) and their company was the first that traveled down the Humboldt river that season. The Indians had been very troublesome that year, but the company of missionaries with their wives got through safe. This was also the year of the Utah famine and their supply of provisions were estimated at barely enough per family to last them to Carson Valley. They had not gone far before Governor Young, in consequence of the famine, released all the prisoners then in the Penitentiary, on condition of their leaving the Territory for California. The governor sent the released after the company with instructions for each family to take one of them to provision on the way. One of the released prisoners fell to the lot of Mr. Jennings, who with his young wife generously provided for him on the journey out of what was considered their scant rations. This benevolence appeared to them providentially rewarded, for their supplies seemed not to diminish, which was often, on the way, the subject of conversation between Bro. Jennings and his wife. While in Carson Valley, Frank W. Jennings was born Feb. 25, 1857. He is the eldest son of the subject of this sketch and was a member of the great commercial firm of Jennings and Sons. After being on this pioneer mission eighteen months, the family prepared for their return to Salt Lake City. It may be observed, by the way, that this episode in their lives entitled William Jennings to rank as one of the founders of Nevada, as well as of Utah, and to Frank W. Jennings a peculiar State distinction attaches, he being one of the first native born sons of Nevada. In this early period of her married life, Sister Priscilla Jennings was a principal personage in the action of a number of romantic incidents as well as the usual hardships which attend pioneer families in their career of State-founding, among which were some thrilling Indian adventures on the way home, it being at the time of the Utah war. After the return of the people of Utah Territory from their exodus south in 1858, the two branches of the Jenningses lived together in most perfect harmony in one house,-first in their old family residence near the spot where now stands the Walker Hotel. It was this family residence that the Colfax party visited in 1865. The two Mrs. Jennings were to each other as affectionate, considerate sisters, the distinction of first and second wife never being made by their husband, and so much were the children regarded as one family, that even their city visitors hardly knew which of these companion wives was the mother of the different children met in this harmonious home circle. Thus united, the family removed to Devereux House, where the two wives lived together in sisterly bonds until the death of Mrs. Jane, about 1870, when Mrs. Priscilla became as mother to both branches, fostering for some months, till its death, the babe which the first Mrs. Jennings left to her motherly care. The children of the first wife were eleven and of the second fourteen. Of Jane Jennings' children there are still four living, namely, Jane, Isaac, William and Maye. Of the second Mrs. Jennings' children there are seven living, namely, Frank, Joseph, Priscilla, James, Walter, Harry and Harold. Many years ago Sister Priscilla P. Jennings formed a sewing club and gave work to many who were in destitute circumstances. She solicited work from the stores and also gave free sewing lessons to girls. Thus this small factory was a wonderful help to the community. Sister Jennings has also been a diligent Relief Society worker from the early days and has been a member on the General Board of the Relief Society since the time Sister Bathsheba W. Smith became president. She has also been an earnest Temple worker and served on the Committee appointed to furnish the Temple when getting it ready for dedication. She was one of the first sisters called to officiate in the Temple as an ordinance worker, and is still devoting a part of her time to that work. Sister Jennings has always been a public-spirited woman, ever willing to take part in such work which has been assigned her to do.
