Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Wells, Lydia Ann

Wells, Lydia Ann, wife of Daniel H. Wells, was born Jan. 1, 1828, at Lynn, Essex county, Mass., the second daughter of Geo. Alley and Mary Symonds. Her American ancestors came over from England in 1634. Her father's family hailed from London and settled in Lynn, Mass. Her mother's family were from Kent, England, and settled in Salem, Mass. When she was about three years old her father's family moved to Salem, Mass., where they first heard the fulness of the gospel preached by Elders Erastus Snow and Benj. Winchester in 1841. In the fall of that year the family started for Nauvoo where they arrived in January, 1843. Sister Lydia writes in 1905: "In Nauvoo we had the privilege of seeing the Prophet Joseph and of listening to the words of inspiration which fell from his lips. I shall never forget them; they are as vivid to my mind now as if they had been uttered only yesterday. I can testify of the Divine mission of the Prophet Joseph and I know for a surety that he was a servant of the Most High God. I was in Nauvoo at the time of his martyrdom and shared in the great sorrow which befell the saints on that occasion. In 1844 I was baptized in the Mississippi river at Nauvoo by Elder Erastus Snow and confirmed by Amasa M. Lyman." In 1852 Sister Lydia was married to Daniel H. Wells by whom she had six children, three of whom have passed to the other side and three are still living. When the Ward Relief Society was organized in 1858, Sister Wells became a member of the same and later acted as a teacher. In 1873 she was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Rachel Grant, of the Thirteenth Ward Relief Society. In 1882 she was promoted to the position of first counselor, which position she held until 1890. For five years, commencing with 1882, she presided over the primary association of the Thirteenth Ward. Later she was called to act as second counselor to Ellen C. Clawson, president of the Salt Lake Primary Association, which office she held until Sister Clawson's death. After that she acted as first counselor to Pres. Camilla Cobb, occupying that position until the Salt Lake Stake was divided in 1904. In 1877 Sister Wells attended the dedication of the Temple in St. George; she was also present when the Temple site at Manti was dedicated, and attended the dedicatory services of the Manti Temple. In 1893 she was called to officiate as a worker in the Salt Lake Temple, a position which she occupied until the time of her death which occurred in Salt Lake City, Aug. 6. 1909.
