Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Snow, Elizabeth Rebecca Ashby

Snow, Elizabeth Rebecca Ashby, wife of the late Apostle Erastus Snow, was born May 17, 1831, at Salem, Mass., the daughter of Nathanial Ashby and Susan Hammond (of Marblehead, near Salem, Mass.). Her parents were among the first converts to "Mormonism" at Salem. In 1842 the family migrated to Nauvoo, Ill., where Elizabeth was baptized in 1842 by Erastus Snow. She passed through and witnessed the persecutions of the saints in Hancock county, Ill., and as a fourteen year old girl became a participant in the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo and was with them in their travels in the wilderness. During the persecutions her father weakened and died, leaving a wife and eleven children. After many trials, the family reached Winter Quarters, where they spent the winter of 1847-48. After the return of the pioneers from G. S. L. Valley Sister Elizabeth became the wife of Elder Erastus Snow Dec. 19, 1847. She accompanied her husband to the Valley the next year, arriving there Sept. 20, 1848. Sister Snow drove a horse team all the way across the plains. This was a trying task to her in the beginning, but before she reached her destination, she became quite an expert as a teamster. The winter of 1848-49 was spent in the old fort, and in the spring of 1849 Erastus Snow moved his families out upon lots in the Thirteenth Ward. Sister Elizabeth was provided with a small adobe house. The following fall her husband left her on a mission to Scandinavia, he returned in 1852. During his absence she lived with her brother-in-law's family Bryant Stringham and went out sewing for a livelihood. During the "move" in 1858 Sister Snow went as far south as Provo. In 1861 she accompanied her husband to southern Utah, where he was called to preside and there Sister Elizabeth resided until her husband's death. At St. George Erastus Snow built a big house in which Sister Elizabeth for years entertained the many visitors who called on Elder Snow, and thus became the hostess of hundreds of prominent people in the Church. In 1884 she accompanied her husband to Mexico, where Elder Snow went to locate towns for the people who at that time were driven into exile and were seeking homes beyond the borders of the United States. Her husband died in Salt Lake City May 27, 1888. Two weeks before his demise Sister Snow came to Salt Lake City to care for him and remained with him till the end. She then went to Mexico with her daughter and son-in-law, Moses Thatcher, and after a short stay there returned to her home in St. George, where she lived for a number of years and then moved to Salt Lake City. Her present home is in the Eighteenth Ward.
