Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Murdock, David L.

Murdock, David L., senior president of the 13th quorum of Seventy, was born at Cronberry, parish of Auchinleck, county of Ayr, Scotland, January 13, 1852, the son of Wm. Murdock and Janet Lennox. He received his education at the school in connection with the iron and coal works at Muirkirk. At the age of fourteen he entered the service of the Eglinton Iron Co., at their Portland iron works at Hurlford, Scotland, in the office of the works. After four years' service there he was transferred to the Gartsherrie iron works office of William Aird & Co., and after some two years experience there was again transferred to the head office in Glasgow. At the general election in 1873, M. Alexander Whitelaw, the senior member of the firm, was returned to Parliament for the city of Glasgow as a Conservative, and he chose as his private secretary, the subject of this sketch. He remained with him in this position till early in 1878, when he emigrated to Utah. He lived in Heber City for three years after his arrival in this country, and at that time was offered a position in Zion's Co-operative Mercantile Institution, Salt Lake City, which he accepted. In 1905-1907 he filled a mission to Scotland, laboring in Edinburgh, Ayrshire and Glasgow and was during the last nine months president of the Scottish mission. After an absence of a little over two years he returned home, having enjoyed his labors in his native country. May 16, 1878, he was baptized in the river Clyde by Alexander F. McDonald, and was confirmed a member of the Church the Sunday following. He was ordained a Priest March 30, 1879, ordained an Elder May 19, 1879, and ordained a Seventy July 20, 1885, by Elder B. Y. Hampton and became a member of the 13th quorum of Seventy, located in the Twentieth Ward, Salt Lake City. For sometime he acted as clerk of the quorum and on Aug. 14, 1893, was set apart as a president of that quorum by the late Elder John Morgan and during the past ten years he has been senior president, succeeding to that position on the death of James Sharp in 1904. He married Elizabeth Pinkerton Thyne April 18, 1878. Eight children have been born through that marriage, five of whom are surviving.
