Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Chambers, Nathaniel George

Chambers, Nathaniel George, a High Priest in the Ensign Stake, Salt Lake co., Utah, was born Dec. 31, 1836, in Detroit, Michigan, the son of George Henry Chambers and Mary Hyde. He left home in the fall of 1858 for St. Louis, Missouri, where he remained until the spring of 1859, when he and another young man by the name of Alonzo Corkans heard of the big boom in Pike's Peak, near Denver, Colorado, and they decided to go there, but owing to the hostile attitude of the Indians on the way, they concluded to travel on foot. In order to have food on the journey, Brother Chambers bought a cow, on the back of which he and his companion tied two sacks of provisions which they had purchased. One day's journey from the Missouri river, they came across a traveler with an ox team, who invited them to travel with him to his ranch, called "The Big Blue," about one hundred miles further west. Consequently, they unloaded their pack animal, put their sacks in the man's wagon and traveled on. About two days before they reached the man's ranch, one of the oxen gave out, so they put the cow under the yoke, but she laid down bellowing, refusing to pull. After parting with their friend, they happened upon a freight train belonging to Hiram T. Spencer and Y. Greene on its way to Utah. Mr. Corkans with American nerve asked the clerk of the train if they would be kind enough to haul their sacks, and received a warm welcome into the new company. Soon Nathaniel was given a mule to ride, while his partner's special business was to drive the cow. Both stayed with the train, and instead of landing at Pike's Peak, as they had intended, they came through to Salt Lake City. After their arrival in the Valley, they traded their cow for a horse and saddle, and while Alonzo Corkans went to California, Mr. Chambers became a "Mormon" and remained in Zion. In 1866 he made a trip to the States, from which he returned the same year, crossing the plains in Captain White's mule train. His place of residence has been Salt Lake City and the point of the mountain west, near where Garfield now stands. He also lived in the Eighth Ward and the Twentieth Ward, Salt Lake City. In 1861 (Feb. 17th), he married Mary Leon Spencer, eldest daughter of Daniel Spencer and Sarah Lester, by whom he has had three children. In 1882 he went on a pleasure trip to the States.
