Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Cook, Hyrum Howland

Cook, Hyrum Howland, was born May 6, 1866, at Swan Creek, Rich county, Utah. He was the sixteenth and youngest child of Phineas W. Cook and Ann Elisha Howland. He had some of the hardships of the early days in Bear Lake valley, to contend with, thought nothing to compare with what his parents had to undergo in the settling of Salt Lake valley. He lived with his parents at Swan Creek until he was seventeen years of age. His father being over-burdened with the cares of a large family, the son was called to the responsibility of looking after his aged mother, and lived with her at Garden City, Rich county. When twenty-two years of age he married Miss Annie Catherine Vaterlaus, daughter of Conrad and Catherine Schmid Vaterlaus, the issue of which marriage was two sons and four daughters. In the fall of 1894 he was called to fill a mission to Australia. He left Salt Lake City Dec. 11th of the same year with the first company of Elders, going by Hudard Parker S. S. line. He was placed in charge of the company on leaving Vancouver, B. C., and arrived at Auckland, N. Z., Jan. 12, 1895. He received his appointment to labor in the Wairau conference, by President Wm. Gardner, where he labored in the field with others of the Elders and assisted in opening up the work in the city of Nelson. Was heard in private, in public and through the press. He was released to return home July 2, 1897, and called to bring his sick companion, J. G. Gasper, home, which they reached in September, 1897. While on this mission his mother was called to the great beyond May 17, 1896. He was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as counselor to Samuel Weston, Bishop of Garden City Oct. 26, 1897, by William L. Rich, which position he labored in until April, 1900. He was then released to go with the pioneers to the Big Horn country, and assisted in the early work of the Mormon people in that place. He was the first to reside in the townsite of Cowley. May 30, 1905, he was called to part with his beloved wife and was left with four children to mourn the loss.
