Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lapish, Hannah Settle

Lapish, Hannah Settle, of hand-cart fame and a resident of the Twentieth Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Nov. 2, 1834, at Beeston, Leeds, Yorkshire, England, the daughter of William Settle and Hannah Strickland. The following life sketch was prepared by Sister Lapish herself: "I am the youngest of eight, children, born to my parents; the seventh child died prior to my birth. My parents, not believing in infant baptism, were refused a Christian burial for their child. Father died in my early infancy, and mother survived him only two years. During her widowhood, Sectarian ministers and others persuaded mother to have all her children christened, and yielding at length to their pressure she permitted the same to be done Feb. 28, 1836, her children at that time ranging in age from two to eighteen years. The Rev. Thos. Wardle, vicar of Beeston, Leeds, officiated in making us all members of the Church of England. When about seventeen years of age I heard the gospel as preached by the Latter-day Saints. I believed it implicitly and was baptized Feb. 29, 1852. The following year (July 3, 1853) I married Joseph Lapish, a member of the "Mormon" Church. By this union I became the mother of nine children, five of whom survive to the present time. Emigrating to America we embarked May 30, 1857, on the ship "Tuscarora" at Liverpool and arrived in Philadelphia July 3, 1857. This being the year of the great panic, my husband, together with others, went to Richmond, Virginia, to obtain employment, and in the mean time I took in sewing from a knitting factory which proved quite providential at the time, as I was left with a three-months old babe. After the elapse of three months I joined my husband in Richmond where we resided about three years. During our residence at that place the so-called Harper Ferry raid occurred, and during the excitement we received a letter from Geo. Q. Cannon counseling us (according to instructions which he had received from Pres. Brigham Young, to leave for the West, as war in the east seemed inevitable. We took the council and joining a number of other saints at Philadelphia we traveled to Florence, Nebraska, where we joined Capt. Daniel Robinson's handcart company and started on our journey to Utah June 7, 1860, with our two children, aged respectively two and a half years and six months. On the journey there was considerable suffering, owing to the scarcity of provisions, and as I had some jewelry which I thought could be spared I went to a trading post on our route of travel and asked the proprietor of the store if he would trade me some flour for my jewelry; the price of flour at that time and place was $10 per hundred. I soon perceived that the store keeper was not inclined to make the trade, but I noticed a very tall man, perhaps a trapper or a miner, dressed in a beaded buckskin suit, standing in the store who turned to me and asked: "What do want for that thing" (meaning my jewelry). I answered him as if by inspiration, saying: "700 pounds of flour, Sir." He took my piece of jewelry and sent 700 pounds of flour to our camp. I gave it to the commissary of the hand cart company who dealt it out judiciously to the hungry travelers, the last measure, being half a pint to a person, being distributed on the day we crossed Green River. While we were being ferried across that stream a shout of joy went up from our company as the word was passed that a relief train sent by the Church authorities had just arrived with provisions for us. With this relief our main troubles were over, and we arrived safely in Salt Lake City Aug. 27, 1860. One birth and one death (that of a baby) happened on our overland journey. The arrival of our company in Salt Lake City ended forever that most pathetic mode of traveling by the Latter-day Saints, namely, the crossing of the plains with hand carts. Our family made our home at Lehi, Utah county, from 1860 to 1868 and then returned to Salt Lake City in 1868 and located in West Jordan in 1872. My husband found employment at the Galena smelters and I kept a boarding and rooming house for the company. When the rumor first reached us to the effect that a railroad would be built to Bingham Canyon, I invested in a piece of land on the line of the Utah Southern Railroad with money I had earned by selling sewing machines. On this land the Bingham Canyon Railroad Company located their depot and machine shop without first obtaining my permission to do so. I built a boarding house which became known as the Junction House and two cottages on the land. In 1876 my husband moved south to Salina, Sevier co., where he made his home. Being unable to effect a settlement with the railroad company for the use and occupancy of my ground, I commenced suit against the Bingham Canyon Railroad Company in 1879, which suit was continued until 1881, when the court quited my title and awarded me damages against the company. In 1882 we moved to American Fork, where I resided until 1898. During my residence at that place I became interested in Woman's Suffrage and in December, 1892, I was elected president of the Suffrage Association of American Fork. I held this position until 1898. While acting as president I took the initiative in raising a subscription to build a house for a worthy widow with four children, the people responding generously, and the suffrage association gave a liberal donation. My efforts in this good cause was ably seconded by Sister Orphia Robinson. In the spring of 1892 I organized a Ladies' Civil Government Class in American Fork; the meetings of this class were well attended, and the city council granted us the use of the city hall to hold our meetings in, free of charge. In September, 1892, I was elected chairman of the World's Fair Committee of American Fork. This committee planned a beautiful clock, 7 ft. high and 18 inches wide, made of wood and Utah onyx. This clock was exhibited at the World's Fair exposition in 1893 and was presented by myself to the Alpine Stake Tabernacle, at its opening Sunday, Sept. 13, 1914. In March, 1895, I was elected by the Women's Suffrage Association of Utah County one of a committee of three to attend the Constitutional convention in Salt Lake City, to plead for woman's recognition in the constitution. About this time I was presented with three calf-bound volumes of the History of Women Suffrage by Mrs. Clara B. Holby (editor of the "Womans Tribune"), as an appreciation for services I had rendered the National Women's Suffrage cause. In 1898 I moved to Salt Lake City, where I built a home and continued to take interest in the cause of Woman's Suffrage and also in Relief Society work. In 1903 June 14th) I was elected secretary of the Board of Directors of the 20th Ward Relief Society, which position I held for seven years, and I am still a member of said board. For many years I have been treasurer for the Utah State Suffrage Council of Women, and in 1902 I was elected by the State Suffrage Council as a delegate to the national and the first international suffrage convention held at Washington, D.C. From Feb. 14th to 18th I acted as chairman of the woman's suffrage delegation from Utah, and I read a paper before the convention on the result of woman suffrage in Utah. While at Washington I was introduced to Pres. Roosevelt through the courtesy of Senator Thos. Kearns and was shown through the White House. Senator Kearns also presented me with a permit to the reserved gallery of the U. S. Senate for the session. We attended several receptions given in honor of the delegates while at Washington, and I also visited Mt. Vernon and many other points of interest. In the year 1910 I felt an inmost desire to form a society which would particularly honor the memory of the hand cart pioneers. The daughters of Utah pioneers had specialized only the pioneers from 1847 to 1853, but I felt that the same great faith which prompted Utah's first pioneers also actuated those of latter years, and especially those who pushed and pulled hand carts across the plains and mountains in the years 1856, 1857, 1859 and 1860. Why should their history and their hardships and sufferings be relegated to oblivion? Before taking any decided step, however, I counseled with Pres. Jos. F. Smith, April 5, 1910, who gave me his approval, and as the semi annual hand cart reunion was then in session I went to the meeting and through the courtesy of Bro. Thos. Dobson I was permitted to introduce a resolution to the effect "That it be the sense of the meeting that a society of the Utah hand cart pioneers be organized." The resolution was adopted unanimously and on the 14th day of April, 1910, a number of hand cart pioneers and daughters met at my home at 381 4th Ave., Salt Lake City, and organized the society of the Daughters of Utah Handcart Pioneers with fifty charter members. I was elected president with Sarah Swift and Emily V. Beebe as vice-presidents and Mary Van as secretary. Isabella Armstrong was selected chairman of a committee on constitution and bylaws. Six other officers were also elected and I being the originator of the society was given the title of founder-general. In this undertaking I was encouraged and ably assisted by Sister Maria Y. Dougall. The society is now (1914) in a flourishing condition under the presidency of Sister Isabella Armstrong. In 1885, while visiting my daughter in Montana, I was led in a most remarkable way to discover the location of a lost "Mormon" burial ground in Iowa-a cemetery which guards the remains of some of the Latter-day Saints who were expelled from Nauvoo in 1846, among whom was Wm. Huntington, the father of Zina D. H. Young. This is the famous Mt. Pisgah. I brought my discovery to the attention of the Huntingtons and the burial ground at Mt. Pisgah was subsequently purchased by the Church and a monument erected thereon. A full account of this circumstance was published in the May, 1914, number of the "Improvement Era." At the annual outing of the handcart pioneers at Saltair July 14, 1913, Edward T. Fairchild, president of the National Education Association, delivered a speech to the hand cart pioneers to which Sister Lapish responded with a few choice remarks, at the close of which she unfastened her hand cart society badge and presented it to Mr. Fairchild, saying: "Allow me, dear Sir! to present you with my hand cart badge which will remind you that it was not for wealth, but for the love of Christ, that we crossed the plains with hand carts." Mr. Fairchild was deeply moved by the sentiment and the gift. This was perhaps one of the most dramatic telling incidents in creating in the minds of all present mutual respect and admiration for the visiting Easterners and the descendant of the notable hand cart companies. Sister Lapish on November 2nd, 1914, will be eighty years of age; she is possessed of all her mental and physical faculties, and her energies are still bent on philantropic measures. She always feels that her first duty is to her family and the grandest and noblest aim of a woman is to make her home bright and happy.
