Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Kingsford, Elizabeth Horrocks Jackson

Kingsford, Elizabeth Horrocks Jackson, a Utah handcart pioneer, was born Aug. 5, 1826, at Macclesfield, Cheshire, England, the daughter of Edward Horrocks and Alice Houghton. She was the oldest of a family of eleven children and commenced to work in a silk factory when only seven years old. In her girlhood she attended the services of the Wesleyan Methodists, to which denomination her parents belonged. Becoming converted to "Mormonism" she was baptized in 1841 by James Gallay. In 1848 (May 28th) she married Aaron Jackson who was born Sept. 30, 1823, at Eyme, Derbyshire, England, and died Oct. 25, 1856. This marriage was blessed with three children, namely, Martha Ann, Mary Elizabeth and Aaron. In 1856 the family emigrated to America, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Horizon" and the plains in Edward Martin's handcart company. She describes the journey across the plains as a long and tedious one. "We continued our toil day after day", she writes, "pulling our handcarts with our provisions and rations, our little children, etc., through deep sand, rocky roads or fording streams. It was a dreary journey. Many miles each daw were traveled, ere with tired limbs we reached camp, ate and retired for the night to rest, to pursue our monotonous course the following day. After toilsome and fatiguing travel, we reached Laramie on the 8th of October. Here we rested for a short time. Our provisions by this time had become very scant and many of the company went to the fort and sold their watches and other articles of jewelry. With the proceeds they purchased corn meal, flour, beans, bacon, etc., with which to replenish their stores of food which had become very scant. Hitherto, although a ration of a pound of flour had been served out daily to each person, it was found insufficient to satisfy the cravings of hunger, but the weary pilgrims were then about to experience more privation in this direction. Shortly after leaving Ft. Laramie it became necessary to shorten our rations that they might hold out, and that the company be not reduced to starvation. The reduction was repeated several times. First, the pound of flour was reduced to three-fourths of a pound, then to half a pound, and afterwards to still less per day. However, we pushed ahead. The trip was full of adventures, hair breadth escapes, and exposure to attacks from Indians, wolves and other wild beasts. When we reached the Black Hills, we had a rough experience. The roads were rocky, broken and difficult to travel. Frequently carts were broken down and much delay caused by the needed repairs. In crossing the Platte river some of the men carried a number of the women on their backs or in their arms across the stream, while others of the women tied up their skirts and waded through like heroines that they were. My husband also attempted to ford the stream, but he had only gone a short distance when he reached a sand bar in the river on which he sank down through weakness and exhaustion. My sister, Mary Horrocks Leavitt, waded through the water to his assistance. She raised him up to his feet. Shortly afterward, a man came along on horseback and conveyed him to the other side of the river, placed him on the bank and left him there. My sister then helped me to pull my cart with my three children and other matters on it. We had scarcely crossed the river when we were visited with a tremendous storm of snow, hail, sand and fierce winds. It was a terrible storm from which both the people and teams suffered. After crossing the river, my husband was put on a hand cart and hauled into camp; and indeed after that time he was unable to walk and consequently provision had to be made for him to ride in a wagon. As soon as we reached camp, I prepared some refreshments and placed him to rest for the night. From this time my worst experience commenced. The company had now become greatly reduced in strength, the teams as well as the people. The teams had become so weak that the luggage was reduced to ten pounds per head for adults and five pounds for children under eight years. And although the weather was severe, a great deal of bedding and clothing had to be destroyed-burned-as it could not be carried along. This occurrence very much increased the suffering of the company, men, women and children alike. On the 20th of Oct. we traveled, or almost wallowed, for about ten miles through the snow. At night, weary and worn out, we camped near the Platte river, where we soon left it for the Sweetwater. We were visited with three days more snow. The animals and emigrants were almost completely exhausted. We remained in camp several days to gain strength. About the 25th of October, I think it was-I cannot remember the exact date-we reached camp about sundown. My husband had for several days privious been much worse. He was still sinking, and his condition became more serious. As soon as possible, after reaching camp, I prepared a little of such scant articles of food as we then had. He tried to eat, but failed. He had not the strength to swallow. I put him to bed as quickly as I could. He seemed to rest easy and fell asleep. About 9 o'clock, I retired. Bedding had become very scarce, so I did not disrobe. I slept until, as it appeared to me, about midnight. It was extremely cold. The weather was bitter. I listened to hear if my husband breathed-he lay so still. I could not hear him. I became alarmed. I put my hand on his body, when to my horror I discovered that my worst fears were confirmed. My husband was dead. He was cold and stiff-rigid in the arms of death. It was a bitter freezing night and the elements had sealed up his mortal frame. I called for help to the other inmates of the tent. They could render me no aid: and there was no alternative but to remain alone by the side of the corpse till morning. The night was enveloped in almost Egyptian darkness. There was nothing with which to produce a light or kindle a fire. Of course I could not sleep. I could only watch, wait and pray for the dawn. But oh, how those dreary hours drew their tedious length along. When daylight came, some of the male part of the company prepared the body for burial. And oh, such burial and funral service. They did not remove his clothing-he had but little. They wrapped him in a blanket and placed him in a pile with thirteen others who had died, and then covered him up in the snow. The ground was frozen so hard that they could not dig a grave. I will not attempt to describe my feeling at finding myself thus left a widow with three children, under such excruciating circumstances. I cannot do it. But I believe the Recording Angel has inscribed it in the archives above, and that my sufferings for the gospel's sake will be sanctified unto me for my good. My sister was the only relative I had to whom I could look for assistance in this trying ordeal, and she was sick. So severe was her affliction that she became deranged in her mind, and for several days she ate nothing but hard frozen snow. I could therefore appeal to the Lord alone-he who had promised to be a husband to the widow and a father to the fatherless. I appealed to him and he came to my aid. A few days after the death of my husband, the male members of the company had become reduced in number by death; and those who remained were so weak and emaciated by sickness, that on reaching the camping place at night, there were not sufficient men with strength enough to raise the poles and pitch the tents. The result was that we camped out with nothing but the vault of Heaven for a roof and the stars for companions. The snow lay several inches deep upon the ground. The night was bitterly cold. I sat down on a rock with one child in my lap and one on each side of me. In that condition I remained until morning. My sick sister, the first part of the night, climbed up hill to the place where some men had built a fire. She remained there until the people made down their beds and retired, to sleep, if they could. She then climbed or slid down the hill on the snow to where there was another fire which was kept alive by some persons who were watching the body of a man who had died that night. There she remained until daylight. It will be readily perceived that under such adverse circumstances I had become despondent. I was six or seven thousand miles from my native land, in a wild rocky mountain country, in a destitute condition, the ground covered with snow, the waters covered with ice, and I with three fatherless children with scarcely anything to protect them from the merciless storms. When I retired to bed that night, being the 27th of October, I had a stunning revelation. In my dream, my husband stood by me, and said, "Cheer up, Elizabeth, deliverance is at hand." The dream was fulfilled for the next day (Oct. 28, 1856) Joseph A. Young, Daniel Jones and Abel Garr galloped unexpectedly into camp, amid tears and cheers and smiles and laughter of the emigrants. These three men were the first of the most advanced Relief Company sent out from Salt Lake City to meet the belated emigrants. Though the sufferings after that still continued, yet the worst was over and the survivors of that ill-fated handcart company arrived in Salt Lake City Nov. 30, 1856. I have a desire to leave a record of those scenes and events, through which I have passed, that my children, down to my latest posterity, may read what their ancestors were willing to suffer, and did suffer, patiently for the gospel's sake. And I wish them to understand too, that what I now word is the history of hundreds of others, who have passed through like scenes for the same cause. I also desire them to know that it was in obedience to the commands of the true and living God, and with the assurance of an eternal reward-an exaltation in his kingdom-that we suffered these things. I hope, too, that it will inspire my posterity with fortitude to stand firm and faithful to the truth, and be willing to suffer, and sacrifice all things they may be required to pass through for the sake of the Kingdom of God." Sister Elizabeth Horrocks Jackson was married to William R. Kingsford, a widower, July 6, 1857, and afterwards became an active and successful business woman of Ogden. She was a long and diligent worker in the Relief Society and helped the poor and needy whenever a good cause was shown. Her various relations with the Church in its organization were all that could be expected of a person who had home and business to attend. Sister Kingsford passed to her final rest Oct. 17, 1908, at Ogden, Utah.
