Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Williams, Sarah Thomas

Williams, Sarah Thomas, wife of David Williams, was born Nov. 9, 1827, in Merthyr Tydvil, Glamorganshire, Wales, the daughter of Daniel Thomas and Sarah Thomas Bowen. She was called Sarah Thomas up to the time of her marriage. Her childhood was mostly spent in her native city, though she often visited an aunt who lived in the village of Grosvan, nearby. On one of these visits she became converted to the gospel and was baptized in 1844, a short time before the death of the Prophet Joseph and while Elder William Henshaw presided over the Saints in Wales. She was then only fifteen years old, and her parents were much opposed to her baptism, but gave a reluctant consent. Being eager to make known to others the truth she had embraced, she often walked miles distributing tracts and books, and aided in converting many persons. In 1847 she met and married David Williams, a member of the same branch. For a time they lived in the same house with Captain Dan Jones, and both were active in missionary work. At one time an East Indian called at the house as a testimony meeting was about to begin. She spoke inquiringly to Captain Dan Jones, who presided, about the strange caller, and was told to invite him in. During the meeting, the spiritual gifts were exercised and one man, by the gift of tongues, spoke in the native language of the East Indian, telling him he ought to be baptized. The stranger asked to have the ordinance performed at once, but was persuaded to wait till the close of the meeting, when it was attended to. Sarah Williams at first supposed he was a Lamanite, and was anxious to have him hear the gospel. David and Sarah Williams always kept an open house for the Elders, and the promise was made to them that though they might have to pass through trials they would never want for the necessaries of life, which promise was fulfilled. They were eye witnesses to the miraculous setting of bones in the case of D. Richards, who was so badly crushed in a coal mine that a doctor said he could not live, as related in Orson Pratt's "Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon". They had planned to migrate to Utah in 1850, but Bro. Williams was called on a mission to North Wales, where he labored four years, his family accompanying him. They finally started for Zion on the "Clara Wheeler", which sailed from Liverpool Nov. 27, 1854. David Williams had charge of a company of Welsh Saints on the ship. At Liverpool, Sister Sarah Williams was taken very sick and seemed near death, when she was administered to by Elder Daniel Spencer and almost instantly healed. He promised her that she should live to a good old age, which promise was fulfilled, and was always a great comfort to her; it gave her faith to recover from many other dangerous attacks of disease which she afterward passed through. David and Sarah Williams reached St. Louis, en route for Utah, in January, 1855. Sister Williams was in delicate health and had lost two children at sea, and Elder Erastus Snow, who was presiding at St. Louis, advised the family not to travel further that year. Soon after reaching St. Louis. David Williams went to Kingston, Illinois, in search for work. Here he became very sick from malaria, and was advised to go from there to Canton, Illinois, for his health. He took his family to Canton, and resided there many years, where he was a merchant and coal mine owner. In 1876 a branch of the Church was organized in Canton, of which David Williams was president. His wife, Sarah Williams, was chosen president of the Relief Society, which position she held until the family removed to Utah in 1877. They first located in the Fifteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, but in 1880 went to Pleasant Valley, then in Emery, now in Carbon county, where David Williams became the contractor and operator of the coal mines. About 1881 the Winter Quarters Ward was organized in Pleasant Valley, and David Williams was made Bishop, and his wife, Sarah Williams, was made president of the Relief Society, a position she held several years. In 1886 Sister Williams accompanied her husband on a mission to Wales. She returned the following year; having obtained, while in her native land, a large amount of genealogical data. From her return until her death, she resided in the Fifteenth Ward. Her husband died in 1889. During her widowhood, she constantly labored for the relief and comfort of others, and the number of persons entertained in her home was surprising. Ever devout and devoted, she was like a ministering angel, loved and reverenced by all who knew her, and idolized by her children and grandchildren. She was the mother of twelve children and died Dec. 3rd, 1905, at the home of her daughter Emily (wife of B. F. Cummings) at 295 Center Street, Salt Lake City.
