Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lyon, David Ross

Lyon, David Ross, first Bishop of the Ensign Ward (Ensign Stake), Salt Lake City, Utah, is a native son of Utah, having been born in Salt Lake City Aug. 16, 1864. The city at that time had a population of about 17,000. He has lived to see the city grow to a city nearly six times as large as it was then. Ever since he was old enough to do so, Brother Lyon has taken an active interest in the progress and welfare of the Church. His father, John Lyon, was the well-known Scotch poet, author of "The Harp of Zion", one of the earliest, if not the first book of poems published by a member of the Church. Bro. David R. Lyon was baptized in the Endowment House, Salt Lake City, Nov. 16, 1876, by Elder (now President) Joseph F. Smith, and was confirmed by him on the same day. In addition to his present office, he has also held the office of Deacon, Priest, Elder and Seventy. When about fifteen years old, Brother Lyon was called to act as a block teacher, and labored in this capacity for nearly thirty years. At the age of twenty, Bro. Lyon was called to be assistant secretary of the old Salt Lake Stake Sunday School Union Board and acted in this capacity for several years, until called to be first assistant to John C. Cutler in the superintendency of the Stake schools. In both capacities Brother Lyon served about ten years. For a number of years Bro. Lyon was second counselor to Levi W. Richards in the presidency of the 10th (now the 3rd) quorum of Elder); also first counselor to Heber J. Romney in the same quorum, until called to be a Seventy; he was also vice-president and chairman of the program committee in the Twentieth Ward Institute for several terms and president of the Twentieth Ward Y. M. M. I. A. for nearly twelve years. Brother Lyon married Mary Cairns in the Logan Temple on Sept. 30, 1885, from which union ten children have been born-eight boys and two girls. Bro. Lyon has the unique distinction of having been twice set apart as Bishop in a little over a year: Aug. 11, 1912, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Twentieth Ward (Ensign Stake) under the hands of Pres. Charles W. Penrose, and on the creation of the Ensign Ward, Aug. 18, 1913, he was chosen as Bishop and set apart to preside over said Ward, under the hands of Pres. Anthon H. Lund.
