Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Willardsen, Christian

Willardsen, Christian, one of the pioneer settlers of Ephraim, Sanpete county, Utah, was born near the city of Skive, Viborg amt, Denmark, April 6, 1811. Being left an orphan when very small and compelled to rely an his own resources, he started life without money, but soon obtained a farm and made himself quite comfortable. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism", he was baptized in 1852 by Elders Christian Christiansen and left Denmark in December, 1852, emigrating to America, together with his wife Karen Sörensen whom he had married in Denmark April 2, 1851. They crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Forest Monarch" and the plains in John E. Forsgren's company, which arrived in Salt Lake City, Sept. 30, 1853. Together with others of the same emigrant company, Bro. Willardsen and wife first located in the so-called Allred Settlement (now Spring City), but were driven away by the Indians and spent the winter of 1853-54 in Manti. In the spring of 1854 he settled permanently at Ephraim, being one of the first settlers of that place, where he helped to build the first forts erected as a protection against the Indians. He was a member of that community the remainder of his life, becoming one of the most prosperous citizens of the town. He had an interest in the first burr mill at Ephraim, and finally organized a company, which built the Climax Roller Mill, of which he was president and the principal stock holder till the time of his death. Later he bought a burr mill in Mayfield and changed it to the present roller process; that mill is now owned by the family. Brother Willardsen also engaged in merchandizing at Ephraim at an early day, his store being later incorporated as the Ephraim Co-op. He constructed a tannery, carried on farming and freighted produce to market. He took an active part in the Black Hawk war and passed through all the trials of grasshopper and Indian incidents in early days. In 1871 he filled a short mission to Scandinavia. Returning home he assisted quite a number of poor Saints to emigrate to Utah, he being a man of means. On many other occasions he contributed very liberally to the Church for public purposes. Being the founder of home industries, he gave employment to many people. When he passed to his final rest at Ephraim, June 29, 1897, he left three wives and fourteen children. His first wife (Karen) bore him five children, namely, Willard, Christian, Erastus C., Joseph and Maria. His second wife (Mary Larsen) bore him four children (Christian, Caroline, Andrew and James): she had two children, Mary A. Allred and Mena Oviatt, by a former marriage. His third wife (Anna Katrine Sørensen) bore her husband four children, namely, Annie, Lorinda, Peter and John.
