Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Willardsen, Christian, junior

Willardsen, Christian, junior, mayor of Ephraim City, Sanpete county, Utah, and second counselor to Bishop John S. Beal, was born Nov. 6, 1870, the son of Christian Willardsen and Mary Larsen. He was baptized Aug. 10, 1879, by Andrew C. Nielson and ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher, Priest and Elder, the latter ordination taking place March 25, 1894, under the hands of George Taylor, March 28, 1894, he married Mary Lillie Larsen (daughter of George Larsen and Kisty Larsen) who became the mother of seven children, namely, Mary Adella, Kisty Omera, Ida Lillian, Arthur C., George Cannon, Spencer Christian, and Howard Oral Willardsen. In the spring of 1898 he was called on a mission and was ordained to the office of a Seventy under the hands of Apostle George Teasdale. He labored for two years in the Northwestern States Mission, principally in the State of Montana. Shortly after entering the mission field he was called to preside over the Butte conference and later over the Anaconda conference. While on this mission he organized one branch of the Church and two Sunday schools and had the privilege of baptizing 23 into the Church. Before going on a mission he took an active part in the Church, laboring as a Ward teacher and counselor to the president of the Ward. He was also a very active worker in the Sunday school and labored as a missionary aid in the Sanpete Stake of Zion. When the Sanpete Stake was divided into the North and South Sanpete Stake he was chosen as second counselor in the Stake organization of Sunday schools. From 1903 to 1908 he acted as superintendent of the Ephraim North Ward Sunday school: in the fall of 1900 he was chosen to act as the president of the Y. M. M. I. A. and acted in that capacity for two years. Dec. 9, 1901, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop John S. Beal, which position he held for eleven years, or till Dec. 30, 1912. In 1895 he was one of the organizers of the Equitable Creamery Company and acted as president of that company for two years; he also acted as justice of the peace of Ephraim City from 1904 to 1906, was elected two terms on the Ephraim School Board (serving in this capacity for six years), was on said school board when the present magnificent public school building was built and was a member of the building committee when the Snow Academy was erected. Being elected mayor of Ephraim City, he has acted in this capacity since Jan. 1, 1914. At the present time he is vice-president of the Bank Ephraim. In fact he is one of Ephraim's most substantial and progressive business men, his principal occupation being the buying and shipping of farm produce in car load lots. Brother Willardsen has always taken an active part in all home industries and was one of the promoters of the present Ephraim Sanitary Canning Co., just built at Ephraim. During the short time he has acted as mayor, Ephraim's main street has been paved all through the city, and the city of Ephraim under his administration is building a magnificent Carnegie library.
