Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Thomson, Andrew

Thomson, Andrew, a prominent Elder of Ephraim Sanpete co., Utah, was born Dec. 4, 1831, on the island of Falster, Denmark, the son of Thomas Nielsen and Dorthea Andersen. His father died when Andrew was a boy and his mother was married again to Peter Petersen Thomson. He received a common school education in his native land, and helped his fosterfather on the farm. Becoming converted to "Mormonism." he was baptized June 28, 1852, by Johan Swenson and emigrated to America in December, 1852, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Forest Monarch" and the plains with oxteam in Captain John E. Forsgren's company which arrived in Salt Lake City, Sept. 30, 1853. Together with many others of the same company, Brother Thomson located at the Allred Settlement in Sanpete county (now known as Spring City), but in December following the settlers were advised by the leaders of the Church to move to Manti for safety from the Indians. Here they spent the remainder of the winter, but early in the spring of 1854, a number of them, among whom was Andrew Thomson, settled on Pine Creek, where they built a fort for their protection, giving it the name of Fort Ephraim. In 1864, responding to call, Brother Thomson became one of the first settlers of Circleville, but pursuant to order returned to Ephraim in 1866 on account of the Black Hawk war. During this war he stood guard and assisted whenever duty called for the protection of the settlers against the red men. He held the offices of Elder and Seventy, being a member of the 47th quorum of Seventy. In 1877 he was ordained a High Priest and chosen as second counselor to Bishop Lars S. Anderson, of the Ephraim North Ward. Later, he became first counselor to the same Bishop and remained in that position till the death of Bishop Anderson, thus serving in the Bishopric twenty-four years. Brother Thomson has consequently been a resident of Ephraim from the beginning and has taken an active part in all spiritual and temporal matters pertaining to the growth of the settlement. He married Christiana Jensen Nov. 21, 1857, Bishop Kofford officiating. Brother Thomson is the father of ten children (five sons and five daughters) of whom four sons and three daughters are still living.
