Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Nixon, Thomas Alonzo

Nixon, Thomas Alonzo, High Councilor in Bingham Stake, Idaho, is a native of Utah, having been born at Wanship, Summit county, Sept. 21, 1861. His parents were Thomas Stephen Nixon and Harriet Rushton. His grandparents on his father's side joined the Church while he was a little child, and the whole family came to America while headquarters were in Nauvoo; here the grandfather became a member of the Prophet Joseph's body guard and remained in that position until the latter's death. The family were driven out with the body of' the Saints, and the grandmother, giving birth to a child during the ordeal, lost her life. After a trip replete with hardships they reached Salt Lake City in 1851, afterwards going to Provo, where this subject's father and mother were married, soon after going to Wanship. His grandparents on the mother's side were also members of the Church, natives of New York, and emigrated to Utah at an early day. Thomas A. was baptised Nov. 24, 1874, by his grandfather Stephen Nixon, having previously, through an oversight, been ordained a Deacon; this unusual state of things caused the boy some trouble of mind and body and was soon made right, the act of ordaining being repeated subsequently to his great satisfaction. He became a Teacher in 1875; an Elder Jan. 7, 1878, under the hands of Daniel Lewis; a Seventy June 1, 1882, by Josiah Reed; was set apart as one of the seven presidents of the 106th quorum of Seventy by Seymour B. Young, serving thus until ordained a High Priest Aug. 14, 1893, James E. Steele officiating. Bro. Nixon has acted in many capacities in the Y. M. M. I. A. in Wanship Ward, and Summit Stake, serving first as treasurer, assistant secretary, secretary, assistant superintendent and president; he also acted for some time as second assistant in the Stake presidency of the organization. He served as a Ward teacher until he removed from Utah; also as home missionary and superintendent of Sunday schools. In 1883 he went to Idaho Falls, Eagle Rock Ward, Idaho, which he made his home from 1884 to 1892. He was married to Emma Jane Cantwell Dec. 29, 1888, and eight children were born to them. In his present residence he has served extensively as a home missionary in the then Bannock Ward. In Eagle Rock Ward he acted as superintendent of Sunday schools and president of the M. I. A. He accepted a call to what was then the Northwestern States Mission and left home Jan. 15, 1890, returning home, after extensive service during which he presided over the Indiana conference, in April, 1892. During this mission eleven persons were baptised under his hands. Taking up a brief residence in Iona, Bro. Nixon was set apart as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in October, 1892; May 7, 1893, as superintendent of the Iona Sunday school; Aug. 14, 1893, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Joseph S. Mulliner, of Iona Ward. In the fall of that year he returned to Idaho Falls, and in 1899 was set apart as Stake aid in the Y. M. M. I. A. of Bingham Stake, acting thus till 1903, when he became second assistant to Supt. Robert Anderson. June 3, 1896, at the organization of the Bingham Stake, he was set apart as a High Councilor by Apostle John Henry Smith, which position he still holds. Previously, in 1893, he was again called into Sunday school and M. I. A. work, acting as superintendent of both, and also laboring as a home missionary. In March, 1890, he again moved to Iona and settled down there.
