Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Breinholt, Jens Peter Larsen

Breinholt, Jens Peter Larsen, a prominent Elder of the Ephraim South Ward, Sanpete county, Utah, was born Feb. 1, 1844, at Winding Strand, Veile amt, Denmark, the son of Laurs Jensen and Anna Sophia Nielsen. According to the prevailing system in those days, he, together with his brothers and sisters, was surnamed Laursen after his father's given name Laurs, but in the year 1884 the whole family adopted the name of Breinholt, which was granted them by the legislature of Utah. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism". Jens P. L. Breinholt was baptized and confirmed Jan. 10, 1864, by Elder Gustav Pegau. He was ordained a Teacher Sept. 25, 1864, and at a conference held at Veile, Oct. 23, 1864, he was ordained a Priest by Pres. Chas. Widerborg and at the some time called to labor as a missionary in the Nyby branch. He was ordained an Elder April 30, 1865, by Elder W. F. O. Behrman, and continued to labor as a missionary in the Fredericia conference till the spring of 1867, when he was released to emigrate to Zion. He crossed the North Sea in the steamer "Waldemar" and the Atlantic in the steamship "Manhatten" which sailed from Liverpool, England, June 21, 1867, and arrived at New York July 4, 1867. Thence the company in which he traveled went by rail to North Platte, 391 miles west of Omaha, and continued the journey across the plains in Capt. Leonard G. Rice's independent oxtrain, which arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 5, 1867. While journeying in this company Brother Breinholt became acquainted with Miss Ane Sophia Madsen from the Vendsyssel conference, Denmark, and after their arrival in Utah, she became his wife, Feb. 14, 1868. After his marriage he became a permanent resident of Ephraim, where his wife has borne him ten children, four boys and six girls; the youngest of these (a boy) died when seven years old. Brother Breinholt was ordained a Seventy Aug. 7, 1884, and a High Priest Dec. 11, 1911. For a number of years he was one of the presidents of the 47th quorum of Seventy (senior president for about six years). As a resident of the Ephraim South Ward he has held many ecclesiastical positions. He also labored as one of the leading masons on the Manti Temple, working at his trade on that sacred edifice from the time its foundation was laid till the capstone was placed in position and dedicated. He took charge of the stone and brick work on the Snow Academy at Ephraim and has done a great deal of other important labor in building up his home town. In 1904-06 he filled a successful mission to his native country (Denmark), laboring one year in the Aarhus conference and one year as president of the Aalborg conference. At Aalborg he took charge of the building of the Latter-day Saints chapel under the direction of Pres. J. M. Christensen. The gospel as revealed to Joseph Smith the Prophet has shaped Bro. Breinholt's destiny in life and through that has come to him all the spiritual and temporal blessings which he has enjoyed, the Lord having rewarded him liberally for his obedience to the same.
