Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Garrick, Hamilton Morrison

Garrick, Hamilton Morrison, a president of the 48th quorum of Seventy and an early settler of Gunnison, Sanpete county, Utah, was born Nov. 29, 1834, in Gallowanshire, Scotland, the son of John Garrick and Esther Whitford. He was baptized in 1851 by Robt. Hislop, learned the trade of a boiler maker and worked at this avocation for some time in Glasgow, Scotland, and Belfast, Ireland. In 1856 he was ordained an Elder by James Ferguson and labored as a local missionary at Gilford, Lurgan, Portadown and the City of Armaugh, Ireland. He raised up a branch of the Church at Tullyan, Ireland. After laboring about one year in this locality, Elder Robt. McQuarry offered to pay for his passage to Utah, if he would help his father's family across the sea and plains. Bro. Garrick accepted of this offer and was honorably released from further missionary labors in Great Britain. Thus emigrating to America, he crossed the ocean in the ship "George Washington", which sailed from Liverpool, England March 28, 1857. He crossed the plains in Capt. Jesse B. Martin's company, on which interesting journey he was one of three Hunters selected to supply the camp with game. On one of his many hunting expeditions he was fortunate enough to kill a large buffalo which proved a great boom to the company who were short of meat. He also passed through the experience of a stampede and only saved his life, while the cattle were running at full speed, by grabbing the bow on the yoke of a team which ran and carried him clear out of danger. One man was killed by his side. The company arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 12, 1857. After his arrival in the Valley, Bro. Garrick commenced hauling logs from the canyon, but after working a whole month for nothing (being cheated out of his wages), he went to Sanpete Valley and settled at Ephraim. In 1857 (Dec. 8th) he married Elizabeth Tilley, daughter of Richard and Phoebe Tilley, and moved to Manti. The honeymoon trip of the newly married couple consisted of a walk of seven miles through seven inches of snow from Ephraim to Manti. After working in a tannery at Manti about four years. Bro. Garrick changed his place of residence to Gunnison in the year 1862, and here commenced farming, being one of the early settlers of Gunnison. When the Indian troubles commenced, he took an active part in the defence of his home and the homes of his neighbors from the red men of the desert. He served as base drummer in one of the battalions and was captain of the night guard. In due course of time he became well acquainted with the Indian chief Black Hawk, to whom he gave many a meal. Bro. Garrick was ordained a High Priest in July, 1875, by Anthon H. Lund, having previously been ordained a Seventy and becoming a member of the 48th quorum of Seventy. For some time he also acted as one of the presidents of said quorum. In a secular way Bro. Garrick has always been an active and prominent citizen, taking part in public matters generally and filling several positions of honor and trust within the gifts of his fellow-citizens. For twenty years he acted as choir leader at Gunnison and he officiated as pound keeper and postmaster about eight years. He moved to Salt Lake City years ago where he is now spending the evening of his life working in the Temple in the interest of his progenitors.
