Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Anderson, Lewis Robert

Anderson, Lewis Robert, Stake superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. in the South Sanpete Stake, Sanpete county, Utah, was born March 26, 1872, at Fountain Green, Sanpete co., Utah, the son of Lewis Anderson and Mary Ann Crowther. He was baptized March 26, 1880, by his father; ordained to the office of a Deacon and later ordained a Priest: ordained an Elder by John D. T. McAllister Dec. 11, 1895, and ordained a Seventy March 16, 1898, by J. Golden Kimball. Later (Dec. 18, 1902) he was set apart as a president of the 48th quorum of Seventy by Joseph W. McMurrin. Bro. Anderson has spent a great deal of his time in the advancement of the mutual improvement association cause, having held about every office in the Ward mutual and also served as Stake aid, secretary, and assistant superintendent of the Sanpete Stake. When the Sanpete Stake was divided in 1900, he was set apart as superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the South Sanpete Stake by Pres. Joseph F. Smith. From March, 1898, to April, 1900, he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring as a traveling Elder in the Middle Tennessee conference about four months, and acted as counselor to Pres. Ben E. Rich twenty months. When the Chattanooga conference was organized, Elder Anderson was chosen president, and he also assisted in getting out and Publishing the first number of the "Southern Star" which was first issued from the press in Chattanooga Dec. 3, 1898. In 1895, (Dec. 11th) he married Clara M. Munk, daughter of Peter Munk and Eunice Ann Brown. This union has been blessed with six children. In a civil capacity Brother Anderson has served as mayor of Manti three times, being the youngest mayor in the State of Utah at the time of his first election. He was a member of the Utah Board of Sheep Commissioners eight years, president of same four years, and a member of the tenth regular session of the Utah Legislature in 1913. Wool business and ranching has been his principal occupation in life.
