Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Carpenter, Joseph Hatten

Carpenter, Joseph Hatten, second counselor to Bishop Niels R. Petersen, of the Manti North Ward, Sanpete county, Utah, was born April 4, 1861, in Devonport, co. of Devon, England, the son of Rev. Robert Wright Carpenter and Elizabeth Link Hatten. He is a descendant of the old Dukes of Normandy, his maternal ancestry being cousins to William the Conqueror. Brother Carpenter's father was a Congregational minister, therefore Joseph was educated in the Congregational school at Lewisham, Kent, which was a special school for the education of the sons of ministers. After leaving this school, Joseph went to Greenwich, where he lived for three years; he then moved to London and was an employee in the mercantile firm of Messrs. I. & R. Morley, of Wood St. E. C., for seven years. In March, 1886, he left England for West Australia in a sailing ship, round the Cape of Good Hope, and after visiting most of the Australian colonies he started for San Francisco. While on board the ship "Zealandia" he met two Mormon Elders, Wilson Ross Pratt and Wm. C. Mellor. After hearing the gospel as taught by them, he believed it and went direct to Salt Lake City, where he was baptized March 1, 1887, by James Leatham and settled in the 19th Ward. In August, 1887, he went to Elsinore, Sevier county, and became clerk of the Ward. Nov. 6, 1887, he was ordained a Priest by Bishop Joshua W. Sylvester and in February, 1888, he was ordained an Elder by August Kotter. In March, of that year, he moved back to Salt Lake City, where he worked with Geo. M. Cannon in the county recorder's office until the fall of 1890. He was also clerk of the 22nd Ward under Bishop Alfred Solomon. June, 12, 1889, he married Matilda Sophia Alder, of Manti, the daughter of John Alder, of Canton Appenzell, Switzerland, and Matilda Sophia Schramm of Wurtemberg, Germany. This union has been blessed with seven children, four boys and three girls. Joseph Gerald, the oldest son, is now (1914) filling a mission in Germany. In August, 1890, Brother Carpenter left Utah on a mission to Samoa, where he labored as conference president on the island of Sawaii, and returned to Utah in September, 1893. In Manti (which has been his home ever since) he became an active Y. M. M. I. A. worker, being secretary and president of the Manti North Ward Y. M. M. I. A., also Stake corresponding secretary and treasurer and second counselor in the Stake superintendency of the South Sanpete Stake Y. M. M. I. A. In 1894-95 Bro. Carpenter held the position of city recorder of Manti City, and in February, 1895, he became assistant cashier of the Manti City Savings Bank, where he labored until March, 1911, when he was called to be assistant recorder in the Manti Temple. He was ordained a Seventy Aug. 19, 1890, by Apostle Francis M. Lyman, and ordained a High Priest May 8, 1902, by Gustave A. Iverson and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Niels R. Petersen, of the Manti North Ward. For some time prior to this he was one of the presidents of the 48th quorum of Seventy. Of late years Brother Carpenter has been very much interested in genealogical research and has been quite successful in gathering a great deal of data pertaining to the Carpenter and the Hatten families of England and the United States and he has accomplished a great work in the Temples for their redemption, being the fulfillment of a blessing pronounced upon his head by Patriarch Geo. W. Hill, March 12, 1899, in Salt Lake City, 12 days after his baptism into the Church. Bro. Carpenter has been a life member of the Genealogical Society of Utah for some years and is their Stake representative in the South Sanpete Stake. In his case it has been a veritable fulfillment of the prophecy of Jeremiah III: 14, wherein it states: "I will take one of a city and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion," etc. The No. two of the family is his brother Geo. Eustance Carpenter, who came to Utah from South Africa and joined the Church in September, 1893; he was associated with the "Deseret News" for many years, being their city editor before resignation, and is now a journalist of high repute. These two brothers are the representatives in the United States of the Somerset County Carpenters of England, who were yeoman and lived since 1687 at Bradford-on-Tyne, near Taunton, Sommerset, and were a younger branch of the Hereford Carpenters, who lived at Dilwyn, Hereford, before 1300 A. D., and whose ancestor fought in the crusades for the recovery of the Holy Land from the Saracens and Turks, as their armorial bearings and crest will indicate.
