Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Cox, Frederick Walter

Cox, Frederick Walter, a prominent Elder in the Church, was born Jan 20, 1812, in Plymouth, New York, the son of Jonathan Upham Cox and Lucinda Blood. He was the third son of a family of twelve children, nine sons and three daughters. All were born in New York State, except the oldest, William Upham Cox, who was born in Boston, Mass. The father died April 21, 1830, in Oswego, New York. The widowed mother with her large family moved to Nelson, Portage county, Ohio, where she died Dec. 25, 1838. Frederick W. Cox being the older of the boys tried hard to be a father to his younger brothers and sisters. He was married to Miss Emeline Whiting in 1835, in Portage county, Ohio, the Prophet Joseph Smith performing the ceremony. Their son, Frederick W. Cox, jun. was born in Portage. The family journeyed to Far West, Caldwell co., Missouri, in 1839. Thence they went to Lima, Adams co., Illinois, where they lived four or five years and where Bro. Cox was counselor to Isaac Morley, but the Saints were burned out and driven from their comfortable homes. The Cox family with others fled to the shelter of Nauvoo, where Fred W. married Miss Jemima Losee and Cordelia Morley Jan. 27, 1846, in the Nauvoo Temple, President Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball officiating. They then made their home at Silver Creek, Pottawattamie co., Iowa, where Bro. Cox worked to get teams, wagons and means to bring his large family on to Utah. They left Kanesville for Utah June 20, 1852, and reached Salt Lake City Sept. 28, 1852. Then they came on to Manti, arriving there Oct. 4, 1852. Here he went to work to build forts, bridges, roads, homes, mills, etc., necessary for the making of a new country. He did much in developing this sterile State and in an ecclesiastical way he was a power. He was counselor to President Chapman, performed a successful mission of 27 months in England, held the office of presiding High Priest and officiated in laying the northwest corner stone of the Manti Temple. He was also chosen to the Territorial legislature. He held the office of county treasurer for many years along with other offices of trust. In the year 1855 he married Miss Lydia Losee and in 1869 he married Miss Emma Peterson. Altogether he was the husband of five wives who bore him fourteen sons and twenty-two daughters. His wives were all noble women, who acted well their part in helping to maintain their families and in educating them. The present generations have no conception of the sacrifices made by them and the toil they had to endure in the spinning wheel and the loom. If written it would make a large and interesting volume. Bro. Cox died June 5, 1879, at Manti. He was a man of more than medium height and weight. He had brown hair, blue eyes, a mild and kind temperament and a loving disposition. He was a father in the community and every one wished him near them in time of sickness or sorrow. If ailing, one could not help but feel the good spirit and know that they were better. There was something about Bro. Cox to inspire one to better thoughts and better deeds. He seemed to read the countenance of people like an open book, and unless their lives were clean few came to trouble him. He was always able to look every one in the eye, speak his mind and give his advice and counsel which was sought in all the affairs of life. The poor and the downtrodden looked to him for comfort. Even the savage Indian found in him a true and lasting friend. Hours of patient conversation were spent with those treacherous, cruel savages and the miracle was they never left him in anger. His talk to them was so forceful and the right so plainly pointed that they were usually willing to follow his directions. He read things with so clear an eye and understood cause and effect so well that his word was almost prophetic. His sublime faith, his unfaltering integrity in all the walks of life made him a husband, a father, a friend and a good citizen to be loved, honored and respected by all. His life was a success and the bond of affection which still continues unbroken among his descendants is one of the forceful evidences of his worth. All their highest ideals, their greatest achievements, their loyalty to the principles and faith of their fathers are tributes to his memory.
