Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Cox, William Arthur

Cox, William Arthur, a veteran Elder of the Church and a resident of Manti, Sanpete county, Utah, was born Dec. 27, 1840, in the Morley settlement, Hancock co., Illinois, the son of Frederick Walter Cox and Emmeline S. Whiting. His parents joined the Church at an early day and settled in Illinois. In the fall of 1845 the settlement where the Cox family resided was burned by the mob, and the inhabitants were forced to flee to Nauvoo for protection. The next year (1846) the Cox family shared in the general exodus of the Saints from Illinois, and traveled as far as Mount Pisgah, where two of Bro. Cox's sisters and his mother's parents died. Later the same season the family continued the journey to the Missouri river and spent the winter of 1846-47 at Winter Quarters. The next year (1848) they re-crossed the river into Iowa and located at the Cutler settlement, where the family remained until 1852, when they migrated to Utah, crossing the plains in Capt. Walker's company which arrived in Salt Lake City in October, 1852. They settled at once at Manti, Sanpete county, Utah. Bro. Wm. A. Cox went back to the Missouri river as a Church teamster in 1861 after emigrants, and in 1866 he went back as assistant wagon master in Abner Lowry's company to Wyoming, on the Missouri river, on a similar mission. After his return from this last trip he married Mary Christina Anderson Dec. 1, 1866; she was the daughter of Wm. Anderson and Henriette L. Barnson and was born June 3, 1848, on the island of Falster, Denmark, and emigrated to Utah in 1852-1853 in John E. Forsgren's company. Sister Cox bore her husband eight children and died at Manti Aug. 6, 1906. Bro. Cox was baptized in 1848 by his father and was ordained an Elder at Manti in 1866. Later, he was ordained a Seventy and still later a High Priest. In 1865-66 he took an active part in the Black Hawk war and was several times exposed to the fire of the savage Indian. He participated in the skirmishes and had many narrow escapes. In 1887 he was called to fill a colonization mission to Colorado, on which he became one of the first settlers of Manassa, in the San Luis Valley. He plowed the first irrigation ditch which was made in the new settlement. During his residence in Colorado for about a year he taught the people from the south the principle of farming. Bro. Cox is by occupation a farmer and has also been engaged in the lumber business. In 1909 Elder Cox married Margaret A. McMahon (daughter of James McMahon and Lucinda Atcherson) who was born Sept. 17, 1874, at Holden, Millard co., Utah. Sister Cox has acted as a Stake officer in the Millard Stake primary associations and has also been a Sunday school worker in the Fillmore Ward. Later she acted as an aid in the South Sanpete Stake primary association. She is now president of the primary association in the Manti North Ward.
