Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Kjær, John Christian

Kjær, John Christian, an alternate High Councilor in the South Sanpete Stake of Zion, and a resident of Manti, Sanpete county, Utah, was born Jan. 12, 1849, at Hals, near Aalborg, Denmark, the son of Lars Christian Kjær and Mette Marie Christensen. His parents joined the Church in 1851 and emigrated from Denmark in the latter part of 1854 bound for Utah, together with his wife, three sons and one daughter. While crossing the North Sea the wind became so furious that the vessel on which they had secured passage was driven on to the coast of Norway, where the emigrants remained about a week; and when at last a new start was made, another storm was encountered which drove the vessel back to Frederikshavn for repairs. A final start was made Christmas eve and this time the emigrants succeeded in reaching England, whence they sailed from Liverpool Jan. 7, 1855, on board the ship "James Nesmith" and reached New Orleans Feb. 23, 1855. The journey was continued up the Mississippi river to Ft. Leavenworth and the journey across the plains commenced from Mormon Grove in Noah T. Guyman's company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 11, 1855. After residing temporarily in the Second Ward, Salt Lake City (where the Kjær family lived about one year) they moved to Manti, an uncle, Niels Peter Domgaard, taking them with an ox team to Sanpete Valley. Here John Christian Kjær was baptized by John Crawford, in 1857, and in 1872 (Jan. 8th) he married Margaret Weibye. He was ordained a Seventy Aug. 8, 1854, by Jens Hansen, and has always been an active member in the Ward in which he has resided. In 1886-87 he filled a mission to Minnesota and Dakota, after which he acted as president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. for one year. While crossing the plains he tried on a certain occasion to climb into the wagon when in motion, but was tripped and fell, one of the wheels of the vehicle passing over him, breaking an arm and bruising one of his legs. In the absence of a doctor friends set the arm, which was perfectly healed. Bro. Kjær is a farmer by occupation.
