Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Jeffs, David William

Jeffs, David William, second counselor to Bishop C. W. Rockwood in the Bishopric of Iona, Idaho, is the son of William Y. Jeffs and Alice Ward and was born at Farmington, Utah, Sept. 25, 1873. He was baptised in 1881, by Jonathan D. Wood. At the age of twelve he was ordained a Deacon, a few years later a Priest; and at the age of seventeen was called to labor as a Ward teacher. In the year 1893, he was ordained an Elder by J. H. Robinson, and Jan. 17, 1896, was ordained a Seventy and set apart for a mission to the Southern States, by Apostle John Henry Smith. While on this mission he labored as a traveling Elder in the East Tennessee conference. He received many great testimonies of the Gospel, and greatly enjoyed his labors and received the gifts of healing, faith and knowledge, to a marked extent. In a sketch prepared for this work, Elder Jeffs writes: "I went into the mission field with very little knowledge of the Bible, and I had to study very hard and depend greatly upon the inspiration of the Holy Ghost to guide and sustain me in my labors; I had no experience in preaching. The Lord, however, came to my assistance many times. I remember on one occasion, when defending the principles of the Gospel, I quoted a passage of Scripture that I had heard my companion repeat; the minister with whom I was conversing asked me where such a passage of Scripture was, as he had never read it in the Bible. I told him to let me take his Bible and I opened it, and there appeared, a certain verse, in very large letters which I read to him. It was the very passage that I had quoted to him. After reading the passage referred to, it did not appear any larger print than the rest of the chapter; this is one example out of many like testimonies. As I have said, my experience in public preaching was very limited; yet I resolved in my heart that I would not refuse to take my turn in any part of the missionary work. My companion and I had appointed a meeting at a friend's house, in Chearokee county, North Carolina. Some of our enemies, hearing of the meeting, sent for one of the leading preachers of the State of Georgia to defeat the "Mormons." I had heard of this preacher, whose name was Manuel Henry. However, I did not learn of his coming to our meeting until we were arriving at the house and heard some one say, "There comes Manuel Henry;" my heart seemed to stop beating for a minute, my mind was a perfect blank and I trembled like a leaf. We called the meeting to order and I had to take hold of a chair in front of me in order to arise to my feet. Just as we commenced singing all fear left me, and as I arose to my feet to speak I was as cool and collected as if I had been in the work for years; the Spirit of God rested upon me in mighty power and by the help of my Father in Heaven, I spoke for one hour and twenty-five minutes, and quoted Scripture that I could not remember ever having read and my mind was filled with knowledge. This was a testimony and a strength to me all through my mission. After my return home, which was in July, 1898, I was called to labor as a home missionary, Stake secretary of Y. M. M. I. A., and a Sabbath school teacher. I was also called to labor as Ward teacher and religion class teacher. On the 8th of July, 1900, I was set apart as second assistant superintendent in the Farmington Sabbath school. A little previous to this date I had been called and set apart as first counselor in the Stake superintendency of religion classes, which position I held until I moved to Iona, Idaho, with my brother John, in September, 1901. On June 27, 1900, I married Phebe Woolley, of Grantsville, Utah. In November, 1901, two months after arriving at Iona, Idaho, I was called and set apart as superintendent of the Sabbath school. On Jan. 28, 1902, was appointed Ward chorister. In the spring of 1903, I was set apart as second assistant in the Stake superintendency of Sabbath schools, which position I held until November, 1905, when I was released from Stake work and called to labor in the Ward. I was again called to take charge of the choir, also to be theological class teacher in the Sabbath school, and teacher of the senior class in the Y. M. M. I. A. I was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop C. W. Rockwood, of Iona, Idaho, Dec. 30, 1906, being ordained a High Priest and set apart for this position by James E. Steele. I started to learn the carpenter and also the brick mason trade at the age of fourteen; and for seventeen years in partnership with my brother Samuel I followed the contracting and building business. In the spring of 1900, my brother John joined us; and in September following, we moved to Iona, Idaho, continuing in the same business. In the spring of 1905, we entered the brick business, and one year later, we also entered the lumber business, which we are now following."
