Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Taylor, Martin Van Buren

Taylor, Martin Van Buren, the second Bishop of the Draper (Freedom) Ward, Sanpete county, Utah, was born Dec. 26, 1835, in Loraine county, Ohio, the son of Benjamin Franklin Taylor and Ann Menels. His parents joined the "Mormon" Church in 1841, and in 1842 the moved to Macedonia, Ill., one of the "Mormon" settlements. They passed through all the persecutions raging against the Saints in that State, and in 1846 they moved to Council Bluffs, Iowa. Martin was baptized and confirmed March 18, 1849, by Wm. Terry. In 1850 the family started for Utah in Capt. Foote's oxtrain. Many of this company died of cholera while en route, but the Taylor family reached Utah in safety, and located at Little Cottonwood, Salt Lake co. The next year they went to California with Apostles Lyman and Rich and founded the colony of San Bernardino. In the year 1854 Martin married Amanda M. Hart, and in 1863 he and his wife returned to Utah and located at Santaquin, Utah county. While residing there he married Marry A. Clemens, and three years later he moved to Springville, where he married Cornelia Mount and Joanah Jennings. About the year 1871 he moved to Little Salt Creek, Juab county, where he engaged in farming and stockraising. In 1883 he settled at Freedom, where he engaged in farming, stockraising and wool growing. About the year 1893 he, in company with others started the Meadow View Creamery, of which he was manager, and made it a success. When the Freedom Ward was organized Sept. 5, 1897, Bro. Taylor was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Anthon H. Lund and set apart to preside over the Freedom Ward. He gave general satisfaction as a presiding officer, being well liked by everybody; was an enterprising and upright citizen, and was very thoughtful of the sick and needy. Bro. Taylor was the father of thirty-two children. With his first wife, Amanda Hart, he had ten children; his second wife, Mary A. Clemens, bore him four children, his third wife, Cornelia Mount, was the fourth wife, Joanah Jennings, gave him eleven children. Highly respected by all who knew him Bro. Taylor passed to his final rest April 4, 1900, at Freedom, leaving a large posterity.
