Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Anderson, William

Anderson, William, one of the martyrs of the Church, was the son of Wm. and Mary Anderson and was born March 29, 1809, in Lewiston, Lincoln county, Maine. When three years of age, his father moved to New Vineyard, Somerset county, where he resided till he grew to manhood. In early life he was the subject of spiritual manifestations. He dreamed he was to be a minister of the gospel. Searching the Scriptures for proof in favor of Universalism (the faith that his father taught him) he discovered so many passages irreconcilable with that doctrine that he discarded Universalism and reviewed the faith of the Methodists. Congregationalists and Baptists, but found himself in the same dilemma as before. In the summer of 1827, he was engaged in a marble factory in Thomaston, Knox county, and his religious impressions were of such a melancholy nature, that death would have been hailed by him as a happy release. He prayed to God fervently, and obtained relief from his unhappy state of mind. In 1829 or 1830, he read Thomas Paine's works which, for a time, caused him to lay all his thoughts on religion aside. He married Emeline T. Stewart, daughter of Hugh and Martha Stewart, born Sept. 25, 1812, in Kennebeck county, Maine. In 1839 he began again to reflect on the existence of God, futurity, etc. The idea of intelligent man passing from this state of existence into a world of darkness, looked to him irreconcilable with the works of an intelligent Creator. He concluded that if there was any truth in revealed religion, or any law by which he could gain any intelligence of a hereafter, and that if the Lord would turn his mind, so that he could look upon the Bible as a record of truth, he would take it for granted that there was a law by which he could be saved. His mind was entirely changed. He attended the Baptist church, but would not join. He asked God to tell him what religion was true. The spirit manifested to his mind that they were all wrong, that none were acceptable. From this time he took no part in their meetings. Brother Stephen Richardson was his nearest neighbor in Bureau county, Illinois, upon whom the Elders called. In July, 1841. Elders Joshua Holman, Noah Pachard and Winslow Farr called and preached in his house; with them he reasoned and conversed on the principles of the gospel and the Latter-day work. After the Elders left he prayed to God and was confirmed in his belief of the authenticity of the Latter-day work, and was sorry that he had not gone forward in baptism. August 14, 1841, in answer to prayer, Elders Moses Smith and William Burton visited Bureau county, and on the 15th Wm. Anderson was baptized and confirmed and enjoyed a spiritual manifestation. He attended the October conference in Nauvoo, was ordained to the Priesthood and received from Hyrum Smith his Patriarchal blessing. Shortly after returning from that conference, he commenced to preach; he also baptized twenty-four persons. In the winter of 1842-43 he went to Chicago as a missionary. After preaching for some time to the few who attended the meetings (which he advertised in the "Chicago Democrat"), the spirit manifested to him, that an excitement would soon take place which would call the people together. Shortly after, John C. Bennett came along and challenged him to a discussion, which he accepted, and by this means an excitement arose which called the people out and thereby he found an opportunity to preach the gospel to them. He baptized twelve persons. In March 1843, he left Chicago for Bureau county, and continued to preach through the northern part of Illinois until September, 1844, when he removed to Nauvoo. He received his endowments in December, 1845, in the Nauvoo Temple, and took an active part in the defence of Nauvoo against the mob in 1846. Finally he fell as a martyr for Zion Sept. 12, 1846, being killed in the so-called battle of Nauvoo. (See "Eventful Narratives", 13th Book of the Faith-Promoting Series, p. 40.)
