Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Andrus, James

Andrus, James, Bishop of St. George, Washington county, Utah, was born June 14, 1835, in Florence, Huron co., Ohio, the son of Milo Andrus and Abigail Jane Daley. He was blessed as a child under the hands of Sidney Rigdon, his parents being already members of the Church. When about eight years of age, he was baptized and soon afterwards ordained to the office of a Deacon. In the spring of 1846 he left Nauvoo, Ill., together with his parents for the far west, en route for the mountains. Having proceeded as far as the Pawnee village, near Grand Island, the company with which he traveled received word from Pres. Brigham Young to go into winter quarters at or near that place; but, being under the direction of Bishop Geo. Miller, the company, instead of obeying the council of Pres. Young, turned north, traveling as far as the Running Water, in the Ponca nation. Here they stayed for several months and then returned to Winter Quarters, settling temporarily above that place, where they remained till the summer of 1847. In the spring of 1848, when James was about thirteen years old, he started across the plains, together with his mother, one sister older than himself, two younger sisters and a younger brother, having two yoke of oxen and a yoke of cows at their disposal. The father left his family on the prairie, starting for England on his first mission. Bro. Andrus writes: "We have all of our possessions for the family of six in one small wagon, and I took my part, although but a child, in all the guards of both camp and cattle." In 1857 Brother Andrus was ordained a Seventy by Joseph Young, and in 1895 he was ordained a High Priest by Francis M. Lyman and called to act as a High Councilor in the St. George Stake, which position he filled till 1896, when he was ordained a Bishop by Franklin D. Richards, and set apart to preside over the St. George Ward. He discharged his duties faithfully in that office until he was honorably released. Bro. Andrus spent the winter of 1855-56 in Washington Territory, as a trader among the Flat Head Indians. In 1857 he married Laura A. Gibson, who has borne him nine children. In 1863 he married Manomas L. Gibson, with whom he had eleven children. In 1857-1858 he filled an honorably mission to Great Britain, returning home in 1858 because of the Johnston army troubles. In going out on this mission he was one of a company of missionaries, who traveled all the way from Salt Lake City to the Missouri river with handcarts. His second mission was with an exploring expedition to the Uintah country in 1861. In the fall of 1861 he was called (together with many others) to settle Southern Utah, where he passed through all the trials and privations incident to pioneer life in a barren desert country, but he was eminently successful in his labors of developing the wilderness and turning it into a fruitful garden spot. In 1862 he filled a short mission to the Moquis Indians. In 1863 he made a trip to the Missouri river with an ox team after emigrants. The following year he made a similar trip east after merchandise, traveling with a mule team. In 1870 he crossed the mountains to Southern California for freight for the Co-operative Store in St. George and in 1869 he made a trip from Los Angeles, Cal., to Helena, Montana, with freight. During the Black Hawk war he took a most active part in protecting the settlers in southern Utah from Indian depredations. In 1871 he took charge of the Canaan Co-operative Stock Company and managed that concern for twenty-five years. For many years he owned and operated a large mercantile establishment in St. George, known as James Andrus and Sons. Prior to that he was a member of the Woolley, Lund and Judd Company. Bro. Andrus is also engaged extensively in farming and stockraising.
