Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Beatie, Phoebe Louisa Young

Beatie, Phoebe Louisa Young, a member of the General Board of the Relief Societies of the Church, was born Aug. 1, 1854, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the daughter of Pres. Brigham young and Clarissa Ross. Her mother died when Phoebe was three years old, and Zina D. H. Young, another wife of President Brigham Young, reared the family of Phoebe's mother. Sister Phoebe was baptized Aug. 1, 1852, by James Works, and at the age of fifteen she became one of the charter members of the Young Ladies Retrenchment Association, which after wards was merged into the Y. L. M. I. A. of the Church. In 1872, (Jan. 17th), she married Walter J. Beatie, to whom she has borne seven children. In 1890 she was chosen one of the members of the General Board of the Relief Societies, and from 1902 to 1910 she was chairman and secretary of the Relief Society Nurse School. This class was originated by Margaret C. Roberts under the direction of the Relief Society General Board. In this cause Sister Beatie has traveled extensively throughout the Stakes of Zion to give instructions to the sisters and encourage classes of them to attend this school. For several years Sister Beatie acted as a counselor to Sister Julia Howe, in the presidency of the Seventeenth Ward Primary Association, and on a certain occasion she conducted a performance of the Primary at her own house, by which she cleared a nice sum, which amount was donated to the Temple as a special gift from the Primary children of the 17th Ward. In 1891, she went as a delegate from Utah to the International Council of Women which was held at Washington, D. C. bearing her own traveling expenses. While at Washington she met Susan B. Anthony, and gained her friendship and confidence. When Mrs. Anthony several years afterwards visited Utah on her western lecture tour, she became the honored guest of Sister Beatie. As a charter member of the Daughters of the Revolution and as a member of several other organization in Salt Lake City, Sister Beatie figures as one of the most active women in the Church.
