Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Beck, John Forsyth

Beck, John Forsyth, first counselor to Bishop Geo. D. Snell, of Spanish Fork, Utah co., Utah, from 1891 to 1903, was born May 12, 1844, in Bucks county, Pennsylvania, the son of Joseph Ellison Beck and Hannah Forsyth. He emigrated with his parents to Utah in 1850, and after a short sojourn in Salt Lake City, located permanently at Spanish Fork. He was baptized in 1851, ordained a Deacon by Bishop John L. Butler in the winter of 1856-57; ordained an Elder in 1868 by John D. T. McAllister, ordained a Seventy by Andrew Ferguson, and still later ordained a High Priest by Abraham O. Smoot; on the latter occasion he was also set apart as a counselor to Bishop Geo. D. Snell of Spanish Fork, in which office he served nine years. In 1865-66 he participated in the Black Hawk war by standing guard and carrying express messages. In 1866 he went back to the Missouri river as a freighter and assisted Capt. Andrew H. Scott with his company of emigrants. On a certain occasion, when Capt. Scott's horse was stolen, Bro. Beck was asked if he could spare a mule for the captain. Bro. Beck answered promptly in a practical manner by unhitching one of his mules from his load for Bro. Scott, and with the other five mules Bro. Beck hauled his load to the Valley. In 1868 he married Mary Hopkins (daughter of Morgan Hopkins and Hannah Williams) who was born Jan. 23, 1847. She became the mother of fourteen children; later Bro. Beck married Miss Grace Robinson (daughter of James R. Robinson and Matilda Graham) who bore her husband three children. As a consequence of taking a plural wife Bro. Beck was arrested and convicted of unlawful cohabitation and served a term in the Utah penitentiary from Oct. 10, 1889, to Feb. 14, 1900. Elder Beck has ever been a typical pioneer and has spent a great deal of his time in building homes, meeting houses, Stake houses and Temples. He has ever been willing and ready to perform any labor which has been assigned him by the authorities of the Church. For two years he labored as a home missionary in the Utah Stake of Zion. Among the civil offices held by him may be mentioned that he served eight years as a peace officer at Spanish Fork, six years on the police force and two years as marshal.
