Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Brimhall, Noah

Brimhall, Noah, a Patriarch and veteran Elder in the Church, was born Feb. 14, 1826, at Olean, Alegany co., New York. His parents, Sylvanus Brimhall and Lydia Gyteau, had eight sons and three daughters. Noah being the seventh son. Bro. Brimhall is tall and straight in statue, having in fact a military appearance; his height is six feet, his complexion fair and his weight 167 lbs. The eight sons of Sylvanus Brimhall were versed in mechanical arts and farming, each receiving the best benefits of the school systems of their State, and some of them specializing in military tactics. The true gospel, which was born in their native State, attracted the attention of the family, and four of the brothers joined the Church, namely, Norman, George W., John (who went with the Mormon Battalion) and Noah, who was baptized in the Missouri river at Council Bluffs, Iowa, by Elder William Hyde in 1848, and was soon after ordained a Seventy by Charles Bird and Albert P. Rockwood, at Council Bluffs. Noah came to the Valley with the family of William Hyde, arriving on July 27, 1850. In the month of June, 1853, he married Samantha Lake, who bore him six sons and five daughters; subsequently he married Melina Zundell (who bore him one son) and Lavina Jones (who became the mother of fifteen children). In October, 1856, he was appointed captain of a rescuing company sent out from Ogden, consisting of thirty men and teams, who went to bring in the rest of the handcart companies. He participated in the Echo canyon expedition at the time of the coming of Johnston's Army in 1858, and was among the first settlers of Hyrum, Cache county, where he acted as counselor to Bishop Ola N. Liljenquist, of that Ward, and was also set apart as a member of the High Council of the Cache Stake by Ezra T. Benson. He is also the first pioneer (settling with his family) in Oxford, Idaho. He continued to be of great service in the military organizations of Cache county, holding the rank of major, and was a teacher of military tactics until he removed to Arizona in the year 1876. Through his whole life Bro. Brimhall has ever been one of the foremost and most energetic citizens in the communities where he has lived, filling many positions of trust and honor in the Church. Some years ago he was ordained a Patriarch and now (1914), at the age of eighty-nine, he is in the enjoyment of health and revered by a numerous and faithful posterity, numbering upwards of two hundred, among whom not one instance of mental or physical defect has ever occurred. For a period of many years one or more of his children have been serving continuously in the mission fields of the Church. Bro. Brimhall's place of residence is Tempe, Maricopa county, Arizona. (Samantha G. B. Foley).
