Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Huffaker, Louis Albert

Huffaker, Louis Albert, president of the High Priests' quorum of Bingham Stake, Idaho, was born in Bureau County, Illinois, March 9, 1841, being the third child of Simpson David Huffaker and Susan Green Robinson. He has a vivid recollection of some of the awful scenes of the Saints' persecutions during his younger days, when the mob came to take possession of Nauvoo, seized some of the wagons and threw the brethren into the river, and has seen the blood on the floor of Carthage jail. Another distinct recollection is that of hearing Joseph Smith the Prophet preach. Bro. Huffaker's family crossed the plains in Jedediah M. Grant's company, reaching Salt Lake City in safety; here the youth attended the first Sunday school and the first public school. During the second year in Utah they moved to South Cottonwood, Salt Lake county, where he was baptized by acting Bishop Jonathan Wright. Bro. Huffaker joined the Utah militia at the age of sixteen and rendered service in the Johnston "war," and acted as one of Robert T. Burton's escort to Governor Cummings. In response to a call of President Lincoln, Bro. Huffaker became one of the 100 troops to go East to restore the Wells-Fargo stage line which had been broken up by the Indians, and was through the greater part of the "Black Hawk war." He was married to Martha Sarah Murry, July 24, 1863, by Bp. Andrew Cahoon, becoming thereby the father of eleven children, and is the grandfather of twenty-one children. In 1863 Bro. Huffaker went to Peoa, Summit county, Utah, remaining there 20 years, then moving to Willow Creek, Bingham county, Idaho, where he still resides. His wife died July 3, 1890, and Oct. 8, 1897, he was married to Sarah Ann Iles. He has done considerable home missionary work and started on a mission to England Oct. 10, 1900, where he spent twenty-seven months in active and useful labor. Returning, he was appointed second counselor to Reuben Belnap, president of the High Priests' quorum of Bingham Stake; subsequently, through a division of the Stake, David Ryall was chosen president and Bro. Huffaker became his first counselor, the former resigning in about a year and the latter being then called to the acting presidency.
