Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Bywater, George Gwillym

Bywater, George Gwillym, a prominent and talented Elder in the Church, was born Nov. 15, 1828, in the parish of Bedwelly, Glamorganshire, Wales, the son of George Bywater and Elinor Gwillym. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized and confirmed Dec. 20, 1848, by John E. Jones at Garndduffaith, Monmouthshire, England. In February, 1849, he was ordained to the office of a Deacon and to that of a Priest in April following. At a general conference of the Welsh Mission held at Merthyr Tydfil, May 29th and 30th, 1849, a conference was organized in the county of Brecknockshire, and Elder John E. Jones, Phillip Sykes and G. G. Bywater were appointed to preside over it, the former as president and the two latter as his counselors. Brother Bywater labored in that conference until July 13, 1851, when he was appointed general book agent, secretary and treasurer of the Monmouthshire conference, under the presidency of Elder Thomas Giles. He continued in those positions until Jan. 4, 1852, when he was called to labor in the Western Glamorganshire conference. Jan. 18, 1852, he attended a quarterly conference held in Trades Hall, Swansea, where he received the appointment of first counselor to Robt. Evans, who at the same meeting was appointed president of that conference. He occupied that position until Feb. 4, 1854, when he, having been released from all his labors in his native land with permission to gather with the Saints to Utah, embarked with a company of Saints on board the ship "Golconda" at Liverpool. He was appointed clerk of the company over the ocean, and commissary for that years' emigration. He arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 24th of the same year. Nov. 27, 1854, he was married to Martha Jones, eldest daughter of Rees and Martha Jones, by Bishop Shadrach Roundy, of the Sixteenth Ward, and afterwards, (Oct. 11, 1855) sealed in the Endowment House. By her he had five sons and two daughters. He was ordained an "Apostle of the Seventies" Dec. 29, 1855, under the hands of William Carmichael and made a member of the 25th quorum. He participated in the various services incident to the Echo Canyon campaign and the "general move" during the fall and winter of 1857, and the spring, summer and fall of 1858. Sept. 4, 1860, he was called upon to take a mission to Europe. To fill this he left Salt Lake City Sept. 28, 1860, and arrived in Liverpool Dec. 12th following. Dec. 29th, he received his appointment to labor in the Cheltenham District, under the direction of Elder William Gibson, but was shortly afterwards appointed to labor in Wales, his native country, and the Cardiff conference was assigned him as his local field of labor, under the presidency of Elder Thomas E. Jeremy, president of the Church in the principality of Wales. May 14, 1862, he was assigned the presidency of the Glamorgan conference, as well as that of counselor to Elder Jeremy. In the latter capacity he traveled through the conferences of North and South Wales as circumstances required. May 22, 1864, he was released from his labors abroad to return home to Zion after an absence of four years. He sailed from Liverpool with a company of Saints on board the ship "Manchester," in charge of Elder Jeremy; himself and Joseph Bull, sen., assisting him as counselors. He arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 4, 1864. Here he resided until March 22, 1868, when he was called on a home mission and appointed to labor in Utah county, in connection with Elders Abraham O. Smoot, Elijah F. Sheets, Joseph F. Smith and others. During the two years he remained in Utah county he discharged the duties of city councilman, director in the Provo Co-operative Mercantile Institution, president of the Provo Library and Literary Association and vice-president of the Mechanics' and Gardeners' Club. July 27, 1869, he was called to fill a vacancy in the council of the 34th quorum of Seventy, created by the death of Elder Taylor. Feb. 23, 1870, he was called from that field of labor by Pres. Brigham Young, to enter the service of the Utah Central Railway as conductor which position he filled until May 9, 1870. He was then called to go on another mission to Europe, to which call he responded, leaving Salt Lake City June 6th and arriving in Liverpool June 27th of that year. The first appointment he received after his arrival in Europe was to preside over the Sheffield conference, but in consequence of ill health he was removed to Wales. August 1st, he was appointed to preside over the Glamorgan conference, but continued ill health necessitated an early release from his labors abroad. Nov. 16, 1870, he embarked with two other Elders and a small company of Saints on board the steamship "Manhattan," and arrived in Salt Lake City Dec. 11th of the same year. At the April conference, 1872, he was called with nine other Elders to labor as home missionaries in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. He filled, with but few exceptions, all his appointments in that capacity for a period of twelve years. Dec. 9, 1878, he was chosen to fill a vacancy in the council of the 8th quorum of Seventy, and when the reorganizations of the quorums were effected, he was removed from the 8th quorum to the 3rd quorum to fill a vacancy in the council of the the latter quorum, where he remained until his death. Upon his return from Europe, Pres. Brigham Young desired him to re-enter the service of the Utah Central Railway Company, which he did. From March 18th to June 12th, 1871, he labored as machinist, then as locomotive engineer to May, 1862, then as machinist in the tool-room to April 15, 1883, from which time he was master mechanic of the Utah Central Railway. Brother Bywater died suddenly at his home in the Seventeenth Ward Dec. 18, 1889. Elder Bywater was universally known as a great reader, a profound thinker, an able speaker, a true friend and an honest man; his integrity as an Elder in the Church was never questioned.
