Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Christiansen, Søren

Christiansen, Søren, a member of the High Council of the Sevier Stake, and a resident of the Richfield First Ward, was born March 23, 1863, at Holdensgaard, Albæk parish, Hjørring amt, Denmark, the son of Hans Christensen and Maline Nielsen. He emigrated with his parents to Utah in 1869, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Minnesota" and arrived at Taylor's Switch, near Ogden, Sept. 6, 1869. After residing two years at Ephraim, the family located permanently at Richfield, Sevier co., where Søren received a limited education and helped his father on the farm. He was baptized Aug. 18, 1872, by Jørgen L. Hansen. Several years later he was ordained a Priest by Bishop Poul Poulson. April 3, 1884, he was ordained an Elder by Elias Blackburn, and shortly afterwards (April 9, 1884) he was ordained a Seventy by Geo. Teasdale and set apart for a mission to the Northern States. On this mission he labored principally in Minnesota and Dakota, returning home in December, 1885. After his return, he labored as a home missionary and a Sunday school teacher. He was also active in the 36th quorum of Seventy, of which he was a member. For ten years he served as chief clerk in the mercantile house of James M. Peterson and Company at Richfield, and in 1898 he bought Theodore Brandley's furniture store. Since that time he has been a successful furniture dealer. He is also a stock holder in several home enterprises. Brother Christiansen was ordained a High Priest March 21, 1901, by Mathias F. Cowley, and set apart as an alternate member of the Sevier Stake High Council; he became a regular member of that body Dec. 13, 1903. In 1907-09, he filled a mission to Scandinavia, laboring in the Christiania conference, Norway. While on this mission he witnessed many marvelous manifestations of the power of God, principally in the healing of the sick, in fulfillment of prophecies and promises made to him by the Elder who set him apart for his mission. In secular matters Bro. Christiansen has also been very active and served a term as city councilor in Richfield. In 1887 (Nov. 18th) he married Amanda T. E. Lund (daughter of Niels R. Lund and Henrietta L. Lorenzen) who has borne him twelve children, nine of whom are now living.
