Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Cooper, Thomas

Cooper, Thomas, Bishop of Monroe Sevier co., Utah, was born June 17, 1834, at Hingham, Norfolk, England. His father, Robert Cooper, was a brick mason, and his mother, Ann Thompson Cooper, helped to support the family by working in the field. One of their son's earliest recollections is dropping wheat and otherwise assisting his mother in farming. This was when he was seven years old. Even at that tender age his school days were over and he had entered upon a life-long career of hard work. The father had less schooling than the son, for he could neither read nor write. Bro. Cooper speaks of his extreme youth as a period of adversity, during which he often lacked the common necessities of life. His constitution was rather weak, hardly fitted for the kind of labor that fell to his lot. At the age of twelve he was apprenticed to a shoemaker, though he naturally inclined towards carpentering and building. After mastering his trade his labors alternated between shoemaking and farming until he was sixteen, when on June 26, 1850, he joined the Latter-day Saints. He then settled down as a shoemaker and resided for some time at Norwich. On Sept. 5, 1853, he married Eliza Ward, and in 1864 he moved to London. Bound for Utah, he sailed on the ship "Hudson" June 3, 1864. The company of saints in which he emigrated was presided over by Elder John Kay. The Civil War was in full blast at that time and Confederate cruisers were playing havoc with Union commerce upon the seas. One of these cruisers, the "Florida," ran the "Hudson" down three times in two days, but finding that she was a British vessel did not attempt to injure her. From New York the emigrants proceeded to Florence, Nebraska, where they were met by Capt. Warren S. Snow with ox teams. Bro. Cooper was very sick on the plains, but recovered and reached Salt Lake City, Nov. 3, 1864. He spent the winter at Bountiful, living with Thos. Bottrel, and then returned to Salt Lake City, where he went to work at shoemaking for William Jennings, living meanwhile with Robt. Dye in the 20th Ward. The summer of 1867 found him serving in the Blackhawk war in Sanpete county as a member of Capt. Wm. L. Binder's company. At Gunnison he quarried rock, burned lime and helped to build a fort and barracks, besides doing military duty. While burning lime he and his comrades were attacked about 10 o'clock one night by Indians, who came down upon them under cover of heavy cedars and shot and killed John Hay, an estimable young man, whose death was much deplored. Bro. Cooper returned home in the fall. In the militia he was first sergeant, then lieutenant, and finally captain. He still worked at shoemaking as an employee of James L. Bunting, Enock B. Tripp and others. During the excitement of the "McKean period" he served on the special police force. September, 1872, saw him on his way to Sevier county, where he permanently settled. At Monroe, he worked for the co-operative store and for John B. Hesse. He became head teacher of the Ward and second counselor to Bishop Harris and after the latter's death in 1884 succeeded him as Bishop of Monroe, holding that office until 1891. Bro. Cooper held every grade of Priesthood up to the office of a High Priest excepting that of Deacon, and was always an earnest worker in the Sunday schools. He was a member of the county court one term, and justice of the peace three terms. He was the husband of three wives, two of whom, Mary Ann Rice Winters and Mary Ann Funnell, he married in the summer of 1868. He had no living children, but reared nine. Bishop Cooper died Nov. 12, 1910, at Monroe.
