Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Crismon, Charles, jun

Crismon, Charles, jun, a Utah pioneer of 1847, was born June 14, 1844, at Macedonia, Hancock county, Ill., the son of Charles Crismon and Mary Hill. When but about two years of age he came to G. S. L. Valley with his parents in 1847, and his life has ever since been identified with the State of Utah. The Crismon family remained in the Valley about two years, and then went to California in 1849, settling temporarily on the American river, where the senior Crismon engaged in mining. In 1851 he became one of the pioneer "Mormon" settlers of San Bernardino, Cal., and was among its leaders in subjugating that part of California to the needs of the people, building mills and aiding in many ways in the development of the resources of the country. When the San Bernardino settlement was broken up in 1858, owing to the Johnston Army troubles, the Crismons and the majority of the other "Mormon" settlers at San Bernardino returned to Utah. Charles Crismon, jun, the subject of this sketch received as good an education as the settlements of San Bernardino and Salt Lake City afforded in the fifties. At the age of fifteen he brought a drove of sheep from the Missouri river across the plains and mountains to G. S. L. Valley, arriving with them in Salt Lake City in the fall of 1862. In 1862, when Pres Lincoln called for volunteers from Utah, Bro. Crismon enlisted in Lot Smith's company which went out to protect the mail route from the Indians, leaving Salt Lake City May 1, 1862, destined for Chimney Rock. Later Charles Crismon turned his attention to sheep raising. He went to California and brought a drove of sheep from that State to Utah in 1863. In addition to the sheep he also brought with him a quantity of bees which are said to be the first bees introduced into Utah. On his trip he was for seven days and seven nights without water, and the hostile attitude of the Indians compelled him to push on at his best speed to Utah. Besides the torture and thirst which he and his animals suffered in crossing the desert, he lost 1500 head of sheep, famished by the want of water and stolen by the Indians. Charles Crismon and his brother George, together with his father and Elisha M. Weiler, were the first to recognize the possibilities attending the raising of sheep in Utah. They established the migratory movement of sheep from one range in summer to another in winter, which has proved to be a great success to the sheepraisers of Utah. In 1868 he made a second trip to the East and successfully brought another large drove of sheep across the mountains and plains from Iowa. In addition to his sheep business, Bro. Crismon successfully undertook the business of railroad contracting. Thus the firm of which he was a member built twenty miles of the Bitter Creek division and sixteen miles of the Muddy division of the Union Pacific Railroad, and later built 75 miles of the Oregon Short Line Railroad and a large portion of the Park City branch from Park City to Echo; still later they built a part of the Denver and Rio Grande Railway. Bro. Crismon is also known as a successful mining man and was among the first to develop the resources of the Tintic District; he purchased from prospectors and developed the great Mammoth Mine at Tintic to a depth of over 400 feet. At Coalville, Summit co., he opened up valuable coal mines, one of which was known as the Crismon mine, now owned by the Ontario Coal and Mining Co. In June, 1871, Bro. Crismon married Elizabeth Cain (daughter of Joseph Cain and Elizabeth Whittaker) who bore her husband six children. Bro. Crismon is universally known for his generosity and good will toward his fellow-man. Of late his health has been failing.
