Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Dougall, William Bernard

Dougall, William Bernard, a prominent Elder in the Church, and a resident in the 17th Ward Salt Lake City, was born May 3, 1843, in Liverpool, Lancashire, England, the son of John Dougall and Catherine Mac Swein. His parents and ancestors were Scotch. His mother (then a widow) embraced the gospel in 1853, in which year also her son, William, was baptized. The exact date of his baptism was Aug. 5, 1853, and John S. Fullmer was the administrator. Two years later he emigrated to Utah with his mother, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Juventa", which sailed from Liverpool, England, March 31, 1855, and arrived at Philadelphia May 5, 1855. He crossed the plains in Noah T. Guyman's company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 7, 1855. The family settled at Springville, Utah co., and in 1861 William, responding to a call from the Church authorities, drove an ox team to the Missouri river and back as a Church teamster, going after the poor. He made the round trip in Joseph W. Young's company and was gone five months. In 1862 and 1863 he made trips to Carson City and Sacramento, California, and in the spring of 1864 to Los Angeles, Cal., all by mule teams. In 1865 he learned telegraphy and was counseled to perfect himself in that art by Pres. Brigham Young. In 1866 he was called on an Indian expedition to Sanpete and Sevier counties, returning in July. In December of the same year, he was called to take a position on the Home Telegraph (later the Deseret) Line, and he was appointed to take charge of the office at Parowan, Iron co. He remained at Parowan till May, 1867, when he returned to Salt Lake City and was appointed to take charge of the Deseret Telegraph Office in July following. From that time he was for many years continuously connected with that institution, becoming secretary in 1874 and superintendent in 1876, which position he occupied until March 1, 1900. Bro. Dougall was ordained an Elder in 1861 and a Seventy in 1875. After serving for fifteen years as a clerk of the eighth quorum of Seventy he became one of the presidents of said quorum in 1890. Bro. Dougall was ordained a High Priest and served as first counselor to Wm. Asper, in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, from 1904 to 1906. In 1900 he filled a mission to Great Britain. Bro. Dougall was also a prominent figure in military affairs. In the Nauvoo Legion he acted as bugler to Gen. Robt. T. Burton and served during the Black Hawk war under Col. Heber P. Kimball. During the latter part of his life Elder Dougall was especially interested in the L. D. S. High School in Salt Lake City, being one of its founders. The following is extracted from his own writings: "In July, 1886, being greatly interested in having a school in Salt Lake City, similar to the B. Y. Academy at Provo. I had several conversations with Karl G. Maeser on the matter. He agreed to supply a teacher, if a suitable hall could be had, as he was greatly in favor of such a school being started. We concluded to secure Bro. Daniel H. Well's old school house, situated near the Z. C. M. I., if nothing better could be had. I then drafted a subscription paper as a preparatory step to raising funds wherewith to buy the needed furniture, and I headed the list myself with $75. The first person I handed it to was Wm. Rossiter who put down $50 as his donation. I then went over to the Gardo House to interview Pres. Angus M. Cannon, who resided there temporarily on the underground. He heartily endorsed the movement. Next I started out soliciting subscriptions on general principles and met with excellent success, the amount of $970 being raised, which was sufficient to start the school. I then wrote to Pres. Geo. Q. Cannon, who was also on the underground, informing him of what we had done. He also approved of our actions and sent me a subscription, suggesting also that I communicate with Pres. Taylor and ask for a part of the Social Hall for the school. Writing Pres. Taylor, as had been suggested, he replied by expressing himself much pleased with our actions and proposed that the lower room in the Social Hall be placed at the disposal of the school. My next move was to inform those who had subscribed money and a number of us met at James Dwyer's store, on which occasion Alonzo E. Hyde and I were apointed a committee to wait on Angus M. Cannon, in order to have him accept of the proposal made by the First Presidency and appoint a committee from the subscribers to take general charge of matters. Bro. Cannon appointed Wm. B. Dougall, Wm. A. Rossiter, Alonzo E. Hyde, Spencer Clawson, Frank Cope, Wm. H. Rowe and Rodney C. Badger (with Angus M. Cannon as chairman) as a committee to take charge. An executive committee was also named, consisting of Wm. B. Dougall, Wm. A. Rossiter, Alonzo E. Hyde and Spencer Clawson. We ordered the necessary furniture for opening school and on Nov. 15, 1886, the Latter-day Saints College was opened in Salt Lake City with Karl G. Maeser in charge, assisted by Willard Done." The growth and success of this school now known as the Later-day Saints University stands as a grand monument to the earnestness and faithfulness of Wm. B. Dougall, who, as stated, took the initiative step in founding that noble institution of learning: it has indeed proven a great blessing to thousands of the youth of Zion. Bro. Dougall served as a member of the board of trustees of the school and took a most active part in the affairs of the same until the time of his death, which occurred in Salt Lake City April 9, 1909.
