Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Dougall, Maria Young

Dougall, Maria Young, counselor in the General Presidency of the Y. L. M. I. A. of the whole Church, was born Dec. 10, 1849, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the daughter of Pres. Brigham Young and Clarissa Ross. The following sketch of her life is principally culled from the History of the Y. L. M. I. A. Sister Maria Y. Dougall descends on both sides of her parents from old New England stock, her ancestors on the father's side being among the colonizers of Massachusetts as early as 1720; on her mother's side, Betsy Ross, one of her family was the fashioner of the first American flag. Sister Dougall was raised in the Lion House, Salt Lake City, and her childhood was passed amidst the difficulties and hardships among the early settlers of Utah, although her education, even under these circumstances, was not neglected; the wisdom of her illustrious father having provided a private teacher and school-room for his children, where an excellent rudimentary education could be acquired. Among the studies taught was physical culture, with the early appliances invented by Dr. Dio Lewis. The quaint, single seats are now all destroyed; but there are still extant some of the back-boards which were used in those early and primitive "gymnastics." A private music teacher was always a part of the family life, the first piano and organ having been drawn across the plains with ox teams. Not a daughter of Pres. Young lacked the musical ear, and most of them were, for those days, superior musicians. Mrs. Dougall was one of David O. Calder's solo singers in his famous pioneer singing school. All this was before high schools in Utah were known, and Mrs. Dougall was married before it became possible to pursue the so-called "higher education." When eight years old, little Maria's mother died, and her subsequent life-training, until she was married, was under the judicious care of that excellent and beloved mother in Israel, Sister Zina D. H. Young, to whose teachings she is indebted for much of the solidity of character and the good judgment which she possesses. June 1, 1868, she became the wife of Wm. B. Dougall, who was for years superintendent of the Deseret Telegraph Company, a young man of great sagacity and refinement. Her marriage was a happy one, and five children were born to her. Sister Dougall has lived all her life in Salt Lake City and from her early years has been earnestly engaged in doing good, both in public and in private life. She was present at that memorable meeting in the Lion House, Nov. 28, 1869, and was chosen as one of the counselors to her sister, Ella Y. Empey. In 1879 she was made president of the 17th Ward Y. L. M. I. Association and acted as such till she was chosen as first counselor to Mary A. Freeze, the first president of the Salt Lake Stake Y. L. M. I. A. from this position in 1887 she was called to become first counselor to Pres. Elmina S. Taylor. She acted for six years as first counselor to Sister Julia Howe in the Primary Association of the 17th Ward, and Sister Howe deeply regretted the necessity for her resignation from that position, to take up the heavier burdens involved in the general work of the Mutual Improvement Association. She was also connected for several years with the Woman's Co-operative Store, acting as vice-president to Pres. M. Isabella Horse. In 1893 Sister Dougall was called to act as a worker in the Salt Lake Temple at the completion of that great edifice, and here she has remained at her post in season and out of season. When the Bureau of Information was opened Mrs. Dougall became one of the guides who gave their time free of charge for the instruction of tourists who visit Salt Lake City. All this, too, in addition to her duties in the Mutual Improvement Association and the many loving burdens which rest upon her as mother and home-maker. Sister Dougall has on four different occasions attended the great convention of Council of Women, once at Chicago, once at Omaha, and once at Washington and New York. She attended also the Suffrage Convention in 1887 held at Washington, D. C. in company with Sister Sarah M. Kimball, Sister Dougall being chairman of the executive committee of the State association. The brief facts here outlined of a full and beautiful life do not portray the half of the good deeds done; for it is in trouble or sickness, in distress and in poverty that the tender hand of this wise counselor has been most often extended. In those offices, where woman ministers to woman, her gentle hands have comforted and blessed hundreds of Zion's daughters. Her character is one of force and strength; and yet so calm and equable is her temperament that a storm-tossed soul can always find a sweet refuge in the sheltering love that knows no distinction between rich or poor, high or low, only the suffering and unfortunate. Her beautiful home has hospitable doors swung wide to every one who knocks at the portals; and, together with her husband, who died April 11, 1909, she ministered to every traveler who went their way. For many years the general officers' meetings of the Y. L. M. I. A. held at the April and October conferences, were convened in Sister Dougall's home. Here the sisters from every part of Zion gathered and held some of the best spiritual and the most profitable business meetings ever known in the history of the Mutual Improvement work. These meetings outgrew the parlors, in the course of ten years; but those who attended these interesting meetings in the Dougall home cannot forget the hallowed influence of that beautiful and consecrated hearthstone! Sister Dougall is also a prominent worker in the Society of the Daughters of the Utah Pioneers, she being chosen as first counselor to Mrs. Anne T. Hyde, the founder-general in 1901. She is also a honorary member of the Daughters of the Handcart Veterans, having the honor of assisting in the organization of that society in 1910.
