Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Dusenberry, Ida Smoot

Dusenberry, Ida Smoot, a member of the General Board of Relief Societies, was born May 5, 1873, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the daughter of Abraham Owen Smoot and Anna Kirstina Smoot. When five years of age she became a pupil of the B. Y. Academy at Provo, and graduated from that institution in 1897. After that she attended the Chauncey Hall College, at Boston, two years (1898-99) and graduated with honor. After her return to Provo, she became principal of the Kindergarten Normal Training school, and organized the first parent's class in Utah. In 1900 she was chosen vice-president of the Women's Congress held in Salt Lake City. She was married in 1891 and became the mother of two children, a boy and a girl. During the next three years death claimed her mother, father and husband. In 1901 she was chosen as president of the State Kindergarten Association and in 1906 she was sent to Milwaukee, Michigan, as a delegate to the National Kindergarten Convention. In 1901 she was chosen as second counselor in the National Women's Relief Society and served in that capacity until the death of Bathsheba W. Smith. In 1902 she went to Washington, D.C., as a delegate to the National Council of Women. In 1905 she went as a delegate to the International Council of Women at Berlin, Germany, on which occasion she traveled abroad four months and delivered speeches in many large cities. In 1905 she went as a delegate to the Executive Session of the National Council of Women which met in St. Louis, Mo. Commencing with 1910 she spent a year doing post graduate work at the Columbia College, New York, and during that year she spoke at conferences held in New York, Brooklyn, Boston, Newark, Washington and Baltimore. The same year she was sent as a delegate from Utah to the convention of Charities and Corrections, held at Boston, where she addressed two large audiences. In 1910 she was a delegate to the International Council of Women held in Toronto, Canada, where she read a paper on the charitable organizations of Utah. In 1911 she was a delegate to the National Convention of Charities and Corrections and delivered an address. During the Portland Fair in 1903 she was sent as a delegate and speaker to the Suffrage Convention held at Portland and at the same time went as a delegate to the convention of Charities and Corrections; she received an appointment as secretary of the State of Utah to the National Convention. For fifteen, years she has been, principal of the Kindergarten Department of Education at the B. Y. University at Provo. For thirteen years she was a teacher in a Ward Sunday school, and has throughout been a most active member of the Church since her early youth.
