Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Gates, Jacob Forsberry

Gates, Jacob Forsberry, son of Jacob Gates and Emma Forsberry, was born July 30, 1854, in Salt Lake City, Ut. He was baptized Sept. 4, 1862 by Apostle Orson Pratt, and ordained an Elder in 1871 by his father Jacob Gates. In 1876-79 he filled a mission to the Sandwich Islands. In 1880 he was ordained a Seventy by President Wilford Woodruff and in 1885-89 he filled a second mission to the Sandwich Islands, taking his family with him. During this term he spent much of his time as superintendent of the sugar plantation of the Church at Lale, on the Island of Oahu. In June, 1889, he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Heber J. Grant and set apart as an alternate High Councilor of the Utah Stake of Zion. About two years later he was chosen a counselor to Joseph B. Keeler who was at that time made Bishop of the Fourth Ward of Provo. In 1902-03 he filled a mission to the Eastern States, spending most of his time in the office in New York City. In 1913-14 he filled a mission to Germany, returning just before the breaking out of the war. In 1905, Elder Gates was called by President Joseph F. Smith to get out a new edition of the Book of Mormon in the Hawaiian language (which book had been translated fifty years before by Pres. George Q. Cannon), he having on his two missions to Hawaii obtained a complete mastery of that tongue. He divided the new edition into chapter and verse like the later English editions, added the references, and made a full and comprehensive alphabetical index. Elder Gates' early occupation was that of a farmer. He was also a furniture dealer, and later, an insurance and real estate agent. While living in Provo, he was elected for two terms as justice of the peace of Utah county. In 1880 (Jan 5th) he married Susa Young (daughter of Pres. Brigham Young) who has borne him eleven children, most of whom died young. His surviving children are Emma Lucy (the celebrated Utah singer), Brigham Cecil (musical director in the L. D. S. University), Harvey H. (editor of the "Universal Weekly Magazine", New York City) and Franklin Young (now a missionary on the Sandwich Islands). Elder Gates is a man of sterling integrity, simple and domestic in his tastes, a wide reader, a keen observer and one who merits and receives the respect of all who know him. He possesses the close friendship of President Joseph F. Smith, they being fellow-missionaries on the Sandwich Islands. He is a tower of strength in the homely virtues that make of men good citizens and faithful Later-day Saints. Genealogically speaking the Gates family line is one of the most unique and wonderful in the Church. Jacob F. goes back in direct attested line on the Gates side to 1250 A. D., and on the last Clapdow line to William the Conqueror's time, 1066. They are a sturdy, intelligent stock; no kings and rakes are noted therein, nor paupers and rogues; just that splendid yeoman strain which has produced the leaders of the Latter-day Saints from New England, Old England, Scandinavia, Germany, Holland and Switzerland. It is the blood of Israel.
