Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Gates, Susa YoungPPGates, Susa Young

Gates, Susa YoungPPGates, Susa Young, corresponding Secretary of the General Board of the Relief Societies, was born March 18, 1856, in the historic Lion House, Salt Lake City, Utah, the second daughter of Pres. Brigham Young and Lucy Bigelow. Besides the many excellent qualities inherited from her father, she is well descended on her mother's side, the Bigelows being one of America's distinguished families. Her education was begun in the private school of her father and was continued in the Deseret University (U, of U.), of which she is an alumnus. Here her literary work had its beginning. Dr. Park appointed her associate editor of the first western college paper, "The College Lantern." Before reaching the age of fourteen she studied stenography and telegraphy, becoming so expert in the former that she can still act as a shorthand reporter. In 1870 her father moved her mother and two daughters, rightly Susan or Susanna, and Mabel to St. George. While sojourning in Dixie, she organized a large club of both sexes called the "Union Club." Since that time she has won distinction as an organizer in intellectual lines. She organized the musical department in 1878 in the Brigham Young Academy at Provo and the domestic science department in the same institution in 1897. She organized the first State chapter of the Daughters of the Revolution in Utah. Her biggest organization work, however, was the founding of the "Young Woman's Journal" in 1889 under the direction of the Y. L. M. I. A. In 1880 Susa was married to Jacob F. Gates, the son of Jacob Gates, who figured prominently in the early history of Utah. He is a man of good judgment and sterling character, possessing that type of nobility which is generally spoken of as common sense. Mrs. Gates accompanied her husband on a four years' mission to the Sandwich Islands in 1885-1889. Three of her children were born there. She is the mother of thirteen children, ten sons and three daughters, five of these are living: Leah D., Emma Lucy, Brigham Cecil, Harvey Harris and Franklin Young. The eldest (now Mrs. Widsoe) is a woman of broad interest and true culture and the second daughter, Emma Lucy, the Utah nightingale and Grand Opera star, is famous on two continents. Mrs. Gates is well known as a public speaker and as an author. To uplift the youth of her people with her pen was a mission given her by Pres. Young. Much of her writing is therefore of a doctrinal nature and all of it is imbued with the spirit of religion. In her editorial days the spirit, no less than the matter, determined whether or not a manuscript was accepted. She herself has a natural power of giving herself to humanity through her writings; they glow with life and on that account kindle fires in other minds and other hearts. Her early writings were printed in the "Deseret News," the "Juvenile Instructor," the "Woman's Exponent," and the "Young Woman's Journal" under the non de plume "Homespun." In these first efforts she was much encouraged by Sisters Eliza R. Snow and Emmeline B. Wells and her friends, Orson F. Whitney and Pres. Chas. W. Penrose. Three books have been published, "Lydia Knight's History," in early days, and recently her finest piece of fiction "John Steven's Courtship," a historical romance portraying pioneer life in Utah; and later the History of the Y. L. M. I. A. a volume of nearly 500 pages. Sister Gates' creative faculty makes all her work original. The interest element is sustained throughout by forcefulness. Simplicity of style, correctness and vivid illustration adapt her writings to popular audiences. The "Journal" editorials cover a period of eleven years and are in many respects her ablest work. They show the sympathetic insight into human nature, and the keen perception of human needs, which distinguish the world's great writings. Sister Gates became associated with the General Board of the Y. L. M. I. A. in 1889. She is in her element when projecting new ideas in the direction of reform. Mutual Improvement work in the General Board and in local associations provided endless opportunity for the exercise of her initiative powers. With characteristic foresight, she advocated the adoption of a uniform course of study in the Y. L. M. I. A. and it was she who wrote the first two "Guides." Naturally interested in all forms of woman's work, she has been a forceful figure in the affairs of the National Council of Women of the U. S. Seven times she represented the Y. L. M. I. A. at the National Council of Women of the U. S. The national leaders honored her by an appointment to the chairmanship of the Press committee of the National Council of the U. S. for three years. They also chose her as one of the speakers at the International Quinquennial held in London in 1899; and in 1901 she filled the responsible position of sole delegate from the National Council of the United States to the International Council of Women held in Copenhagen, Denmark. This was perhaps the highest honor that was ever shown by the women of the world to a "Mormon" woman. Her clever character sketches of the leaders of these big movements, with the lucid accounts of the work accomplished, evoked favorable comment wherever they were read. She was a U. S. representative at the International Council held at Rome, May, 1914, and devoted much time on this trip to the examination of European genealogical conditions. Extensive travel and intimate association with famous people of the world have not lessoned her activity in Church circles. Through the spiritual gifts she exercises her sister associates receive comfort and blessings. Thousands of school and M. I. A. girls who have been benefited by her religious instructions hold "Aunt Susa" in loving remembrance. A few years ago she passed through a long illness which she is convinced must have ended fatally, had she not been healed by faith. Keenly alive to the importance of Temple work she was appointed a worker and recorder in the St. George Temple at its completion in 1877. For the past ten years she has been a regular worker in the Salt Lake Temple. For a number of years, genealogical research, an important branch of the Temple work, absorbs a large share of her attention. Indeed this work lies nearest her heart, and receives her best attention. She is an active worker in the Genealogical Society of Utah, and has been president of the Daughters of the Pioneers, injecting into that body her beloved genealogical work, and she founded and made successful the Hall of Relics in that Society. Her ability to grasp things in the large and to arouse enthusiasm in others have given a great impetus to this line of Church work. Sister Gates has long been a leader in educational matters, and she is referred to as the mother of physical education in Utah. Besides being a teacher of theology, domestic science and music in the B. Y. A. at Provo, she has been a member of its board of directors for 25 years, and was appointed by Governor Cutler in 1906 as a director of the Agricultural College of Utah, which position she held for six years She is a conscientious believer in the practical honesty and fitness of political activity as applied to women. Mrs. Gates allied herself with the Republican party many years ago. She is a leader in all political movements of her party, but has never found time nor inclination for public office Sister Gates was appointed a member of the General Board of the Relief Societies, May 8, 1911, and at once took up active work in that oldest and greatest of all women's organizations. She was appointed as editor of the "Relief Society Bulletin" for 1914, and as editor of the new "Relief Society Magazine," which issues its first number, January, 1915. Mrs. Gates makes a pleasant home for her husband and devoted family; she is noted as a cook and loves to entertain her friends She is a good reconteur and knows how to make conversation," as the French phrase it. Her father once told her that if a woman were to become famous throughout the world and still fail as a wife and mother, she would wake up in the morning of the resurrection and find she had failed in everything. So that her devotion as wife and mother is her first religious duty. Obedience to authority, and reverence for the Priesthood is the foundation stone of her life. She seeks to harmonize her activities to the principles and authority of the Church. Sister Gates is recognized today as a public spirited woman and one having extraordinary initiative power, traits inherited from her father. A vivid personality is combined in her with an energetic and somewhat complex character. She is engaging and brilliant in conversation and possesses the repletion of sentiment which naturally accompanies an artistic temperament, this emotional nature being held in check by the saving grace of honor. Her mind is the versatile, imaginative type, keenly perceptive and philosophical. These qualities have enabled her to attain to the unique position which she occupies in the affairs of Church and State. All that is written of Mrs. Gates in her lifetime will be necessarily inadequate, it is only through the perspective of years that her achievements and dynamic power will be fully discernible. (Estelle Neff Caldwell.)
