Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Geertsen, Peter Christian

Geertsen, Peter Christian, one of the most able and successful missionaries who have traveled in the Scandinavian mission, was born July 26, 1837, in the village of Gjøtterup, Hanherred, Thisted amt, Jutland, Denmark, the son of Geert Larsen and Ane Marie Knudson. He was baptized Nov. 5, 1854, by M. C. Christensen and soon afterwards ordained to the Priesthood and sent out to labor as a local missionary. Becoming very efficient as a speaker and being a man of considerable education, he was kept in the missionary field continuously for nine and one-half years, of which time three and a half years were spent in the Vendsyssel conference, three years in the Fredericia conference and three years in the Aarhus conference; he presided over the latter conference from 1861 to 1864. Finally he emigrated to Utah in 1864 and located permanently at Huntsville. He was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the 75th quorum of Seventy. In 1873-75 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, laboring first as a traveling Elder in and later as president of the Aarhus conference, Denmark. In 1886-88 he filled another mission to Scandinavia, laboring four months in the Aalborg conference and later as translator and writer for "Skandinaviens Stjerne" at the mission office in Copenhagen. Having yielded obedience to the principle of plural marriage, Elder Geertsen was arrested and convicted of so-called unlawful cohabitation and served a term in the Utah penitentiary from Jan. 22, 1889, to June 22, 1899. At home he filled many important positions of honor and trust. He followed farming and stockraising as a means of living, but was more successful as a missionary than a financier. It is perhaps not saying too much that Elder Geertsen measured by the success attained in the missionary field, stands second to none of all the Elders who have labored in Scandinavia. In the midst of a life of usefulness he passed to his final rest at Huntsville, Aug. 22, 1894.
