Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Greene, John Portineus

Greene, John Portineus, an early and prominent Elder in the Church, was born Sept. 3, 1793, in Herkimer, Herkimer county, New York, the fifth son and tenth child of John Coddington Greene, by his second wife, Anna Chapman, to whom he was married Oct. 22, 1778. At the early age of nineteen years John P. Greene married Rhoda Young, a daughter of John Young and Nabby Howe, born Sept. 10, 1789, in Plataua district, New York. This marriage took place Feb. 11, 1813. About two years after his marriage, having impaired his health by incessant labor in chopping and clearing land, he took up shoemaking, in which occupation he was very successful, and resorted to it at different times in after years as a means of support for his family. At an early day he became a member of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and for several years held an exhorter's license, but was not satisfied with their travels and improvements in spiritual things. Hoping that more light and perfection would be manifested, he joined the Methodist Reformed Church, when that church was organized, and traveled about three years preaching the gospel according to the light he had received, but not realizing his hopes of finding that for which his soul panted, he united with some twenty or twenty-five others and formed the Methodist Protestant Church in 1828, and he continued a traveling preacher in that connection until he received the true gospel of Jesus Christ and the New Covenant of the last days. He was baptized in April, 1832, by Elder Eleazer Miller, in Mendon, Monroe co., New York, and after he was confirmed the promise of the Father was verified, he spake in tongues and prophesied. Shortly thereafter he was ordained an Elder under the hands of Elder Miller and commenced preaching the gospel in a more perfect way; where ever he went the fire was kindled, many embracing the gospel and receiving the ordinance of baptism under his administration. His labors that year (1832) were chiefly in Monroe, Livingston, Genesee, Allegany and Catteraugus counties, New York. In Warsaw, Genesee county he assisted in baptizing and organizing a branch of twenty or thirty members. In October, 1882, he moved to Kirtland, Ohio, where he first became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and from their first acquaintance he was an intimate friend of the Prophet. In the spring of 1833 he was appointed by the council to preside over the branch at Parkman, Geauga county, Ohio, where he moved with his family and staid until fall, when he again moved to Kirtland and on Sept. 16, 1833, he was ordained a High Priest and started on a mission to the East (visiting the branches through the western part of New York) and Canada, to gather means for the Lord's House. He returned to Kirtland, Oct. 21, 1833. Under date of Feb. 25, 1834, he received letters of commendation from Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon and took a mission again to the western part of New York and Canada, to gather men and means for the redemption of Zion; he returned to Kirtland and was there when Zion's Camp started for Missouri. He then returned to Canada and labored there most of the season, after which he returned to Kirtland and spent the fall and winter, working at his trade for the benefit of his family. May 18, 1835, he left Kirtland on a mission to the East; he traveled through to the State of New York, visited the branches in Connecticut and Rhode Island and in Boston (Mass.), attended conference at Bradford, Mass, Aug. 7th, at Dover (New Hampshire) Sept. 4th, at Sacco (Maine) Sept. 18th, and at Farmington (Maine) Oct. 2nd. He returned to Kirtland sometime in the winter. In March, 1836, he received a letter of commendation from Joseph Smith, jun., and spent the forepart of the year in gathering means to finish the House of the Lord, etc., among the branches of the Church in Ohio. He started on another mission to the East again July 13, 1836, visiting the branches in New York and returned to Kirtland Sept. 15th. He spent the winter in Kirtland and in visiting the branches in the southern part of Ohio; he was a firm supporter of the Prophet Joseph's measures this and the following season. The year 1837 was spent in Kirtland till Nov. 16th, when he started on a mission to Canada,' in company with Wm. Marks; he returned to Kirtland in June, 1838. Early in 1838 he moved with his family to Far West (Missouri) where he passed through the persecutions of that season and endured all the troubles, privations and labors in common with the rest of the Saints in that region, and when Joseph and Hyrum Smith and others had been given up and Gen. Clark called on the brethren to lay down their arms Bro. Greene, in company with Lorenzo D. Young, Phineas H. Young and others committed their families and friends to the care of the Lord Nov. 1, 1838, and took to the wilderness; and on the 15th of the same month he arrived at the house of Judge Cleveland, four miles east of Quincy, Illinois. As requisitions had been made by the authorities of Missouri for him and others they soon passed over to Exeter, in Scott county, Ill., where Bro. Greene unexpectedly found his son Evan M. Greene and family. Soon after this he returned to Quincy and found his family which had just arrived from Far West, as there had been a general break-up, and the Saints were all fleeing for their lives. He remained at Quincy during the winter of 1838-39, and when Joseph and Hyrum Smith had obtained their liberty and arrived in Quincy a conference was held near that place in May, 1839, at which Bro. Greene was appointed a delegate to visit the cities of Cincinnati, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia and New York and represent the persecution and condition of the Saints. He started June 5, 1839. On this mission he gathered considerable means for the relief of the Saints. While at Cincinnati, Ohio, he printed and published a pamphlet of 32 pages, containing an account of the rupture in Missouri, of which he circulated 3,000 or 5,000 copies. Besides visiting the above named cities he visited many intermediate places and branches of the Church. When he returned to Quincy, Oct. 27, 1839, he found his wife very sick with the inflammatory rheumatism, occasioned by her exposure in removing from Missouri in the fall of 1838; he spent the winter of 1839-40 in Quincy, and in the spring of 1840 he moved to Nauvoo (then Commerce) where he remained laboring incessantly for the gathering of the Saints and the building up of the Kingdom of Heaven, taking care of his wife who was confined to her room (and mostly to her bed) until her death, which happened January 18, 1841. Bro. Greene and his wife had lived happily together twenty-eight years, and had raised seven children, namely three sons (Evan Melbourne, Addison and John Young), and four daughters (Abby Ann, Fanny Eliza, Rhoda, and Nancy Zervian). Bro. Greene felt his loss severely. Dec. 6, 1841, he married Mary Eliza Nelson (his second wife), by whom he had one child a daughter (Mary Emma) who subsequently became the wife of Gilbert Van Schnohoven; she studied medicine and became known as Dr. M. E. Van, of Salt Lake City. She died March 19, 1907, in Salt Lake City. In August, 1842, Elder Greene received a letter of commendation from the hands of Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith and started on a mission to the East On this mission he visited many of the branches in Ohio and New York and returned to Nauvoo Oct. 19, 1843, having been gone thirteen months. Dec. 23, 1844, he was chosen marshal of the city of Nauvoo and assessor and collector of the Fourth Ward of said city which offices he held till the time of his death. He was received into the "Priesthood Quorum in the Kingdom of God" March 25, 1844. Obeying the order of the mayor of Nauvoo (by virtue of the city council having declared the office of the 'Expositor" together with the press, type and fixtures a nuisance) Bro. Greene proceeded with a possee to abate the Nauvoo "Expositor" as a nuisance. During the excitement and troubles that followed he was constantly at his post and efficient in all his duties as marshal and stood shoulder to shoulder with the mayor. On the night of June 20, 1844, he, with the mayor (Joseph Smith), Hyrum Smith and Captain Jonathan Dunham left Nauvoo secretly, passed over into Iowa, where they remained till the 23rd in the afternoon, when they returned to the city. On the morning of the 24th he started, in company with Joseph and Hyrum Smith, for Carthage, to give themselves up to the State authorities, and on the 25th underwent a mock trial in company with others On the 27th he was ordered by Governor Ford to go to Nauvoo to see that order was kept when the governor should come in, he having pledged himself and the faith of the State to protect Joseph and Hyrum and bring them with him to Nauvoo. Bro. Greene was at his post of duty when the governor came in and upbraided him for not keeping his promise. On the morning of the 28th, when the news of the massacre reached the city Bro. Greene was one of the first to visit Joseph's wife Emma. From this time his feeble constitution sank down rapidly, and on the 10th of September, 1844, he departed this life, aged 51 years and seven days, having been an incessant laborer in the Kingdom of God twelve years and five months. Bro. Greene was beloved by all his friends and respected by all who knew him. (By his son Evan M. Greene).
