Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Hyde, Janette A.

Hyde, Janette A., a member of the General Board of Relief Societies, was born December 12, 1865, in Spring City, Sanpete county, Utah, the daughter of Abraham Acord and Nancy Frost. Her parents came to Utah from Iowa, in 1863, and went through to California, not having accepted the gospel prior to that time. Her father was of Pennsylvania Dutch descent, the name being Akert; later it was Anglicized and spelled Acord; he was of excellent lineage, and was known throughout Utah in an early day as a successful financier. Her mother, Nancy Frost, was a daughter of a fine scholar, who was of Virginia birth and inheritance. Samuel Buchanan Frost, (the father of Nancy) was in many ways a remarkable student and pioneer, being one of the first judges in the State of Iowa. Joining the Church he removed his family to Utah and settled in Spring City, Sanpete co. just in time to permit the little Janette to be born in Utah. Janette grew up in Spring City, Sanpete county, and from her earliest youth she was a leader in her circle She was a teacher in the Sunday school and mutual improvement association from the time she was twelve years old, always ambitious and a lover of refinement and culture, attended the Brigham Young Academy, taking a course in normal training in that institution, and graduated in 1883 She taught school in Wales, Sanpete co., for one year and one year in Spring City. She was married to Joseph Smith Hyde, a son of the celebrated Apostle Orson Hyde, in the Logan Temple, July 20, 1886, and is the mother of seven children, none of these are dead. Her sons are Joseph Jay, a college graduate and at present the principal of the high school in Panguitch, and Orson Acord, a graduate for the Utah Business College and a fine musician. Her daughters are Romania (the famous violinist and beloved youthful artist in this intermountain region), Golda (a student in the University at present) and Frank, a child of eight years. Brother and Sister Hyde lived in the 22nd Ward, Salt Lake City, for about twenty years. Here Janette's abilities of leadership were recognized at once, and she was made president of the mutual improvement association of the 22nd Ward, holding that office for fifteen years. The family removing to the 33rd Ward in 1913, Sister Hyde acted as president of the mutual improvement association of said Ward for four years. During the time of the great effort made to establish the old gymnasium in the old Social hall, Mrs. Hyde was one of that zealous committee who gathered thousands of dollars to prepare and equip that famous building for a gymnasium under Prof. Maude May Babock, who had recently come from the east. In 1893 she was a member of the Public Committee which acted as a relief committee for the poor and suffering thousands under the administration of Grover Cleveland. Mrs. Hyde generously opened her own home and assisted in preparing food that was given by the merchants of the city to feed the destitute. In later years, she was taken upon the mutual improvement board of the Liberty Stake, and here again, her initiative faculties were brought into active operation. Here, she developed and set in operation a plan to take the working girls from the City Wards, during the summer season into a camp for girls, just outside the city. Sister Hyde planned the work and gave the plans to Mrs. Emily J. Higgs, Fred J. Pack and Hugh J. Cannon, who ably carried out her ideas. A piece of ground was leased from James Godfrey, a summer home was built and arranged for the girls to have from a week to ten days' outing each summer. She, herself, has acted as chaperone for several companies of girls at different periods, since its establishment. This summer camp is still in active operation, and it was the first enterprise of its kind in this State. In March, 1911, Sister Hyde was appointed a member of the General Board of the Relief Societies, and at once she was called upon to take active service on some of the most important committees of this board. Mrs. Julina L. Smith chose her to act upon her committee for Temple clothing, and the splendid success that has attended this committee has demonstrated anew the capacity of women to administer in large affairs, if they are called to exercise their governing faculties outside of the home circle. Sister Hyde was also chosen by Sister Rebecca N. Nibley to assist her in the establishment of the Relief Society home for women and girls located at 36 West North Temple street. When the "Relief Society Bulletin" was under discussion, the name of Mrs. Janette A. Hyde was at once proposed as the business manager of that enterprise. Assisted by Mrs. Amy Brown Lyman, Mrs. Hyde has financed that great undertaking so successfully that it has been practically independent of any assistance from the General Board. In April, 1914, she was chosen as vice-president of the International Congress of Learned Women of the Utah Division. And now, at the close of this year (1914), she has been sustained as the business manager of the new "Relief Society Magazine," an undertaking which will tax all her gifts and mental resources. A course taken by Mrs. Hyde in the year 1905 in Domestic Science has qualified her for that phase of theoretical preparation for home life, while her own delight in outdoor work has made of her a successful gardener in the small plat of ground which lies at the rear of her modest home on 978 East 4th South street. Here, she raises flowers, vegetables and fruits, and has been so successful that she was placed in charge of the Home Gardening Department for women in the "Bulletin," and has made her customary success of this department. Mrs. Hyde is gifted with a beautiful presence, and a refined manner. She is frank and candid in her disposition, but possesses wisdom to temper the keen which make her an ideal counselor. She is beloved as a friend adored as a wife and mother and respected as a member of society everywhere. (-X).
