Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Jørgensen, Sørine Knudson

Jørgensen, Sørine Knudson, wife of Johan G. Jørgensen, was born June 9, 1830, at Jaasund, near Stavanger, Norway. When quite young she married Ole Staalesen, with whom she had five children; one of these died in infancy, while four of them joined the Church and came to Utah. One of her sons (Søren Staalesen) by this first husband worked in the St. George Temple and later while engaged in labor on the Salt Lake Temple he took sick and died. One of the daughters (Anna Marie, became the wife of John F. F. Dorius; another daughter (Amelia) married Nephi Williams, who lives in Emery county. The other son (Olof) was suddenly killed in February, 1897. Sørine joined the Church about the year 1859, and from the beginning of her acquaintance with the "Mormons" she kept an open house for the missionaries and rendered them efficient help on many occasions. When she finally emigrated to Utah in 1863, she assisted a number of persons to emigrate, and she was one of the most liberal donators to a certain fund created for the purpose of erecting a mission building at Osterhausgaden, in Christiania. On her arrival at Florence, Nebraska, she married Johan Gustaf Jørgensen and fitted out several teams and crossed the plains in an independent company in charge of William W. Cluff. During a stampede on echo plains Sister Jørgensen's hired girl was killed. After their arrival in Utah, the family located at Ephraim, where they passed through all the trials and difficulties incident to early pioneer life and Indian troubles. By her second husband Sister Jørgensen became the mother of five children, namely, Johan Caroline, Enoch (who is at present principal of the Jordan High School), Bertha and Heber. Bro. and Sister Jørgensen were among the pioneer settlers of Koosharem, Grass Valley, Sevier co., Utah, in 1878, and for many years Sister Jørgensen with her four children was engaged in dairying at Fish Lake. Throughout her entire life she was active in all matters pertaining to Relief Society work and general social betterment. Respected and beloved she passed to her final rest April 1, 1914, at Ephraim.
