Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Kemp, William

Kemp, William, a veteran Elder in the Church and for many years a resident of St. George, Washington co., Utah, was born in England. He joined the Church in England and labored seven years as a local missionary; emigrated to Utah in 1862, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "William Tapscott," which sailed from England, May 14, 1862, and arrived at New York after a seven weeks' voyage. He crossed the plains in Capt. Horton D. Haight's company and arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 19, 1862. After residing a short time in the Eleventh Ward, Salt Lake City, he went to St. George, in 1864, where he resided until the time of his death which occurred at St. George. For many years Bro. Kemp was chorister in the St. George Ward and died as a High Priest and a faithful member of the Church. Elder Kemp learned the trade of a weaver at Carlton, England, and married when quite young. One evening while he and his wife were out hunting for employment an Elder came to their house, and being hungry and tired he asked for something to eat. The children, who were alone at home, replied that they had nothing in the house to eat and had been without food all day. The Elder remarked: "You shouldn't be hungry with bread lying all around." Securing a light, the Elder and the children began to search the house, and to their great surprise they soon found four loaves of bread upon the loom. The children ate their bread and went to bed rejoicing. On another occasion after Bro. Kemp and wife had arrived in America, they experienced hard times in common with their co-religionists. One evening when Bro. Kemp was returning home, after having hunted all day for work, he heard a man being refused a night's lodging at the house of a neighbor, and when the same stranger a few minutes later met Bro. Kemp and asked him for lodging, he was told that if he would walk a mile with him he could share his bed with him. The stranger accepted the offer, and upon entering Bro. Kemp's house, they engaged in a conversation about gospel principles, on which the visitor seemed to be exceedingly well posted. The stranger also discovered that the family were in very poor circumstances, in fact almost destitute of food. The stranger left the house early the next morning, but about 8 o'clock he came back with a wagon load of rituals and unloaded the same at the house of Bro. Kemp. The mother then made breakfast and as the stranger sat down to eat, he began to pull money out of his pockets, and toss coins on the floor for the children. He seemed to have money in every pocket. After the meal, the man left, but prior to his doing so he was asked to give his name. He simply replied that he just went wherever he was sent, upon which the stranger mysteriously disappeared
