Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Kleinman, Konrad

Kleinman, Konrad, one of the original Utah pioneers of 1847, was born April 19, 1815, at Bergwater, Landau, Germany, the son of Konrad Kleinman and Odelia Wissing. He emigrated to America when quite young and becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized by Dominicus Carter Aug. 26, 1844, in Indiana. When he first joined the Church his mother was very much embittered against him, but having a testimony from the Lord regarding the divinity of "Mormonism" he paid no attention to the ill feeling of his relatives. He migrated to Nauvoo in 1844, and worked on the Temple with his team, hauling rock. He purchased a log house and a lot in Nauvoo, and lived there until he was driven away by the mob. During the exodus in 1846, he went as far as Winter Quarters, where he built a log house, and in the spring of 1847, he was chosen as one of the original pioneers who made the famous journey to G. S. L. valley that year, under Pres. Brigham Young. From the very beginning Bro. Kleinman took an active part in the upbuilding of this western country, and after residing temporarily in Salt Lake City he located at Lehi, Utah co. In 1855-56 he filled a mission to New York and he was called on the Dixie mission in 1861. After residing at St. George and Toquerville, southern Utah, he removed to Mesa, Arizona, but soon returned to St. George, to spend his last day's working in the Temple. There he performed ordinance work for more than 4,000 of his dead relatives. Bro. Kleinman was ordained to the different grades of the Preisthood and was ordained a High Priest as early as 1855, when he was appointed, to act as a counselor to Bishop Pettigrew of the Tenth Ward, Salt Lake City. Later he acted as counselor to O. N. Stewart and Alexander Hunsaker of Mesa, Arizona. In 1839 he married Elizabeth M. Holland, and in 1856 he married Anna Benz and Mary Ann Garner. By these three wives he was the father of thirteen children, nine boys and four girls. Bro. Kleinman was ordained a Patriarch in September, 1891, and died Nov. 12, 1907, at St. George, Utah.
