Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Layton, Oscar T.

Layton, Oscar T., first counselor in the Bishopric of the Thatcher Ward, Graham co., Arizona, was born May 12, 1874, at Kaysville, Davis co., Utah, the son of Christopher Layton and Septemma Simms. The following brief sketch of his life was prepared by himself: "My father was Bishop of Kaysville for seventeen years and counselor in the Stake presidency of the Davis Stake for a number of years. He was then called to Arizona to preside over the St. Joseph Stake at its organization. He held this position until his health was so impaired that he could not attend to his duties. In the fall of 1882, I with my mother came to Arizona to join father. After remaining a few years I returned to Utah and stayed there until after the death of mother. I then returned to Arizona, and at the age of eighteen years I married Lula Lewis, a daughter of one of the Mormon Battalion boys. I have been a teacher in the Sunday school since I was about sixteen years old, and when the religion class work was first begun in the Church, or in St. Joseph Stake, I was set apart as one of the first instructors. In the fall of 1898 I was called to Old Mexico, in the interest of Y. M. M. I. A. work. After returning from Mexico I took up my work in the Sunday school again and also that of Ward teacher. In October, 1899, I left home, agreeable to call, to labor as a missionary in the Colorado mission. For the first six months I worked in the State of Wyoming with the conference president, Elder Chris Peterson. We worked the greater part of the eastern portion of the State, and were quite successful in getting the gospel before the people. I was then called to labor in the eastern part of Colorado, where we met with much indifference. In the early part of the winter of 1900, I worked in the city or Denver, as a canvassing Elder. In January, 1901, I was called to Nebraska to work as conference president. While there I organized a class for the benefit of the Elders who were laboring in Omaha, and set the Relief Society and Sunday school in order. My attention was also directed to the genealogy of the Saints of that conference. I found that labor very difficult, but was able to collect some data in regard to it and sent it in to mission headquarters. My family having been sick most of the time since I left home, I was released July 12, 1902, to return home. I was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as first counselor in the Bishopric of the Thatcher Ward, Nov. 25, 1902. During the administration of the present Bishopric the Ward has built a white sand stone meeting house at a cost of $21,000 and furnished to the amount of $1,300."
