Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Lyman, Amy BrownPPLyman, Amy Brown

Lyman, Amy BrownPPLyman, Amy Brown, Secretary of the General Board of Relief Societies, was born Feb. 7, 1872, in Pleasant Grove, Utah co., Utah, the daughter of John Brown. Her father was a pioneer of sturdy character and unfaltering loyalty to the gospel of Jesus Christ. He was one of the original Utah pioneers, and he and Orson Pratt were the first of this band to catch a glimpse of the Great Salt Lake Valley. With a few companions, John Brown ascended the Twin Peaks soon after this early entrance into the valley. They were the first pioneers and probably the first white men who ever planted their feet on these peaks. He was known and dearly beloved by the early settlers of Utah, and held many positions of prominence and trust. He was unusually well read, and he put forth, during the whole of his lifetime, every possible effort to induce young people to go to school. Amy Brown had the good fortune also to be the granddaughter on her mother's side of Geo. Zimmerman, who was a graduate of a German university, and a linguist of rare ability. She was very fortunate to come from parents both of whom had been trained in such an educational atmosphere, and it is not surprising, therefore, that as a result she has exhibited unusual interest and talent in education work. There were twenty-five children in this famous old Utah family, nine sons and sixteen daughters. From the public schools of Pleasant Grove the subject of this sketch went to the Brigham Young University at Provo, and was graduated with the class of 1890, the last normal class to receive personal instruction from the late Dr. Karl G. Maeser. After graduation Miss Brown was employed four years as a teacher in the training school of the Brigham Young University. She was one of the first students trained under the direction of Prof. Maud May Babcock in physical education. She afterwards taught this subject, as well as domestic art, in the Brigham Young University. During the last year of her stay in that institution, although very young, she discharged the duties of matron with such dignity and modest self-control as to win the respect and loyal support of every girl in the school. The marked success with which she served as teacher in the public schools of Salt Lake City during the next two years, under the superintendency of Dr. J. F. Millspaugh, is but another evidence of the unusual talent which she possesses. After leaving the school room as a teacher Miss Brown took special courses in English and History both in the University of Utah and also in the University of Chicago. Miss Brown was married to Richard R. Lyman, son of President Francis M. Lyman, in the Salt Lake Temple by President Joseph F. Smith, Sept. 9, 1896. Two children have been born of this union, namely, Wendel Brown Lyman (born Dec. 18, 1897, in Salt Lake City) and Margaret (born Sept. 15, 1913, in Ithaca, New York). Sister Lyman has traveled all over the Eastern centers and has visited the treasures of art and information to be found in the great cities in this country. She spent one summer in Chicago and three years in Ithaca, New York, while her husband was pursuing graduate studies, for which he was granted the degrees of Master of Civil Engineering and Doctor of Philosophy by the graduate faculty of Cornell University. Sister Lyman has been a devoted worker in the various Church organizations, especially as a teacher in the mutual improvement associations and Sunday schools. She was elected a member of the General Board of the Relief Society, Oct. 5, 1909, and was made assistant secretary May 25, 1911. Upon the resignation of Mrs. Olive D. Christensen in August, 1913, she was appointed General Secretary of the Society. In addition to her work as secretary, Sister Lyman has served as assistant to Mrs. Janette A. Hyde, business manager of the "Relief Society Bulletin." She also prepared the literary studies for this publication. Sister Lyman is spontaneous and sparkling in spirit and speech. Quick spoken she is, but not with the quick temper that often accompany this characteristic; yet there is a snap attached to the sparkle which is not without its salutatory results upon her friends. With her artistic temperament and love of the beautiful, she would perhaps be somewhat worldly, if it were not for the saving grace of the gospel, which is a part of her very life. She is attractive, with abundant brown hair and soft liquid brown eyes, and very winsome indeed. With it all she makes hosts of friends and succeeds in keeping attached to herself most of those whom she wins. She possesses considerable executive ability which is manifested in the excellent housekeeping and home-making qualities so necessary to a wife and mother which she possesses and also in the diligence and dispatch with which she carries forward the labors of her office of General Secretary. She is a favorite with all who know her. Her possibilities for good lie largely in the future, judging from what the achievements of her past promise. Among the many students who were taught and trained by the master mind of Dr. Karl G. Maeser few, if any, have made more enviable records in the school room than has Sister Amy Brown Lyman. (-X)
