Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

McCune, Elizabeth Ann Claridge

McCune, Elizabeth Ann Claridge, a member of the General Board of the Relief Societies, was born Feb. 19, 1852, at Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, England, the daughter of Samuel Claridge and Charlotte Joy. She was an infant of eleven months when her parents, who had become Latter-day Saints, emigrated to America. The Claridge's were comfortably situated, but like many other families of the same religious faith, they sacrificed present conditions and future prospects in the old world and underwent the toils and privations incident to the settlement and building up of a new country, in order to be loyal to their convictions. They came directly to Utah, arriving here in the fall of 1853, and settled at Nephi, Juab co. A few years later Samuel Claridge was called on a colonization mission to the Muddy. This proved a very trying and hazardous experience, and the family lost the accumulations of years, when the settlements on the Muddy were finally broken up in 1871. While her father's family resided on the Muddy, Sister Elizabeth returned to Nephi and married Alfred McCune. While her husband was railroading in Colorado she maintained her residence at Nephi, but in 1885 she and her children went to Montana, where Mr. McCune was then engaged in his large wood contract. After a residence of three years in that part of the country, they returned to Utah, taking up their residence in Salt Lake City. Sister McCune became a regular worker in the Salt Lake Temple, when that sacred edifice was finished and dedicated in 1893, and she became prominent among the women of the Church. She was placed on the general board of the Y. L. M. M. I. A., as an aid to Pres. Elmina S. Taylor. Her chief delight has ever been in attending to the duties imposed by her religion. Though wealthy and surrounded with luxury, she has never forgotten, and is proud to remember, when the was a poor girl, one of a family who was struggling for a bare existence. In February, 1897, the McCunes started on an extended tour of Europe, visiting Great Britain, France and Italy. Sister McCune spent much of her time in the British Mission, where her son Raymond and her nephew, George W. McCune, were then laboring as missionaries. In England the McCunes located at Eastbourne, a fashionable watering place, leasing an elegant residence belonging to a gentleman who was traveling; the Elders laboring in those parts of England were invited to make Eastbourne their home. Sister McCune and her eldest daughter, Fay, would often take part in the outdoor meetings held by the Mormon missionaries. Sister McCune and her daughter attended the Queen's Jubilee in London, and at a conference of the saints held in that city Sister McCune bore a powerful testimony of the truth of "Mormonism" to a very large congregation, in which she depicted particularly the condition of woman in Utah, thus refuting successfully a number of falsehoods which had been circulated in Great Britain concerning the condition of women generally among the "Mormons." During her stay at Eastbourne Sister McCune was instrumental in converting two of her English relatives to "Mormonism." A year of traveling and sight-seeing made the McCunes all long for home and in March, 1898, they returned to, Salt Lake City. The next year Sister McCune made another trip to Europe to attend the International Congress of Women held in London in 1899. While in London she was voted in as a patron of the I. C. W. and at the close of its sessions went with the other members to Windsor Castle, where they were entertained by Queen Victoria. In 1903, Sister McCune and three children accompanied her husband, to Peru, South America, remaining there nearly a year. Sister McCune is still active in women's work, and no lady is more highly or more worthily esteemed. Though the wife of a rich mining man, she is a zealous Latter-day Saint. She is also a faithful and devoted wife, who has shared with her life's partner poverty and hardship as she now shares with him prosperity and wealth. Through her influence her husband gave $5,000 to the Salt Lake Temple, when that magnificent edifice was being pushed to completion. This is only one of the many munificent donations made by the McCunes to various worthy causes. Sister McCune has always been deeply interested in Temple work, and has not only been a worker in the Salt Lake Temple for twenty years, but has consistently and faithfully sought after her own kindred dead. Her father, Patriarch Samuel Claridge, is a noble worker in this cause and spends the evening or his life in recording all the information he can possibly secure into family records for Temple use. The work is done by his daughter, Sister McCune, in the Salt Lake Temple. She has been for a number of years chairman of the Women's Committee for the Genealogical Society of Utah, and she and her beloved friend, Mrs. Susa Young Gates, have traveled over the Church, speaking on the subject of genealogy and Temple work, and teaching classes in this difficult art. She is chairman of the committee on Temple Work and Genealogy in the General Board of the Relief Societies, and gives to this work her deepest affections, and her most ardent attention. In May, 1914, Mrs. McCune went with Mrs. Susa Young Gates, Mrs. Alice K. Smith and other ladies, to attend the International Council of Women at Rome. With Mrs. Gates, she devoted much of the time of this European trip in searching out genealogical conditions in England, Germany, and other parts of Europe. After the other ladies left for Utah in June, Mrs. McCune remained for some time at Deseret, in London, joining Mrs. Stewart Eccles in the beautiful work of tracting from house to house in the neighborhood of the mission headquarters. Mrs. McCune is a clear, oftentimes witty and eloquent speaker-simple, yet vivid in her illustrations; she possesses a keen sense of humor, and has a remarkable gift of story telling. She is exceedingly generous and charitable, faithful to her friends, loyal to her family and is, above all, an Isrealite in whom there is no guile. "Of such are the Kingdom of Heaven." (-X)
