Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Mortensen, Johan Peter

Mortensen, Johan Peter, an active Elder in the Second Ward, Salt Lake City, was born April 23, 1833, in Høstervang, Skanderborg amt, Denmark, the son of Morten Jensen and Johanne Drapis. He was baptized in May, 1859, by Peter C. Geertsen, and emigrated to Utah in 1862. Soon after his arrival in Utah, he settled temporarily at Paris, Idaho, thus becoming one of the first settlers in Bear Lake Valley. In 1864 he removed to Salt Lake City, where he resided during most of his subsequent life, though he also resided for a short period of time at Logan (Utah), the Snake river country (Idaho), and Big Cottonwood (Utah). In 1877, responding to a call from the Church authorities, he went on a mission to the States, laboring principally in Iowa, Nebraska, Dakota and Minnesota. In 1886-88 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, laboring in the Aarhus conference. He filled a second mission to Scandinavia in 1899. At home he was for many years an active Ward teacher and also served for a number of years as counselor to Anders W. Winberg, in the presidency of the Scandinavian meetings in Salt Lake City. He was a plasterer by trade and worked considerably on the Manti, the St. George and the Logan Temples. Elder Mortensen, during his life, married four wives, namely, Eva Rasmussen, Caroline Rasmussen, Anna Hilgreen and Christine Sørensen. By these wives he became the father of eleven children, namely, two with the first wife, two with the second wife and seven with the fourth wife. He was arrested for unlawful cohabitation for which he served six months in the Utah penitentiary in 1887. Bro. Mortenson was an enterprising citizen and worked himself up from comparative poverty to quite a degree of affluence. He built the so called Alpine Avenue in the Second Ward and Mortensen's Court in the Eighth Ward, and was considered well off financially when he met with an accident in Salt Lake City which cost him his life Sept. 23, 1911.
