Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 2 ( 1914)

Nielsen, Charles M.

Nielsen, Charles M., an active Elder of the Forest Dale Ward, Salt Salt Lake co., Utah, was born Jan. 26, 1856, in Christiania, Norway, the son of Christopher Nielsen and March Olafsen. He was baptized March 2, 1872, by Jørgen Larsen, in Christiania, and two months later ordained to the lesser Priesthood, and appointed as a home missionary to distribute tracts on Sundays. In 1873, he was ordained a Priest and appointed to labor as a missionary in the Arendal branch; later the same year he was ordained an Elder by Oluf J. Anderson. In 1874, he became president of the Arendal branch. Later he labored in the Drammen branch and still later presided over the Odalen branch: in the latter place he baptized a Baptist minister and his family. He emigrated to Utah in 1816, arriving in Salt Lake City July 18, 1876. In 1884-1885, he filled a mission to the Northwestern States where he labored one winter and two summers. He baptized eleven persons and held a great number of meetings in the States of Minnesota and Wisconsin. After his return he was ordained a Seventy by Homer Duncan. Commencing with 1890 he labored, as a home missionary in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion for several years. After studying law for nearly four years in a law office and attending evening law school, he was admitted to the bar Jan. 18, 1895, as an attorney. One year later he was admitted to practice before the U. S. Supreme court. He served as justice of the peace in Salt Lake City four years. He acted as a counselor in the presidency of the Scandinavian meetings in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion a number of years until he moved to Forest Dale in the year 1911. There he bought a home, and was soon afterwards appointed to preside over the Scandinavian meetings in the Granite Stake, which position he held till March, 1912, when he left home to fill a mission to Scandinavia, and he presided two years over the Christiania conference. During his presidency in Christiania, 139 persons were added to the Church by baptism. He returned home in 1914, and is now a home missionary in the Granite Stake.
