Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Preface

This book was written primarily for the benefit of members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the hope that it will reaffirm for them the truth that Joseph Smith, the first prophet of the Church, received revelation from God. For those not of this Church, it is sincerely hoped that it will be the means of engendering interest in the teachings of that Church.

The principal function of a prophet of God is to give direction to solving the problems of the day through revelation, past and present. This function is demonstrated in this book. Prophecy is one of the subordinate functions of the prophet, and fulfilled prophecy is one of the supporting evidences to substantiate the divine calling of the prophet. (Deut. 18:21-22). Judged by this criterion, Joseph Smith is a prophet. It is literally true that the books of scripture which have come into existence through his divine calling abound with the prophetic element.

During many years of teaching the Doctrine and Covenants, a standard work of the Church, I have been impressed with the validity of the following verses from the Lord's "Preface" to that volume:

"Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled.

"What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same.

"For behold, and lo, the Lord is God, and the Spirit beareth record, and the record is true, and the truth abideth forever and ever. Amen." (D&C 1:37-39).

Prophecies and promises of the Lord through his servant Joseph Smith are numerous in the Doctrine and Covenants. Elder John A. Widtsoe, an apostle of the dispensation, counted "nearly eleven hundred statements which may be classed as prophecies of the future." (Joseph Smith, p. 277).

In this book I have used the following definitions in classifying the prophecies and prophetic promises: (a) a prophecy is a statement, without reservation, about the future, (b) a prophetic promise is conditional; that is, if a certain condition exists, then a given result will follow. The prophetic element in the inspired promise is as certain of fulfillment as is the prophecy. A prophetic promise discussed in this book is: "But learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come." (D&C 59:23). An example of a prophecy in the Doctrine and Covenants is Section 87, the revelation predicting the American Civil War and other wars.

In this volume, one hundred and five prophecies and prophetic promises make up the fifty subjects discussed. They have been selected at random with no thought of centralizing them into a given period or series of sections. The purpose of this book is to bring to the reader, from one facet—prophecy—the truth that the Doctrine and Covenants is the word of the Lord. There is no attempt to discuss each subject exhaustively, for books could be written on many of them, but to present sufficient facts to give an understanding of the truth expressed by the Lord that "the prophecies and promises which are in them [revelations] shall all be fulfilled."

I plan to publish other volumes on this subject as time allows.

I am indebted to my wife, Alberta, for her inspiration and for the years of devotion shown to me and especially at this time for her helpful suggestions in editing the manuscript.

Appreciation is also expressed to Mary Lynn Hansgen, graduate research assistant, for arranging the footnotes and bibliography, and also to Kay Rice, secretary, for carefully seeing the manuscript to completion.

There is a spirit in the Doctrine and Covenants which one would expect in a book of scripture. The revelations in that book are true, for they were received from God by and through the instrumentality of the Holy Ghost. This knowledge may be received by every person who sincerely desires to obtain that witness. As the devout member of the Church studies these revelations, darkness is dispelled and the light of understanding grows brighter and brighter.

Roy W. Doxey

Brigham Young University

Provo, Utah

July 1969
