Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 1

"And the Voice of Warning Shall Be unto All People . . ." (D&C 1:2-5)

For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed.

And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days.

And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them. [^1]

Background of the revelation

After a long period of apostasy from the true gospel and Church, revealed and organized by Jesus Christ in the meridian dispensation, the Lord raised up Joseph Smith to restore the fulness of the gospel and organize his church for the last time. A part of that restoration is included in the revelations received by the Prophet, and recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants is the Lord's "Preface" to the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. It was received in the conference of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints held on November 1, 1831. It was decided to print the compilation of revelations prepared for publication by the Prophet Joseph Smith under the title "A Book of Commandments."

Background of the prophecy

Inasmuch as the verses comprising this prophecy are introduced by verse 1, that verse follows: "Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say; Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together." [^2]

Contents of the prophecy

(1) Every person will hear the voice of the Lord. (2) The rebellious shall have their iniquities and secret acts revealed. (3) The Lord's warning will go forth by his disciples, who will deliver their message.

Fulfillment of the prophecy

Because of the importance of the gospel message for the salvation of those who will accept it, the Lord, in this prophecy, says that it is for all men, none excepted. In subsequent revelations it is made known that only those of accountability are responsible for their acts; therefore, little children and the mentally retarded are without sin and under no condemnation. [^3] The Book of Mormon is emphatic in denouncing the doctrine of infant baptism, believed by some as necessary for their salvation. [^4]

"Every person" in this prophecy means the dead as well as the living. Implicit in the doctrine of salvation of the dead, not fully revealed to the Prophet in 1831, is the fact that men will hear the gospel and have an opportunity to accept it in the spirit world. As the prophecy says, the voice of the Lord is unto all men that they might see, hear, and have their hearts be penetrated. The reasonableness of the doctrine and the justice of God in this matter is given by President Wilford Woodruff in these words:

"God is no respecter of persons; he will not give privileges to one generation and withhold them from another; and the whole human family, from father Adam down to our day, have got to have the privilege, somewhere, of hearing the gospel of Christ; and the generations that have passed and gone without hearing that gospel in its fulness, power and glory, will never be held responsible by God for not obeying it. Neither will he bring them under condemnation for rejecting a law they never saw or understood; and if they live up to the light they had they are justified so far, and they have to be preached to in the spirit world. But nobody will baptize them there, and somebody has got to administer for them by proxy here in the flesh, that they may be judged according to men in the flesh and have part in the first resurrection." [^5]

That the dead are interested in their salvation as they learn of the fulness of the gospel in the spirit world is attested in a revelation received by President Wilford Woodruff. He testifies that the spirits of the signers of the Declaration of Independence gathered around him and requested that the temple ordinances in their behalf be performed. He said that they were baptized for and also most of the presidents of the United States and other eminent people. [^6]

Another president of the Church received a vision of the spirit world when the Savior left his body in death and preached the gospel to the righteous in that realm. There, President Joseph F. Smith, saw the prophets gathered together as they were commanded to open the door of the prison house of the spirit world for the preaching of the gospel to those who had not received the opportunity on the earth. This revelation is known as the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead. [^7]

The unique missionary system of the Church gives opportunity to the young men and women of the Church who freely spend their time, talents and means (usually that of their parents) for a two-year period of missionary work in eighty-three missions of the Church. The living are hearing the word of the Lord from these approximately 12,000 missionaries. But other means are employed, such as, radio, television, the printed word in newspapers, brochures, pamphlets, magazines, and books. All who do not have the chance of learning of the gospel in this life, as said, will receive it eventually.

The day will come when those who rebel against the word of the Lord and continue in their sins will be pierced with sorrow. The Doctrine and Covenants Commentary refers to the "rebellious" in this prophecy as those who reject the everlasting gospel. Then, the following is given: "When the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was established, this position was made clear to all the world. When the light comes, they can no longer hide their errors, their iniquities, their secret acts. The light reveals these things. That is the true cause of the enmity toward the Church. They want the light extinguished. It hurts them." [^8]

When a Latter-day Saints missionary teaches someone the gospel, he is delivering the warning message. It is unnecessary for the servant of the Lord to say "I warn you, if you do not accept the gospel," but the rejection of salvation principles and ordinances brings eventual deep regret because of the loss of what might have been. This thought was expressed by President Joseph F. Smith as follows:

". . . there are many blessings that result from obeying the ordinances of the gospel, and acknowledging the Priesthood authorized of the Father and restored to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that cannot be obtained until the person is willing to comply with the ordinances and keep the commandments revealed in our day for the salvation of mankind. The true searcher will see and understand this truth and act upon it, either in this world or in the world to come, and not until then, of course, may he claim the blessings, and if he neglects to accept the laws in this world, knowing them to be true, it is reasonable to suppose that disadvantages will result that will cause him deep regret." [^9]

There is another aspect of the voice of warning. It is the message of frightful and calamitous events which will engulf the wicked in the last days. [^10] Prior to and at the second coming of Christ the world will be racked with fire, earthquake, pestilence, flood, war, and desolation. (See "When the Cup of Their Iniquity Is Full"—D&C 101:10-12). The seriousness of this truth was indicated by President Woodruff when he said: "Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings, are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have the right to be shielded from these judgments." [^11]

The record of more than one hundred and thirty-five years since the Church was organized testifies that no obstacle has been too great to keep the servants of the Lord from delivering their message. On the other hand, they have suffered from men and the elements in discharging their duty. There have been some occasions when a door has been closed to them because of enmity, misrepresentation, and prejudice. Also, some countries have excluded their presence for a time. Eventually, the gospel door has been or will be opened to them. Even war has opened opportunities for Latter-day Saint servicemen to plant gospel seeds among their fellow servicemen as well as among the natives where they have served.

Application of the prophecy

With the certainty of sorrow for lost opportunities, even Latter-day Saints have reason for concern when they do not keep the covenants they have made with the Lord. (See "Zion Shall Escape If . . ."—D&C 97:22-28). President Woodruff said: "No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury." [^12]

Certainly, those who have the privilege of learning of the restoration of God's kingdom upon the earth and who do not follow its teachings, will find deep regret by their disobedience. No one should feel that because there is a doctrine of salvation of the dead that he can wait until he enters the spirit world to receive the fulness of the gospel. This opportunity is for those who died without a knowledge of the gospel. [^13]

To the member of the Church, President Woodruff continued by saying: "Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things. Remember this, and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we'll have protection, and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and in safety." [^14]

"And the Voice of Warning Shall Be unto All People . . ." (D&C 1:2-5)

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 1:12-16.
[^2] Joseph Smith 2:19.
[^3] Exodus 20:3.
[^4] Conference Report, October 1930, p. 71, 73.
[^5] 3 Nephi 9:13.
[^6] Conference Report, September 1961, pp. 30-34.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Conference Report, October 1930, p. 73.
[^9] D&C. 45:57.
[^10] Ibid., v. 39.
[^11] 11. The Young Women's Journal, Salt Lake City, Utah, Vol. 5, p. 512.
[^12] 12. Ibid., p. 513.
[^13] 13. D&C 128:5.
[^14] 14. The Young Women's Journal, Vol. 5, p. 513.
