Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 2

"Prepare Ye . . . for the Lord Is Nigh . . ." (D&C 1:12-16)

Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh;

And the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth.

And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people;

For they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant;

They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall. [^1]

Background of the revelation

By November 1831, the compilation of revelations brought together by the Prophet Joseph Smith was ready for submission to a conference of the Church. Accordingly, the conference authorized that it be printed under the title, "A Book of Commandments". This title of the compilation was given in the revelation known as the Lord's "Preface," the introduction to his revelations.

Background of the prophecy

Section 1 begins with a proclamation to all people that the message of the dispensation is for all men, even the dead who had never heard the fulness of the gospel. The rejection of the Lord's servants will bring sorrow. What is decreed in the revelations will be fulfilled. The day will come when the wrath of God is poured out upon the wicked.

Contents of the prophecy

(1) Preparation is necessary for the Lord's coming. (2) The arm, or power of the Lord, will be revealed in that those who reject the Lord's servants will be cut off from among the people. (3) The effects of straying away from the gospel in the past is felt in the world, for men do not seek righteousness, but walk after their own gods. (4) The gods or idols which men worship shall perish, as did ancient Babylon.

Fulfillment of the prophecy

A major error in the "Christian" creeds of Joseph Smith's day was the true knowledge of God. God, on the other hand, is personal having a body of flesh and bones, an immortal exalted man, not a spirit which is present throughout the universe. When men flaunt God's laws by ignoring their Creator and Father, his anger is kindled against them. Not only the doctrine of God was changed in the great apostasy, but all the ordinances and teachings of the gospel were reduced to error. Because of this the Savior told Joseph Smith that "all their creeds were an abomination in his sight . . ." [^2] This condition has left men with so much error that the ideas of the creeds have lost their appeal. The loss of the Priesthood, the directing power of the Church, and continuous revelation, the means by which the Church was kept alive, progressive, and able to meet the problems of the day, emasculated the early church.

The consequent loss of faith in God has given the Adversary a hold upon the minds and hearts of men to the extent that they do not seek to establish God's righteousness, but their own pleasures and desires.

Elder James E. Talmage in 1930 evaluated the religious world as follows:

"The great trouble with the world today, as I understand it, is that it has become idolatrous. We read of idolatry and think of it as a practice or a series of practices in the past. This is an idolatrous generation, defying the commandment written by the finger of God—'Thou shalt have no other Gods before me', [^3] and an idolatrous generation is an adulterous generation. . . . Men are praising the gods of silver and of gold and of all the other valuable commodities that make up wealth, and the God in whose hand their breath is and whose are all their ways they will not recognize. Do you wonder that wickedness and crime have increased to terrifying proportions under those conditions?" [^4]

Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Council of the Twelve, gave some observations on conditions in a world of unrest and a world which had become more carnal:

"Our world is in turmoil. It is aging toward senility. It is very ill. . . .

"What is this illness? Its symptoms are manifest in every corner of the globe. They are found among men in high places, in hut and mansion. Its symptoms are carelessness, casualness, covetousness, slothfulness, selfishness, dishonesty, disobedience, immorality, uncleanness, unfaithfulness, and ungodliness. . . .

"It seems rather than fast and pray, we prefer to gorge ourselves, at the banquet tables and drink cocktails. Instead of disciplining ourselves, we yield to urges and carnal desires. Numerous billions we spend on liquor and tobacco. A Sabbath show or a game or a race replaces solemn worship. Numerous mothers prefer the added luxuries of two incomes to the satisfaction of seeing children grow up in the fear of God. Men golf and boat and hunt and fish rather than to solemnize the Sabbath. Old man rationalization is with us. Because we are not vicious enough to be confined in penitentiaries, we rationalize that we are pretty good people; that we are not doing so badly. The masses of the people are much like those who escaped destruction in the ancient days of this continent.

The Lord said to them:

"'O all ye that are spared because ye were more righteous than they [the slain ones], will ye not now return unto me, and repent of your sins, and be converted, that I may heal you?' [^5]" [^6]

Each man walks after the image of his own god. Whenever one places anything, material wealth, fashion, recreation, education, sports, above the purpose for which he is in this life that thing becomes his god.

Application of the prophecy

Unless there was an apostasy from gospel principles, there would be no reason for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Latter-day Saints know that a comparison of the "Christian" creeds with the Bible shows that changes from the Church organized by Jesus Christ have been made. He also knows that with the additional books of scripture in his Church—Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price—that the consistency of those books with the Bible, as well as the reasonableness of the doctrines, evidence the truth that a great apostasy made necessary a restoration of the true Gospel.

Latter-day Saints may be assured of this statement from Elder Kimball:

"Our God rules in the heavens. He lives. He loves. He desires the happiness and well being of all his children. He has a prophet on the earth today who receives his revelations. He is a prophet to all the world. He has on numerous occasions outlined the cure for all international as well as local ills. The diagnosis is sure, and the remedy certain. Today's prophet stands in the same position between God and the people as did Isaiah, Samuel, and even Moses who gave to the world the Ten Commandments." [^7]

Knowing that God lives and his prophet is here, Latter-day Saints may well receive these questions from Elder Talmage:

"Are we worshipping the true and living God, or are we going idolatrously after the gods of gold and silver, of iron and wood, and brass, diamonds and other idols of wealth? Are we worshipping our farms, our cattle and sheep? Who is our God? To whom are we yielding homage, allegiance and worship? Not worship by means of words only, in ritualistic form, but worship in action, devotion, and sacrificial service." [^8]

As the days draw nearer to the second coming of the Lord, the need to be prepared should be evermost in the hearts of the covenant people. The parable will be fulfilled concerning the ten virgins:

"For they are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived-verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day." [^9]

"And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man." [^10]

"Prepare Ye . . . for the Lord is Nigh . . ." (D&C 1:12-16)

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 1:31-33.
[^2] D&C 50:23-24.
[^3] D&C 88:67.
[^4] Ibid., vs. 21-22.
[^5] Ibid., vs. 63-65.
[^6] Mormon 9:1-5; D&C 67:10-13.
[^7] Moses 1:39.
[^8] 2 Nephi 31:17-18.
[^9] Ibid., vs. 19-21.
[^10] I John 2:8.
