Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 5

". . . By the Hand of Elijah the Prophet" (D&C 2:1-3).

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers.

If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. [^1]

Background of the revelation

On the night of September 21-22, 1823, Moroni, an ancient Nephite prophet and custodian of the Book of Mormon plates and a resurrected being, instructed Joseph Smith in events which were shortly to come to pass. Among these events was the one found in Section 2 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Background of the prophecy

The last two verses of the Old Testament are a prophecy given by Malachi about Elijah the Old Testament prophet who lived about 900 B.C. [^2] Differences between this prophecy and the one given by Moroni are noted below.

Contents of the prophecy

(1) The Priesthood was to be restored by Elijah before the second coming of Christ. (2) By this restoration, the promises made to the fathers would be planted in the hearts of their children. (3) The children would, therefore, have their hearts turned to their fathers. (4) If this prophecy were not fulfilled, the earth would be wasted at the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

Analysis of the prophecy

Whereas Malachi referred to the coming of Elijah, Moroni said that Elijah would reveal the Priesthood. This restoration would take place in the last days, for it would be before the great and dreadful day of the Lord when judgments and calamities would visit the earth. (See "The Wars That Will Shortly Come To Pass; Part II—Conditions After the American Civil War—D&C 87:4-8;" "When the Cup Of Their Iniquity Is Full"—D&C 101:10-12).

Malachi recorded that if his prophecy were not fulfilled, the earth would be cursed. Moroni said that this curse would be the utter wasting of the earth at the Savior's coming.

As recorded in Malachi the heart of the fathers would be turned to the children and the heart of the children would be turned to the fathers. The work of salvation of the dead is implied in this statement, if one understands the fathers to be dead and the children to be living. The modern rendition says that the promises made to the fathers would be planted in the hearts of the children who would have their hearts turned to their fathers.

Two significant things would transpire according to the prophets: (1) Elijah would visit the earth in the last days to restore Priesthood. (2) The purpose of this restoration would be to turn the hearts of the living (children) toward their fathers (dead).

Fulfillment of the prophecy

On Sunday, April 3, 1836, in the Kirtland (Ohio) Temple, which had been recently dedicated, four personages appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, one of whom was Elijah the ancient prophet. This is the record of that event:

"After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

"Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord comes.

"To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

"Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors." [^3]

Although Oliver Cowdery was excommunicated from the Church and later returned, he did not deny his testimony of the visit of angelic beings to him and the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Prophet went to his death as a witness of the restoration of the gospel. In a powerful testimony of his acquaintance with the Prophet, Lorenzo Snow, said:

"I knew him to be a man of God, full of the spirit of his calling—a man whose integrity could not be disputed, and who was honest in all his endeavors. No one that was as intimately acquainted with him as I was could kind any fault with him, so far as his moral character was concerned. As to the second individual here that bears this last testimony, Oliver Cowdery, I was partially acquainted with him. I heard him preach, and talked with him; and while he was engaged in promulgating the principles of the religion which he espoused, the same that you and I have espoused, no fault could be found with him. At the time he was a good man, and always bore a faithful testimony to these things which God had plainly manifested to him." [^4]

Two events, one on April 3, 1836, and the other has been occurring since that day, evidence the fulfillment of this prophecy. First, the Jewish people have looked forward to the coming of Elijah as promised by Malachi. In fact, each year in the spring, the Paschal Feast is observed in orthodox Jewish homes at which time a door is opened that Elijah might come in and sit at that feast. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith said:

"It was, I am informed, on the third day of April, 1836, that the Jews, in their homes at the Paschal Feast, opened their doors for Elijah to enter. On that very day Elijah did enter—not in the home of the Jews to partake of the Passover with them, but he appeared in the House of the Lord, erected to his name and received by the Lord in Kirtland, and there bestowed his keys to bring to pass the very things for which these Jews, assembled in their homes, were seeking. [^5]

The second event is the organization of genealogical societies in various parts of the world. Before 1836, there were no organizations gathering records of the dead. But, in 1837, Great Britain made it necessary to preserve the records of the dead. In the United States in 1844, the New England Historical and Genealogical Society was organized, and in 1869 the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society was organized in New York City. Other organizations having a similar purpose came into existence. Also, by 1836, only fewer than 200 family histories were published. [^6]

The Priesthood powers restored by Elijah were the sealing powers by which all ordinances might be validated in heaven as they are performed upon the earth. [^7] Although in 1829, the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods were restored to perform salvation ordinances, it was necessary that Elijah restore the sealing and binding powers.

The "spirit of Elijah" is permeating the hearts of members and non-members of the Church of Jesus Christ to perform a search for the records of their kindred dead, thus the promises made to the fathers before this earth was formed are being fulfilled in the works of their living children. One of the largest, if not the largest, collections of genealogical data has been gathered for the use of Latter-day Saints by the Genealogical Society of the Church in Salt Lake City, Utah—another evidence of the return of Elijah to the earth. As important as this fact is, more important is the fact that the work of performing ordinances in behalf of the dead is a continuing labor in the temples of the Lord. During 1968 more than six million ordinances were performed in behalf of the dead in 13 temples.

Application of this prophecy

Because Elijah restored the Priesthood and the work thus inaugurated is continuing in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the earth will not be utterly wasted at the second coming of Christ. Despite atomic or hydrogen bombs and other destructive weapons, the inhabitants of the earth will not be destroyed, although the calamities of the last days will take a terrible toll.

Premortally, the sons and daughters of God committed themselves to perform a work for their kindred dead which was not possible by their progenitors because they did not have the opportunity to hear the gospel while on the earth. [^8] By covenant commitment in baptism, the member of the Church is under the responsibility of performing the necessary genealogical research for his kindred dead and then having the salvation ordinances performed in a temple in their behalf. Without the performance of this necessary work neither the dead nor the living can be perfected. [^9] The work of salvation of the dead is so vast that in 1844 the Prophet said the following: "The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead, and gather together their living relatives, that they may be saved also, before the earth will be smitten and the consumption decreed falls upon the world." [^10] The consumption decreed is apparently the one mentioned in the revelation on wars where many devastating conditions will exist "until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations." [^11] (See "The Wars That Will Shortly Come To Pass—Part II—Conditions After the American Civil War. D&C 87:4-8") With moral and political conditions worsening in the world, the prophecies concerning the last days are being fulfilled. It, therefore, behooves members of the Church to look to their responsibility in saving their dead.

". . . By the Hand of Elijah the Prophet: (D&C 2:1-3)

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 4:1.
[^2] Ibid., 6:1; 11:1; 12:1; 14:1.
[^3] Isaiah 29:13-14.
[^4] Juvenile Instructor, August 1928, p. 431.
[^5] Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest, pp. 132-133.
[^6] Moroni 10:3-5.
[^7] Ibid., v 7.
[^8] Conference Report, April 1952, p. 34.
[^9] D&C 49:25; 1:30.
[^10] New York Times, November 5, 1937.
[^11] Conference Report, October 1921, p. 109.
