Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 6

". . . A Marvelous Work Is About to Come Forth . . ." (D&C 4:1; 6:1; 11:1; 12:1; 14:1)

Now behold, a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men. [^1]

A great and marvelous work is about to come forth unto the children of men. [^2]

Background of the revelations

The five revelations in which this prophecy appears were given for the benefit of individuals in this order: Joseph Smith, Sen.; Oliver Cowdery; Hyrum Smith; Joseph Knight, Sen.; and David Whitmer. The period of time involved was from February to June 1829. Of these individuals Joseph Smith, Sen. was the father of Joseph Smith, and Hyrum Smith was his older brother.

Background of the prophecies

In each case the prophecy opens the revelation. The subject matter of these revelations is: Section 4—qualifications of those who labor in the ministry; Section 6—Oliver Cowdery had just met Joseph Smith and received by this revelation knowledge that the work in which Joseph was engaged was of God; Section 11—Hyrum's desire to engage in the ministry was to come later, but he was always to judge righteously by the Holy Spirit, and never reject the principle of revelation; Section 12—Those who have desires to build Zion may enter into the work; Section 14—the important message is given that Zion should be established, and eternal life is the greatest gift God bestows upon his children.

Contents of the prophecies

A marvelous work is to come forth.

Analysis of the prophecies

The word "marvelous" means that which causes wonder and astonishment; something that is extraordinary; in fact, so extraordinary as to be improbable, incredible, or miraculous.

There are probably two events or matters foretold in these prophecies: (1) the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and, (2) the coming forth of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, custodian of the Priesthood and the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Joseph Smith had beheld the Father and the Son, Jesus Christ, received the several visits by the Angel Moroni, and had received the plates from which was to come the Book of Mormon. Also, the Aaronic Priesthood was restored by John the Baptist, and the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored in June 1829, the same month in which the revelation to David Whitmer was received. The Book of Mormon was yet to be printed, and the Church was not organized.

Fulfillment of the prophecies

The Book of Mormon plates were translated between April and July 1829, during the time when four of the five revelations carrying this prophecy were received; consequently, the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is particularly mentioned as the marvelous work which was about to come forth to the children of men. This fact is further suggested by the chapter in the book of Isaiah to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon in the last days because of the religious apostasy then existing. Isaiah prophesied:

"Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

"Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." [^3]

Isaiah's prophecy was literally fulfilled in the Book of Mormon, for the wise men have sought to account for this ancient record other than its being an ancient history of the forefathers of the American Indian. Their wisdom has failed; each theory of its origin has been successfully controverted. On the other hand, the evidence for its authenticity has mounted since its publication in 1830, particularly during the twentieth century. In Hugh Nibley's Lehi In The Desert and the World of the Jaredites one will find almost one hundred examples of Semite and Asiatic customs, unknown when the Book of Mormon was published, that authenticate the first 40 pages in the Book of Mormon and the 32 pages of the Book of Ether, a book in the Book of Mormon.

Joseph Smith or any man could not have written the Book of Mormon; it had to be the product of many historians who witnessed the events they recorded. The following excerpt from a letter addressed to Elder James E. Talmage, an apostle of this dispensation, from Dr. Henry Drinker, past-president of Lehigh University, is on this subject:

"To me, perhaps, the marvel is that an untutored farmer youth should have had the literary ability to express in the language used by Joseph Smith, the record he presented—how at his age, he could have had the knowledge of the scriptures, both Old and New Testament, which enabled him, as a familiar story, to so forcibly use and reuse, and to reaffirm, the scriptural teachings. If you seek for miracles, this was one—a miraculous record whether the 'Mormon' or anti-'Mormon' view be taken; for from the 'Mormon' view it was a divine revelation; if this is denied; it is an instance of phenomenal wisdom and utterance from one as was Christ, when, as a child, he argued with the elders in the temple." [^4]

The complexity of writing the Book of Mormon, the miraculous record, as stated, is pointed up in the following from President Hugh B. Brown:

"I ask anyone to undertake to write a story on the ancient inhabitants of America. Write as he did without any source material. Include in the story fifty-four chapters dealing with wars, twenty-one historical chapters, fifty-five chapters on visions and prophecies, and, remember, when the writer begins to write on visions and prophecies he must have the record agree meticulously with the Bible. He must write seventy-one chapters on doctrine and exhortation, and, here too, he must check every statement with the scriptures or he will be proved to be a fraud. He must write twenty-one chapters on the ministry of Christ and everything the writer claims Jesus said and did and every testimony he writes in the book about him must agree absolutely with the New Testament.

"I ask, would anyone like to undertake such a task? I point out too that he must employ figures of speech, similes, metaphors, narration, exposition, description, oratory, epic, lyric, logic, and parables. I ask the writer to remember that the man who translated the Book of Mormon was a young man and he hadn't had the opportunity of schooling that many today have had and yet he dictated that book in just a little over two months and made very few, if any, corrections." [^5]

The real miracle of the Book of Mormon is the power its pages possess, with prayer, to implant a divine witness to its truth by the Holy Ghost. [^6] Millions of people have known of its truth by this power. In addition, this fulfilled promise includes the knowledge that Jesus Christ is divine, the Son of God, man's Atoner. [^7] Only God can bestow this knowledge upon man! The Book of Mormon is a "marvelous work."

The marvelous work to come forth unto men in the last days is primarily the restored Church with the Gospel and the Priesthood, for the Book of Mormon is a part of that restoration. Wherein has the history of the Church shown it to be a marvelous institution? Probably, in its impact upon the lives of the millions who have accepted its teachings. The Gospel has transformed the lives of bad men into good ones and good men into better men. Elder John A. Widstoe, an apostle of this dispensation, referred to the man who baptized him into the Church as a man, who, before his conversion was,

". . .a rope-walker with a jug of beer two or three times a day, a glass of whiskey a little later, and a cud of tobacco mostly all day long, living a useless, purposeless life, except for three meals a day, and the satisfaction of some of the carnal appetites. He heard the Gospel and accepted it. . . . The man grew in power and stature in the Church. As I recall it, he filled five or six missions and presided over one of the missions of the Church. He was the same man, with the same arms, same feet, same body, same mind, but changed because of the Spirit that comes with the acceptance of eternal truth. Have we not seen this in our families and friends, in the little towns in which we live? Have not we felt our own strength grow mightier in love for our fellow men, in love for our daily tasks, in love for all the good things of life?" [^8]

Another part of the marvelous work was the pioneer movement across the plains from Iowa to what is now Utah and to other parts of Western United States. It was the faith of these Latter-day Saint pioneers that opened this great frontier. No other explanation of this great accomplishment can exclude this religious motivation. They had faith in the prophecy of Joseph Smith that they would settle in the Rocky Mountains, in the leadership of Brigham Young, and the knowledge of the Spirit that they had accepted the only true and living Church upon the face of the earth. [^9] (See "Zion Shall Flourish Upon the Mountains. . ."—D&C 49:25) Recognition was given to the power of the Book of Mormon, of the faith of these pioneers, by the Secretary of Agriculture Henry A. Wallace, in a discussion of great books. He said:

"It reached perhaps only one percent of the people of the United States, but it affected this one percent so powerfully and lastingly that all the people of the United States have been affected, especially by its contribution to opening up one of our great frontiers." [^10]

Another influence of the Church indicating it as a marvelous work is the influence its teachings have had upon the world. Elder John A. Widtsoe, said:

"A few days ago I picked up a recent number of a great magazine, and my feelings were roused within me and my testimony increased when I found one of the writers declaring to the readers of the magazine that God cannot look upon sin with the least degree of tolerance, borrowed almost word for word from section one of the Doctrine and Covenants. In such a way have the doctrines taught by the despised Latter-day Saints been appropriated by the nations of the earth; and whether the people of the earth accept the inspiration of Joseph Smith, nevertheless, in fact the whole current of human thought has been changed by the doctrines of this people." [^11]

Another factor is the growth of the Church, from fewer than ten members when the Church was organized to 2,700,000 at the end of 1968. Then, of course, the hundreds of thousands who joined the Church and have passed away would constitute a very large number. (See "Triumph of the Kingdom of God"—D&C 103:5-8).

If one considers the miracles performed by the Priesthood, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as a part of the marvelously miraculous work then there is a vast evidence to contribute to these prophecies. (See "The Elder of the Church. . .Shall. . .Lay Their Hands Upon Them"—D&C 42:43-44).

Application of the prophecies

To the member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints there comes a swelling in his bosom when he seriously thinks of the value of his membership. His appreciation is heightened when he remembers that he may make a contribution to the building of that Church. His contribution, though small, perhaps, in the large total, nonetheless is necessary for his own salvation. [^12] To be associated with the "marvelous work," the only one like it in the world, is a prize worth everything, especially in the fact that it is the only means whereby one may be saved in the eternal worlds.

". . . A Marvelous Work Is About to Come Forth . . ." (D&C 4:1; 6:1; 11:1; 12:1; 14:1).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 5:25.
[^2] Ibid., 17: 1-4.
[^3] Ether 5:2-4; 2 Nephi 11:3; 27:12.
[^4] DHC 1:20-23.
[^5] 1 Nephi 16:10.
[^6] Andrew Jenson (ed.), Historical Record, 6:207-208.
[^7] DHC 1:54.
[^8] Conference Report, April 1952, p. 34.
[^9] D&C 49:25; 1:30.
[^10] New York Times, November 5, 1937.
[^11] Conference Report, October 1921, p. 109.
[^12] D&C 38:40; 6:6-7.
