Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 7

". . . They Have Been Shown unto Me by the Power of God . . ." (D&C 5:25; 17:1-4)

(A) And then he shall say unto the people of this generation: Behold, I have seen the things which the Lord hath shown unto Joseph Smith, Jun., and I know of a surety that they are true, for I have seen them, for they have been shown unto me by the power of God and not of man. [^1]

(B) Behold, I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which if you do with full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of the plates, and also of the breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face, and the miraculous directors which were given to Lehi while in the wilderness, on the borders of the Red Sea.

And it is by your faith that you shall obtain a view of them, even by that faith which was had by the prophets of old.

And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with your eyes, you shall testify of them, by the power of God;

And this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may not be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work. [^2]

Background of the revelations

(A) The gold plates received from the Angel Moroni were being translated by Joseph Smith. The plates referred to Three Special Witnesses who would testify to their truth. [^3] The Prophet is told that he should not show them to any one except those appointed by the Lord.

(B) The Three Special Witnesses of the Book of Mormon—Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris—were appointed. Section 17 informs them of their responsibility in this regard.

Background of the prophecy and promise

(A) Martin Harris had sought a witness to know of the truth of Joseph Smith's claim that he had the gold plates. The fact that there would be three special witnesses was made known in the revelation, and the importance of their testimony to the world. Joseph Smith is counseled that he should remain firm in keeping the commandments, even if he should be slain.

(B) The opening verses of Section 17 constitute the prophetic promise for examination in this article.

Contents of the prophecy and promise

(1) Martin Harris, who desired a witness of the Book of Mormon plates, is to view them, provided he will humble himself. (2) His testimony must be the truth: that he has seen the things to be shown him, for they are shown by the power of God. (3) The Three Special Witnesses will have a view of the following: the plates, breastplate, sword of Laban, Urim and Thummim, and the miraculous directors. (4) Only by their faith will they see them. (5) They must testify of this knowledge.

Analysis of the prophecy and promise

The Angel Moroni, a resurrected being, appeared to Joseph Smith and instructed him about some Bible prophecies and told him about some gold plates which contained a record of the ancient inhabitants of the American continent. Four years later Joseph received these plates after having been instructed yearly by the Angel at the site of the ancient depository of these records in Manchester township, New York.

Special mention is made of the need for Martin Harris to be humble that he might be one of the witnesses. Before this, he had implored Joseph Smith to permit him to take 116 pages of translated material from the plates to show them to his wife and others that they might be convinced that Joseph was not trying to defraud him. The manuscript was lost, thereby bringing the Lord's condemnation upon Joseph, even the loss of the plates and the Urim and Thummim, all of which were later returned to him. [^4]

The ancient artifacts to be shown to the witnesses were: plates made of gold upon which were inscribed ancient engravings; the breastplate was used by the translator to carry the Urim and Thummim; the sword of Laban that was taken by Nephi from Laban, relative of the Prophet Lehi whose family, according to the Book of Mormon, came to the American continent about 600 B.C.; the Urim and Thummim were the divine instruments used in translating the gold plates; the miraculous director called Liahona was "a round ball of curious workmanship" of brass, and within the ball were two spindles to assist the Lehites in the wilderness. [^5]

Fulfillment of the prophecy and promise

Not long after Section 17 was given in June, 1829, the three witnesses to be, and Joseph Smith retired to a secluded area on the Peter Whitmer farm near Waterloo, New York, where the prophecy and promise of viewing the plates were fulfilled. Each prayed in turn, but without success. Martin Harris left the other three believing that he was unworthy. Whereupon, the angel with the plates showed them to the three, turned the leaves that they might see the engravings, and a voice from the heavens declared them to have been translated by the power of God.

Joseph Smith left Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer and found Martin Harris and prayed with him. Again, the same appearance of the angel with the plates, and the voice was heard testifying to their authenticity.

The following testimony of these Three Special Witnesses appears in every copy of the Book of Mormon:

"Be It Known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken. And we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true. And it is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen."

The lives of each one of these three men verify the truth that their testimony is true. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris were excommunicated from the Church. When the hand of fellowship was withdrawn, the opportunity came for them to deny all of what they said was true regarding the angel, the voice, and the plates. But at no time did they falsify. Some may ask why men who had received such a glorious experience would be subjects of excommunication. The answer lies in the simple truth: they failed to keep the commandments. The Spirit of the Lord will not remain with those who fail to observe his teachings. (See ". . .From Him Shall Be Taken Even The Light Which He Has Received"—D&C 1:31-33; 50:23-24; 88:67). The spirit of repentance impelled Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris to seek baptism into the Church, but David Whitmer failed to rejoin the kingdom of God.

The Witnesses, as promised in Section 17, also saw the other artifacts. While out of the Church, David Whitmer was visited by Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith, who reported this fact. Part of his testimony follows: "The fact is, it was just as though Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting just here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light. It was not a light of the sun, nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light about as far off as he sits (pointing to John C. Whitmer, sitting a few feet from him), there appeared as it were a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon, also the sword of Laban, the directors (i.e., the ball which Lehi had) and the interpreters. I saw them just as plain as I see this bed (striking the bed beside him with his hand), and I heard the voice of the Lord, as distinctly as I ever heard anything in my life, declaring that the records of the plates of the Book of Mormon were translated by the gift and power of God." [^6]

A series of ten scholarly articles on the three witnesses, written by Dr. Richard L. Anderson of the College of Religious Instruction of Brigham Young University, appear in the Improvement Era, August 1968 to August 1969. These articles present new evidence to support the testimony of these witnesses.

Application of the prophecy and promise

Every Latter-day Saint may take justifiable pride in the fact that the foundations of the Church are secure as indicated in the testimonies of those persons who, under divine direction, laid its foundations. The testimony of the Three Special Witnesses is a good example of the strength of those foundations. Every attempt to disprove their testimonies has failed.

With such evidence for belief in the hereafter (the resurrected Moroni) as the Spirit bore witness by the Holy Ghost to the prophets in the Book of Mormon, as well as the personal witness to each member of the Church, motivation is given to live the Lord's commandments.

The Angel singled out David Whitmer when he, Martin Harris, and Joseph Smith were viewing the plates and gave him a warning message which is significant in view of the fact that David Whitmer died outside of the Church. The message given then is applicable to all: "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps His commandments." [^7]

". . . They Have Been Shown unto Me by the Power of God . . ." (D&C 5:25; 17:1-4).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 6:3; 11:3; 12:3; 14:3.
[^2] Ibid., 4:4-5.
[^3] DHC 1:48.
[^4] Matthew 13:36-43; D&C 86:1-7.
[^5] D&C 35:3-7.
[^6] Romans 5:3-5.
[^7] Moroni 7:42.
