Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 11

". . . Leave a Cursing Instead of a Blessing . . ." (D&C 24:15; 75:19-20; 60:15; 84:92; 99:3-4).

(A) And inwhatsoever place ye shall enter, and they receive you not in my name, ye shall leave a cursing instead of a blessing, by casting off the dust of your feet against them as a testimony, and cleansing your feet by the wayside. [^1]

(B) And in whatsoever house ye enter, and they receive you, leave your blessing upon that house.

And in whatsoever house ye enter, and they receive you not, ye shall depart speedily from that house, and shake off the dust of your feet as a testimony against them. [^2]

(C) And shake off the dust of thy feet against those who receive thee not, not in their presence, lest thou provoke them, but in secret; and wash thy feet, as a testimony against them in the day of judgment. [^3]

(D) He that receiveth you not, go away from him alone by yourselves, and cleanse your feet even with water, pure water, whether in heat or in cold, and bear testimony of it unto your Father which is in heaven, and return not again unto that man. [^4]

(E) And who receiveth you as a little child, receiveth my kingdom; and blessed are they, for they shall obtain mercy.

And whoso rejecteth you shall be rejected of my Father and his house; and you shall cleanse your feet in the secret places by the way for a testimony against them. [^5]

Background of the revelations

(A) Although less than four months had passed since the organization of the Church, persecution was intense.

(B) Section 75 is a missionary revelation in which the duties of the missionary are given.

(C) Several elders and the Prophet Joseph Smith were returning from the State of Missouri, on the Missouri river, to their homes in Ohio.

(D) The importance of the Priesthood in the salvation and exaltation of men is found in Section 84.

(E) Elder John Murdock is given instructions regarding his ministry.

Background of the prophetic promises

(A) Instructions are given to Oliver Cowdery concerning his responsibility to declare the Gospel. Miracles are not to be performed, except when inspired, unless they are requested.

(B) The names of elders who are paired together to perform missionary service are given, including their areas of activity.

(C)The Prophet and some elders were to travel to Cincinnati, while the others were to go to St. Louis and then to their churches. They were instructed to preach the Gospel enroute, and not idle away their time.

(D) Missionaries for the Church are counseled to take neither purse nor scrip, for the Lord will raise up friends to them. Preparation should be made for their ministry by study that, when necessary, the Spirit will draw it forth. Blessings will acrue to those who befriend the Lord's servants, while cursings will follow those who do not help them. (See". . . The Laborer Is Worthy Of His Hire."—D&C 84:79-91).

(E) Elder Murdock is told that he should travel from city to city to proclaim the Gospel.

Contents of the prophetic promises

(1) Those people who receive the missionary as a servant of Christ should be blessed by the missionary. (2) If they receive you not, then a curse should be pronounced against them. (3) The cursing is accomplished in secret by "casting off the dust of your feet," "cleansing the feet even with water," and "bear testimony of it unto your Father which is in heaven." (4) The testimony against them is for the day of judgment.

Analysis of the prophetic promises

These prophetic promises made to missionaries are conditioned upon the receptivity of the people to caring for their wants (food, etc.) as servants of the Lord. Also, the promise, whether positive or negative, pertains to the treatment accorded the missionaries when they deliver their message. The penalty—cursing—may have dire physical effects in this life, or it may be reserved for the after-death judgment. It is apparent for many reasons that the elder should not curse someone because he indicates no interest in the Gospel message; also, if a woman at the door is busy preparing dinner or bathing her baby does not have the time to listen. In other words, the elder should be directed by the Spirit in what he should do. All judgments should be made in righteousness. The following counsel given to Hyrum Smith is applicable to this point:

"And now, verily, verily, I say unto thee, put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy;

"And then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive." [^6]

In harmony with the foregoing instruction President Wilford Woodruff said to missionaries:

"I want to give you a word of exhortation and counsel, brethren: that is, whenever you are in doubt about any duty or work which you have to perform, never proceed to do anything until you go and labor in prayer and get the Holy Spirit. Wherever the Spirit dictates you to go or to do, that will be right; and, by following the dictates you will come out right.

"We shall be brought to many places during our career in the ministry among the nations of the earth, where we may consider a certain course of procedure to be right; but, if we do not know, it will be better for us to go before the Lord and ask in faith that we may be instructed in the way of life." [^7]

Whether the testimony against a person is visited upon him in this life, is something that the missionary may not be able to determine at the time, but, if the Spirit has inspired the action, it is certain that the judgment will follow, either in this life or the life to come.

Fulfillment of the promises

The first time in this dispensation that judgment was pronounced against one who failed to assist a missionary occurred when Samuel H. Smith, brother of the Prophet, undertook the first missionary journey of the Church. His mother relates the following account:

"When evening came on, he was faint and almost discouraged, but coming to an inn, which was surrounded with every appearance of plenty, he called to see if the landlord would buy one of his books. On going in, Samuel enquired of him, if he did not wish to purchase a history of the origin of the Indians.

"'I do not know,' replied the host; 'how did you get hold of it?'

"'It was translated,' rejoined Samuel, 'by my brother, from some gold plates that he found buried in the earth.'

"'You liar!' cried the landlord, 'get out of my house—you shan't stay one minute with your books.'"

Samuel was sick at heart, for this was the fifth time he had been turned out of doors that day. He left the house, traveled a short distance, and washed his feet in a small brook, as a testimony against the man. He then proceeded five miles farther on his journey, and seeing an apple tree a short distance from the road, he concluded to pass the night under it; and here he lay all night upon the cold, damp ground. . . ." [Samuel continued on the next day and was successful in receiving food, for which he gave the party a copy of the Book of Mormon. What happened two weeks later is related by his mother.]

"This time, Mr. Smith, and myself accompanied him, and it was our intention to have passed near the tavern, where Samuel was so abusively treated a fortnight previous, but just before we came to the house, a sign of small-pox intercepted us. We turned aside, and meeting a citizen of the place, we enquired of him, to what extent this disease prevailed. He answered, that the tavern keeper and two of his family had died with it not long since, but he did not know that any one else had caught the disease, and that it was brought into the neighborhood by a traveler, who stopped at the tavern over night." [^8]

In the foregoing account Samuel left a copy of the Book of Mormon with the Rev. John P. Greene, brother-in-law of Brigham Young. These brethren subsequently joined the Church and reaped the blessings as predicted.

To several elders the Lord said this in 1831: "Nevertheless, ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; and they rejoice over you, and your sins are forgiven you." (D&C 62:3). A commentary on this scripture confirms the message of the prophetic promises under consideration:

"In this Revelation we are told that angels are scrutinizing the records kept of the testimonies of the Elders, and that they rejoice over the witnesses. It appears from this that the ministry on earth has its effects beyond the veil as well as on this side. An Elder who bears his faithful testimony to the truth does not know how far-reaching the result may be, though his visible audience may consist of but few." [^9]

Application of the prophetic promise

Patience and humility should characterize the ministry of Latter-day Saint missionaries. The rule stated by President Brigham Young in the following example is correct: He sent an elder to a city in England to perform missionary work, but by the end of the day he had returned having sealed the people up to damnation. President Young believed that this good man lacked knowledge, but if President Young had had this assignment he would have patiently labored with the people until released. [^10]

They must seek for the Spirit to guide and direct them in their activities. [^11] The Lord recognized the administrations of his faithful servants; therefore, caution should always be exercised in the discharge of any missionary responsibility. The Lord has said that "in the day of judgment you shall be judges of that house, and condemn them. . . [^12] "And as ye shall lift up your voices by the Comforter, ye shall speak and prophesy as seemeth me good;

"For, behold, the Comforter knoweth all things, and bareth record of the Father and of the Son." [^13]

Faithful and devoted service in the missionary call will bring forth the following promise: "And thus, if ye are faithful ye shall be laden with many sheaves, and crowned with honor, and glory, and immortality, and eternal life." [^14]

". . . Leave a Cursing Instead of a Blessing . . ." (D&C 24:15; 75:19-20; 60:15; 84:92; 99:3-4).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 29:7-8.
[^2] D&C 45:65-71.
[^3] Ether 13:4, 6-10.
[^4] D&C 57:1-5.
[^5] D&C 84:1-5; Roy W. Doxey, Zion in the Last Days, pp. 11-12.
[^6] D&C 101 17-19; 105:13, 34.
[^7] D&C 63:24-31.
[^8] Journal of Discourses, 3:278-279.
[^9] D&C 101:20-21.
[^10] Ibid., vs. 22-23.
[^11] I Nephi 14:14.
[^12] D&C 29 14-21; 45:30-33, 65-71.
[^13] Testimonies of the Divinity of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by Its Leaders, p. 54.
[^14] DHC 4:272.
