Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 14

"For They Will Hear My Voice, And Shall See Me . . ." (D&C 35:20-21; 38:7-8; 50:44-46; 88:47-50; 93:1-4).

(A) And a commandment I give unto thee—that thou shalt write for him; and the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect;

For they will hear my voice, and shall see me, and shall not be asleep, and shall abide the day of my coming; for they shall be purified, even as I am pure. [^1]

(B) But behold, verily, verily, I say unto you that mine eyes are upon you. I am in your midst and ye cannot see me;

But the day soon cometh that ye shall see me, and know that I am; for the veil of darkness shall soon be rent, and he that is not purified shall not abide the day. [^2]

(C) Wherefore, I am in your midst, and I am the good shepherd, and the stone of Israel. He that buildeth upon this rock shall never fall.

And the day cometh that you shall hear my voice and see me, and know that I am;

Watch, therefore, that ye may be ready. Even so. Amen. [^3]

(D) Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.

I say unto you, he hath seen him; nevertheless, he who came unto his own was not comprehended.

The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not; nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being quickened in him and by him.

Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound. [^4]

(E) Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am;

And that I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world;

And that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one—

The Father because he gave me of his fulness, and the Son because I was in the world and made flesh my tabernacle, and dwelt among the sons of men. [^5]

Background of the revelation

(A) This revelation was given for the benefit of Sidney Rigdon, a recent convert from the Cambellite religion. Great blessings are promised him.

(B) Section 38 was received on January 2, 1831. It tells of the doom of the wicked, and of the promise of the "Law" (Section 42) to be received by the Prophet when he arrived at the Ohio.

(C) Section 50 was received as a result of certain spiritual manifestations present in some branches of the Church which were not understood by some of the elders, including Parley P. Pratt. Criteria are given to detect evil spirits.

(D) The Olive Leaf (Section 88) is a doctrinal revelation, the purpose of which is to speak peace to the saints.

(E) Section 93 is one of the wonderful revelations containing marvelous insights into the divinity of Jesus Christ, man's relationship to God, and his eternal nature.

Background of the prophetic promises

(A) The prophecy in Section 35 is preceded by Sidney Rigdon being told that Joseph Smith is the restorer of the Gospel, holding the keys of the mysteries of sealed knowledge.

(B) The prophetic promise in Section 38 begins with the truth that the Lord Jesus Christ is omniscient, the creator of worlds. He received the city of Enoch into his bosom. He is the mediator between God and man and the wicked are kept in chains of darkness until the day of judgment.

(C) The prophecy in Section 50 closes the revelation. Just preceding this promise instructions are given to several elders, all of whom are designated "little children" who are to grow in the knowledge of the truth.

(D) Immediately preceding the prophecy in Section 88 is a discussion of law throughout the universe—"All kingdoms have a law given; And there are many kingdoms . . ." The earth and all the worlds move in their times and seasons. Then, "Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand?" [^6]

(E) The prophetic promise of Section 93 opens the revelation.

Contents of the prophecies and promises

(1) The elect will hear the Lord's voice and see him. (2) They shall abide the coming of Christ. (3) The Lord is in our midst though not seen. (4) To abide the day of the Lord's coming requires purification. (5) To see God's creations is to see him. (6) Jesus is the true light that is in man. (7) By coming unto Christ, forsaking one's sins, keeping his commandments, one shall see him and know him.

Analysis of the prophecies and prophetic promises

In an earlier revelation it is said that the "elect" are those who hear the Lord's voice "and harden not their hearts." [^7] To purify one's heart is to so live that the Spirit of the Lord may be one's companion. Missionaries are commanded to "purify your hearts before me" when they go forth to preach. They should so seek for the Spirit in preparation for their missions. [^8]

The light which comes from Christ is known as the "light of Christ" which is received by every person in the world. [^9]

Although the Lord says that he is in our midst and his presence is near at all times, it is not essential for salvation for one in this life literally to see him. The Prophet Joseph Smith saw in vision the Twelve Apostles of his day fatigued, feet swollen, eyes downcast, "and Jesus standing in their midst, and they did not behold him. The Savior looked upon them and wept." [^10] As the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary says: "He came in like manner as He ascended when He first appeared to the Prophet Joseph, and He has remained with the Church ever since, though invisible except on a few occasions, as, for instance, at the time of the manifestations in the Kirtland Temple" [^11]

Fulfillment of the prophecies and prophetic promises

To hear the voice of the Lord is not only actually to hear his voice in an audible revelation, as did the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning the American Civil War. "It may probably arise through the slave question. This a voice declared to me, while I was praying earnestly on the subject, December 25th 1832." [^12] A "still small voice" may be felt, as explained by the Prophet: "Yea, thus saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh manifest, saying:" [^13]

Here is still another way in which the voice of the Lord is known: "Verily, verily, I say unto you who now hear my words, which are my voice, blessed are ye inasmuch as you receive these things . . ." [^14] Through the Lord's revelations we hear his voice! To the Twelve the Lord said:

"And now I speak unto you, the Twelve . . .

"These words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore, you shall testify they are of me and not of man;

"For it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them;

"Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words." [^15]

Every member of the Church may testify that he has heard the voice of the Lord if he has a divine testimony of the scriptures!

The promise is given that the day will come when the saints who have kept their covenants will see the Lord. In the prophecies and prophetic promises under consideration one will find these expressions which indicate this thought: (A) ". . . and shall see me, and shall not be asleep, and shall abide the day of my coming . . ." (B) "But the day soon cometh that ye shall see me . . . he that is not purified shall not abide the day." (C) ". . . the day cometh that you shall hear my voice and see me, and know that I am." (D) ". . . the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God . . . Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am . . ." (E) ". . . and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face . . ." "While the Lord made the promise that those who are faithful and true to every covenant may receive the presence of the 'second Comforter,' while still in mortal life, yet this passage implies that those who call upon Him and obey His voice and keep His commandments, shall eventually see Him when their reward for their faithfulness shall come, and they shall dwell in His presence." [^16]

To comprehend God, or to know him in the fullest sense, is to be like him as an immortal, exalted Being: "But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also.

"This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law." [^17]

The prophecy or prophetic promise made in some passages in the Doctrine and Covenants make just such a prediction. At sometime the faithful will see him, but generally, with some exceptions, after the resurrection, and then, they shall know him, for they will be like him. It should be borne in mind also that everyone will not see God or Christ in the spirit world. There are some scriptures which say that the spirits of men go back to God who gave them life. (Alma 40:11; Eccl. 12:7). These passages, however, are interpreted to mean that men and women in the spirit world are in God's presence by his Spirit, but not in his literal presence. [^18] It is conceivable that some will see the Lord in the spirit world, but only on the basis of their being prepared, but, to know him in the ultimate sense is to be like him, after the resurrection. [^19]

Application of the prophecies and prophetic promises

The faithful saint may see God in mortal life! (See ". . . You Shall See Me And Know That I Am . . ."—D&C 67:10-14; 88:66-68) The true saint may hear the voice of God in this life by "feasting upon the word of Christ" as revealed in the Standard Works of the Church! Enos, the Book of Mormon prophet, had such an experience through prayer: "And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, behold, the voice of the Lord came into my mind again, saying: I will visit thy brethren according to their diligence in keeping my commandments." [^20]

The faithful saint will see God and know him and be like him forever and ever! Salvation is an individual matter. The door is open, one need only knock and enter therein. The following personal experience related by Elder Orson F. Whitney was received before he became an apostle of this dispensation:

"I seemed to be in the Garden of Gethsemane, a witness of the Savior's agony. I saw Him as plainly as ever I have seen anyone. Standing behind a tree in the foreground, I beheld Jesus, with Peter, James and John, as they came through a little wicket gate at my right. Leaving the three apostles there, after telling them to kneel and pray the Son of God passed over to the other side, where He also knelt and prayed. It was the same prayer with which all Bible readers are familiar; 'Oh my Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.'

"As He prayed the tears streamed down His face, which was toward me. I was so moved at the sight that I also wept, out of pure sympathy. My whole heart went out to Him; I loved Him with all my soul, and longed to be with Him as I longed for nothing else.

"Presently He arose and walked to where those apostles were kneeling—fast asleep! He shook them gently, awakened them, and in a tone of tender reproach, untinctured by the least show of anger or impatience, asked them plaintively if they could not watch with Him one hour. There He was, with the awful weight of the world's sin upon His shoulders, with the pangs of every man, woman and child shooting through His sensitive soul—and they could not watch with Him one poor hour!

"Returning to His place, He offered up the same prayer as before; then went back and again found them sleeping. Again He awoke them, readmonished them, and once more returned and prayed. Three times this occurred until I was perfectly familiar with His appearance—face, form and movements. He was of noble stature and majestic mien—not at all the weak, effeminate being that some painters have portrayed; but the very God that He was and is, as meek and humble as a little child.

"All at once the circumstances seemed to change, the scene remaining just the same. Instead of before, it was after the crucifixion, and the Savior, with the three apostles, now stood together in a group at my left. They were about to depart and ascend into Heaven. I could endure it no longer. I ran from behind the tree, fell at His feet, clasped Him around the knees and begged Him to take me with Him.

"I shall never forget the kind and gentle manner in which He stooped, raised me up, and embraced me. It was so vivid! So real! I felt the very warmth of His body, as He held me in His arms and said in tenderest tones; 'No, my son; these have finished their work: they can go with me, but you must stay and finish yours.' Still I clung to Him. Gazing up into His face—for he was taller than I—I besought Him fervently; 'Well, promise me that I will come to you at the last.' Smiling sweetly, He said: 'That will depend entirely upon yourself. I awoke with a sob in my throat, and it was morning." [^21]

"For They Will Hear My Voice, And Shall See Me . . ." (D&C 35:20-21; 38:7-8; 50:44-46; 88:47-50; 93:1-4).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 42:43-44.
[^2] Ibid., v. 2.
[^3] James 5:14-15.
[^4] Mark 6:7, 12-13.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 1:152-153.
[^6] Ibid., pp. 148-150.
[^7] DHC 5:126, 209.
[^8] Journal of Discourses, 4:24.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] D&C 84:65-73.
[^11] Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 263.
[^12] Orson Pratt, Orson Pratt's Works, pp. 261-277.
[^13] Deseret News, "Church Department," (Salt Lake City), June 20, 1931.
[^14] Conference Report, April 1960, p. 109.
[^15] 2 Nephi 9:6.
[^16] D&C 42:46.
[^17] Ibid., v. 47.
[^18] Mormon 6:16-22.
[^19] D&C 42:45.
[^20] Enos 1:10.
[^21] Orson F. Whitney, Through Memory's Halls, The Life Story of Orson F. Whitney as Told By Himself, pp. 81-83.
