Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 20

". . . After Much Tribulation . . ." (D&C 58:3-5).

Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation.

For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand.

Remember this, which I tell you before that you may lay it to heart, and receive that which is to follow. [^1]

Background of the revelation

Within a week of the arrival of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his party in Jackson County, Missouri, Section 58 of the Doctrine and Covenants was received. This area had been designated by revelation as the site of the New Jerusalem, or City of Zion, predicted by the prophets. [^2]

Background of the prophecy

Inasmuch as this revelation gives the reasons for the saints being commanded to settle in Missouri, [^3] there is reason for letting them know that this place of residence might not be their permanent abode. The prophets had predicted glorious things to result from this latter-day objective. [^4]

With the beginning of this dispensation of the gospel, persecution began to develop. Following the First Vision, the persecution commenced [^5] and was the Prophet's heritage. [^6]

Contents of the prophecy

(1) The natural eye does not permit man to see the things of the hereafter. (2) Glory is to be received after much tribulation; in fact, after much tribulation come the blessings. (3) The hour is not yet when the saints are to receive great glory. (4) Members of the Church should keep in mind that tribulation and glory will follow.

Fulfillment of the prophecy

Although the location of the New Jerusalem was known and some of the saints had arrived in the promised land away from their original persecutors, they might well have believed that this was the place where they could rest. By the summer of 1833, two years later, storm clouds burst upon the saints. A mob announced that they were to move from the community or suffer the consequences. The Lord had said that they could not then behold what was in store for them in their new land, but glory would be theirs "after much tribulation." [^7] Many members of the Church were killed, savagely wounded or mistreated during the persecutions in Jackson County. Although they moved into other counties of Missouri, their persecutions became more severe until they were expelled into Illinois in 1839. As a party of members, including Elder Heber C. Kimball, were on the bank of the Mississippi River looking toward Commerce, Illinois, later named Nauvoo, Brother Kimball said: "It is a very pretty place, but not a long abiding home for the Saints," Brother Rigdon, upon learning of this remark and since he had had as much persecution as he could stand, said: "I should suppose that Elder Kimball had passed through sufferings and privations and mobbings and drivings enough, to learn to prophesy good concerning Israel." Elder Kimball replied, with a mixture of humor and meekness: "President Rigdon, I'll prophesy good concerning you all the time—if you can get it." [^8]

But the saints did not have surcease from tribulation, for Satan's emissaries fought against them and drove them from the state of Illinois. In the winter of 1846, the saints built a beautiful city with a population of about 20,000 inhabitants at a time when Chicago had only a population of 3,000. They settled on the prairies of Iowa. "Here in these humble prairie settlements, surrounded by Indians, hopeful and even happy, though enduring much sickness and privation, which resulted in many deaths, the pilgrim Mormons passed the winter of 1846-7 [^9]

"After much tribulation"—pioneer life in the far West was hard, oftentimes scarcity of food, even famine, severe climatic conditions, and hostile Indians, together with persecution by Federal officers in the days of plural marriage—was the lot of the saints of God.

Application of the prophecy

There is no assurance that tribulation is over for the members of the Church, whether they are faithful or whether they adhere to the commandments. (See "Upon My House Shall It Begin"—D&C 112:23-26). Success in this life and in the eternal worlds is dependent upon faithfulness to the Lord's word as given through his prophets. The observations and testimony of Elder Abraham O. Woodruff, a member of the Council of the Twelve in this dispensation, are pertinent to this subject:

"The Latter-day Saints, as a rule, are not easily shaken by conditions, however trying they may be. The experience of the past has shown us that the few men who have fallen by the wayside, because they were filled with fear when trouble arose, have signally failed in their efforts to lead others from the Church. The majority of the people of God today are not easily moved nor frightened; their hearts do not sink within them when clouds appear upon our horizon. I believe it is pleasing in the sight of the Lord when His people have sufficient faith not to be easily moved, so that when any difficulties arise, or whenever they are beset by the enemies of righteousness, they do not feel that the whole work is going to pieces, and that the Church can no longer make the remarkable progress it has made up to the present time. Our past history should be a strength unto us, and a hope for the future. It should stimulate our faith in God. Indeed, in the minds of those who have a testimony of the truth, there is no doubt whatever in regard to the outcome of this work. They know it will triumph over all its adversaries, no matter how powerful they may be. Whatever agencies are organized to oppose the work, they know that God is all-powerful, and that He rules the destinies of men and nations, and He will bring His work to victory in the end. So the Latter-day Saints who are doing their duty are not easily moved. On the other hand, whenever anything has arisen in the shape of opposition, and whenever the clouds have been dark and threatening, those who were weak, because they were not doing their duty and keeping the commandments of the Lord, have always been the ones who thought the work was going to pieces, and that 'the bottom was falling out of Mormonism.' Whenever members of the Church have such feelings within them it is an evidence of their own weakness, and of the fact that they are not keeping the commandments of God, because of which they have not the assurance regarding the final victory of this work that a faithful man possesses. We expect there will be opposition, but at the same time we confidently expect that God, in the future as in the past, will deliver us if we will only do our duty. We never intend to so shape our faith and belief that it will please the adversary, or the world." [^10]

"For after much tribulation, as I have said unto you in a former commandment, cometh the blessing.

"Behold, this is the blessing which I have promised after your tribulations, and the tribulations of your brethren—your redemption, and the redemption of your brethren, even their restoration to the land of Zion, to be established, no more to be thrown down.

"Nevertheless, if they pollute their inheritances they shall be thrown down; for I will not spare them if they pollute their inheritances." (See ". . . This Is The Blessing Which I Have Promised . . ."—D&C 103:12-14).

". . . After Much Tribulation . . ." (D&C 58:35).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 59:23.
[^2] Ibid. 19:23.
[^3] Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pp. 137-138.
[^4] D&C 19:10-12.
[^5] Ibid. 14:7; Moses 1:39.
[^6] Conference Report, October 1917, pp. 44-45.
[^7] John 14:27.
[^8] D&C 10:55.
[^9] Ibid. 36:2.
[^10] Conference Report, October 1916, p. 21.
