Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 25

"They Are They . . . Who Have Received of His Fullness, and of His Glory . . ." (D&C 76:50-60; 132:4-5; 131:1-4; 132:15-22).

(A) And again we bear record—for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony of the gospel of Christ concerning them who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just—

They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—

That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.

They are they who are the church of the Firstborn.

They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory;

And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son.

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

And they shall overcome all things. [^1]

(B) For behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory.

For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. [^2]

(C) In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees;

And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage];

And if he does not, he cannot obtain it.

He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase. [^3]

(D) Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world.

Therefore, when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are appointed angels in heaven; which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory.

For these angels did not abide my law; therefore, they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever.

And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife, and make a covenant with her for time and for all eternity, if that covenant is not by me or by my word, which is my law, and is not sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, through him whom I have anointed and appointed unto this power, then it is not valid neither of force when they are out of the world, because they are not joined by me, saith the Lord, neither by my word; when they are out of the world it cannot be received there, because the angels and the gods are appointed there, by whom they cannot pass; they cannot, therefore, inherit my glory; for my house is a house of order, saith the Lord God.

And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood; and it shall be said unto them—Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first resurrection, in the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths—then shall it be written in the Lamb's Book of Life, that he shall commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, it shall be done unto them in all things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in time, and through all eternity; and shall be of full force when they are out of world; and they shall pass by the angels and the gods which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever.

Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory.

For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do ye know me. [^4]

Background of the revelations

(A) Section 76 is known as the "Vision," and was received by Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon on February 16, 1832. It is a revelation concerning the four kingdoms following the resurrection into which all of mankind will go.

(B, D) Section 132 is the revelation on celestial marriage for time and for all eternity and also plural marriage.

(C) Section 131 consists of doctrinal instructions given by the Prophet Joseph Smith in May 1843.

Background of the prophetic promises

(A) The revelation on the future kingdoms following the resurrection contains the doctrine of eternal progression; [^5] the origin of the "Vision"; sight-knowledge of God and Christ; [^6] and Satan and the sons of perdition. [^7]

(B) Section 132 opens with a reference that Joseph Smith had inquired about Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David and Solomon, "my servants," having wives and concubines.

(C) The prophetic promise in Section 131 begins the revelation.

(D) After the introduction of Section 132 (B), the doctrine of celestial marriage is the subject until verse 34, which begins the subject of plural marriage.

Contents of the prophetic promises

(1) They who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just are those who: (a) accept Jesus Christ in baptism by immersion; (b) keep the commandments that they might receive a remission of sins; (c) receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands; (d) overcome by faith and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise. (2) These persons become members of the church of the Firstborn to receive all that the Father hath, priests and kings forever, for they are gods. (3) A new and everlasting covenant is revealed which must be received in obedience to the law which will permit them to receive the Lord's glory. (4) In order to receive the highest degree of the celestial kingdom and have eternal increase, it is necessary to receive the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. (5) Covenants between husbands and wives, not by the Lord, are of no force when the parties are dead. (6) Those who do not abide the law of celestial marriage are appointed angels in the future life to minister for those in a higher degree of heaven. (7) If marriage contracts are not entered into by the word of the Lord through his servant and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, they are not of force and the participants remain single, without exaltation, though saved, throughout the eternities as angels, not gods. (8) If, however, the sealing is by the Holy Spirit of promise, they shall inherit all powers, provided they do not commit murder, and they shall have a continuation of the seed forever. (9) Strait is the way which leadeth to the exaltation and continuation of the lives and few find it, because they are not obedient to the full law.

Analysis of the prophetic promises

The resurrection of the just is the first general resurrection which begins at the second coming of Christ. The just are those who are defined in the prophetic promise as members of Christ's Church through baptism and receiving the Holy Ghost by an authorized servant of the Lord. They become clean from sin by keeping the commandments, and they are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise.

The Holy Spirit of promise is the Holy Ghost. The expression means: the Holy Ghost with the promise of eternal life. [^8]

The Church of the Firstborn is the Church which will exist after the resurrection when faithful people have received eternal life (exaltation) in the celestial kingdom. [^9]

A new and everlasting covenant is marriage for eternity solemnized in the House of the Lord by one who is ordained to this power. It is one of the covenants belonging to the new and everlasting covenant, the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

In the celestial kingdom there are three degrees of glory and to receive the highest (exaltation) one must receive the covenant of eternal marriage. This blessing, received by the faithful, provides for the power to have eternal increase. Eternal increase is the same as continuation of the seeds or lives, or to have the ability to beget spirit children following the resurrection.

Those who do not abide this law are not entitled to the exaltation, but they become angels in one of the three kingdoms of glory. Those angels who are entitled to the celestial kingdom because of obedience to the celestial law, except marriage for eternity, serve the exalted in that kingdom. These angels remain single, without marriage, throughout the eternities, having had the opportunity for the fulness of the Gospel in the earth life or in the spirit world after death.

If a couple have obeyed the fulness of the law and been sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise after their obedience to gospel covenants and sin, as apparently all people do, but they do not commit murder in the shedding of innocent blood or deny the Holy Ghost, they may eventually receive the blessing of exaltation. This blessing is dependent upon the conditions given in verse 26 of Section 132, about which the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary says:

"This verse has been greatly misunderstood and by some grossly abused. Unfortunately there are some who seem to think that after they are married for time and all eternity, the Lord, in this passage, grants them immunity against sin, as long as they do not shed innocent blood or deny the Holy Ghost. It should be remembered that the Lord taught during his ministry this same doctrine as given in the Doctrine and Covenants. (Matt. 12:31-32). He has never granted to any person the privilege of sinning wilfully and then obtaining the reward of faithfulness without repentance. John said:

" 'If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death; I do not say that he should pray for it.' (I John 5:16).

"In this passage we are taught that all manner of sin which is forgiveable on repentance, or 'not unto death,' may be forgiven on repentance, but some sins may call for a most dreadful punishment even then—the destruction in the flesh and being turned over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption. This punishment is most severe. The Lord has not at any time contradicted Himself, and he has said: 'And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end.' (3 Nephi 27:19). The wilful sinners who remain in their sins, 'shall return unto God, and behold his face, and remain in their sins.' (2 Nephi 9:38. Compare Mormon 9:3-4)." [^10]

Innocent blood, according to the revelations, is the blood (life) of the Lord's servants. Joseph and Hyrum Smith are examples, as also Abinadi, of persons of innocent blood. [^11]

In the following statement Elder Melvin J. Ballard, an apostle of this dispensation, provides this information about the resurrection and marrying and giving in marriage:

"In the resurrection there is neither marriage nor giving in marriage, for this Church teaches the doctrine that every ceremony, marriage or baptism, must be fulfilled upon this earth, and that any man or woman who is entitled to these ceremonies will have the privilege of either receiving them or rejecting them before the resurrection. That is why it is going to take one thousand years after the first resurrection until the last can happen. If any of them prove themselves worthy of baptism or worthy of sealing to husband or wife, it will all take place before the resurrection, for after the resurrection, or at the time of the resurrection, every man or woman's status is fixed. It all has to be done here. They are privileged to be experienced before the resurrection. It will be preached to them in the spirit world, and if they are worthy, these same blessings will be administered to them, for the power to bind and seal is here." [^12]

Fulfillment of the prophetic promises

The fulfillment of these promises is planned for the future; that is, after faithful men and women have received the final judgment. This blessing comes only after the resurrection, though they may have the assurance of this glory while in the spirit world, and some may know it in the earth life. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

"Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection." [^13]

The testimony of Elder Melvin J. Ballard regarding the forming of marriage arrangements in the spirit world after death, even for children, is possible:

"You mothers worry about your little children. We do not perform sealings for them. I lost a son six years of age, and I saw him a man in the spirit world after his death, and I saw how he had exercised his own freedom of choice and would obtain of his own will and volition a companionship, and in due time to him and all those who are worthy of it, shall come all of the blessings and sealing privileges of the house of the Lord. Do not worry over it. They are safe; they are all right." [^14]

In general conference, President Rudger Clawson, a president of the Twelve Apostles of this dispensation, related the following experience received by a friend:

"'Upon one occasion I saw in vision my father and mother who were not members of the Church, who had not received the gospel in life, and I discovered that they were living separate and apart in the spirit world, and when I asked them how it was that they were so, my father said, 'This is an enforced separation, and you are the only individual who can bring us together. You can do this work. Will you do it?'—meaning that he should go into the House of the Lord and there officiate for his parents who were dead, and by the ordinance of sealing bring them together and unite them in the family relation beyond the veil. And he informed me that he had attended to the work, and I rejoiced with him and congratulated him.'" [^15]

The tender sympathy and assurance of life after death in the knowledge of the reunion of loved ones is illustrated in the following personal experience of President Heber J. Grant, seventh president of the Church, after relating that his twelve year old daughter expressed faith that her father could heal her mother by the power of the Priesthood, as he had done on other occasions:

"I told my little girl that we all had to die sometime, and that I felt assured in my heart that her mother's time had arrived. She and the rest of the children left the room.

"I then knelt down by the bed of my wife (who by this time had lost consciousness) and I told the Lord I acknowledged His hand in life, in death, in joy, in sorrow, in prosperity, or adversity. I thanked Him for the knowledge I had that my wife belonged to me for all eternity, that the gospel of Jesus Christ had been restored, that I knew that by the power and authority of the Priesthood here on the earth that I could and would have my wife forever if I were only faithful as she had been. But I told the Lord that I lacked the strength to have my wife die and to have it affect the faith of my little children in the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ; and I supplicated the Lord with all the strength that I possessed, that He would give to that little girl of mine a knowledge that it was His mind and His will that her mama should die."

"Within an hour my wife passed away, and I called the children back into the room. My little boy about five and a half or six years of age was weeping bitterly, and the little girl twelve years of age took him in her arms and said: 'Do not weep, do not cry Heber; since we went out of this room the voice of the Lord from heaven has said to me, 'In the death of your mama the will of the Lord shall be done.'"

"Tell me, my friends, that I do not know that God hears and answers prayers! Tell me that I do not know that in the hour of adversity the Latter-day Saints are comforted and blessed and consoled as no other people are!" [^16]

From President Joseph F. Smith we have this testimony:

"Why did he teach us the principle of eternal union of man and wife? Because God knew that we were his children here, to remain his children forever and ever and that we were just as truly individuals, and that our individuality was as identical as that of the Son of God, and would therefore continue, worlds without end, so that the man receiving his wife by the power of God, for time and for all eternity, would have the right to claim her and she to claim her husband, in the world to come. Neither would be changed, except from mortality to immortality; neither would be other than himself or herself, but they will have their identity in the world to come precisely as they exercise their individuality and enjoy their identity here. God has revealed this principle, and it has its bearings upon the evidence that we possess of the actual, literal resurrection of the body, just as it is and as the prophets have declared it in the Book of Mormon." [^17]

Application of the prophetic promises

The purpose of this earth life is that we might receive eternal life, or exaltation, in the celestial kingdom. To receive this blessing, one must enter into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage in the temple. If one does not follow this commandment from the Lord, the principal purpose for which this life is planned will be averted. But this applies to the individual, for though there may be few who will receive the exaltation, this number will no doubt be many. Already, the Lord has said that some have entered into this blessing. [^18]

"They Are They . . . Who Have Received of His Fullness, and of His Glory . . ." (D&C 76:50-60; 132:4-5; 131:1-4; 132:15-22).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 84:79-91.
[^2] Ibid. 42:70-73.
[^3] Ibid. 31:5; 70:12; 106:3.
[^4] Luke 9:1-4; 10:1-5.
[^5] Ibid. 22:35-36.
[^6] Acts 3:19-21.
[^7] D&C 105:24.
[^8] Ibid. vs. 35-37.
[^9] Ibid. vs. 38-39.
[^10] Journal of Discourses 10:168.
[^11] Ibid. 15:285.
[^12] Ibid. 12:48.
[^13] Ibid. 18:124-125.
[^14] D&C 59:23.
[^15] Ibid. 38:40.
[^16] G. Homer Durham (comp.), Gospel Standards, p. 361.
[^17] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 277.
[^18] D&C 132:37.
