Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 26

". . . The Laborer Is Worthy of His Hire." (D&C 84:79-91).

Behold, I send you out to prove the world, and the laborer is worthy of his hire.

And any man that shall go and preach this gospel of the kingdom, and fail not to continue faithful in all things, shall not be weary in mind, neither darkened, neither in body, limb, nor joint; and a hair of his head shall not fall to the ground unnoticed. And they shall not go hungry, neither athirst.

Therefore, take ye no thought for the morrow, for what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed.

For, consider the lilies of the field, how they grow, they toil not, neither do they spin; and the kingdoms of the world, in all their glory, are not arrayed like one of these.

For your Father, who is in heaven, knoweth that you have need of all these things.

Therefore, let the morrow take thought for the things of itself.

Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man.

Therefore, let no man among you, for this commandment is unto all the faithful who are called of God in the church unto the ministry, from this hour take purse or scrip, that goeth forth to proclaim this gospel of the kingdom.

Behold, I send you out to reprove the world of all their unrighteous deeds, and to teach them of a judgment which is to come.

And whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about, to bear you up.

Whoso receiveth you receiveth me; and the same will feed you, and clothe you, and give you money.

And he who feeds you, or clothes you, or gives you money, shall in no wise lose his reward.

And he that doeth not these things is not my disciple; by this you may know my disciples. [^1]

Background of the revelation

This revelation is known as a Priesthood revelation because of the information about the place of the Priesthood in the plan of salvation. The word of the Lord is given regarding the temple in the New Jerusalem; the relationship of the Aaronic to the Melchizedek Priesthoods, and many other important subjects pertaining to the missionary work of the Church.

Background of the promise

The need to know what the Lord revealed to the Book of Mormon people as well as the present-day revelations is emphasized. To those who serve in the mission field special instructions are given concerning the miracles which may be performed by the Priesthood; the need for baptism of water and the Spirit to be saved is given.

Contents of the promise

(1) The missionary is sent out to prove the world, for, he, the laborer, is worthy of his hire. (2) The faithful in this calling will find material as well as spiritual blessings. (3) He need not be concerned about what or when he eats, for the Lord is mindful of the welfare of his servants. (4) He should treasure eternal truths in his mind that the Spirit may draw them forth in a time of need. (5) The missionary should not take purse or scrip. (6) He should reprove the world of their unrighteous deeds and teach a judgment to come. (7) The Lord will be with him in his labors. (8) He who befriends the Lord's servants will receive his reward, but on the other hand, he who will not feed or furnish money to them will not be the Lord's servants.

Analysis of the promise

These verses are a prophetic promise of what will be received by the faithful missionary and those who sustain him. They who will not befriend the Lord's servant will not be his disciple.

The "laborer is worthy of his hire" summarizes what may be called the Law of Remuneration for Services. This law is enunciated in Section 42, given in February 1831, as the law to the Church. [^2] This law of remuneration is also mentioned in other revelations. [^3] When a person gives full time service in the kingdom, he is to receive assistance in providing his material necessities. By and large, the ministry of the Church is not included in this category; for example, the missionary who serves a two-year period sustains himself, but the general authority and other full-time workers are included in this law.

To be "faithful in all things" means to seek for and obtain the spirit of one's calling as a missionary. This is accomplished only by righteousness in thought and deed. It means dedicated and loyal service at all times.

Emphasis is placed in this promise that in order to be a faithful servant one must study the gospel that when the need arises, the full mind will draw forth the necessary information—a dry well will not produce water.

The commandment to take purse and scrip in the early part of the dispensation was the same commandment given by the Savior to his disciples in the meridian dispensation. [^4] When conditions changed, as they have in our dispensation when laws and other factors made it unfeasible to go without money and baggage, the meaning of purse and scrip, the disciples were commanded to take them. [^5] Once again we find an example of the same teachings and practices of the earlier dispensation a part of the restoration of all things. [^6]

An essential message of the servants of the Lord is that the judgment after death will be faced by every man. Also, the revelations are clear concerning judgments in this life in the form of natural calamities and wars. (See "The Wars That Shall Shortly Come to Pass"—Part II—Conditions after the American Civil War"—D&C 87:4-8; "And The Voice of Warning Shall be Unto All People"—D&C 1:2-5). Under some circumstances, the message of judgments should not be mentioned. [^7]

In this same Priesthood revelation we learn that they who receive the Lord's servants receive the Savior, and in receiving him they receive the Father. [^8] When a person helps a missionary with food, or other necessaries of life, he does not "receive" the Lord in the fullest sense given in this instruction. Only he who accepts the Lord fully through baptism and remains faithful will receive all that the Father hath, as indicated in these verses. [^9]

Fulfillment of the promise

At the beginning of the dispensation missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints went out under the commandment that purse and scrip should not be used. They labored under adverse conditions sometimes, but always the Lord was with his faithful servants, raising up friends in time of need. The fulfillment of this prophetic promise is known throughout the Church by the posterity of those who labored without money and baggage. In 1863, President Heber C. Kimball said the time had come when the Gospel was to be preached to all nations and to be taught more quickly than it had ever before; therefore, the elders were to take purse and scrip. [^10] There were times after that day that elders continued to labor without such means but, by and large, the taking of some means of subsistence was followed.

Testimonies of the Lord's goodness to his servants, who faithfully discharged their duties, are many. What impelled these men to travel in such a manner? President Brigham Young testified, as follows:

"It has never been considered a hard thing by the Elders of this Church to pursue that course. Inspired by the Spirit of God they feel as God feels towards the human family—a desire to bless, comfort, and instruct and to lead them in the paths of life. God places this principle in the hearts of his servants—it emanates from him and is part of his nature; and inasmuch as the Elders are dictated by this spirit in their acts insomuch do they resemble their heavenly Father, who is full of benevolence and 'causes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and makes the rain to descend on the just and on the unjust;' and hence whenever we become acquainted with the principles of life ourselves we feel a desire to communicate the same unto others, and I see those all around me, here in this assembly, who, as well as myself, have traveled thousands of miles—I have traveled thousands of miles—on the same principle as the ancient disciples did, trusting in God for sustenance while proclaiming the principles of life to the people. [^11]

President John Taylor said:

"We used to be in the habit of going without purse and scrip. That is the way I have travelled hundreds and thousands of miles, but then we felt as the disciples of old did. When we returned, if asked if we had lacked anything, we could say verily no. . . . At that time we were the poorest people in the world, but now we are better off than the generality of mankind, and we are able to help one another, and there is no necessity for our missionaries to go under the circumstances they have done heretofore. . . ." [^12]

The power of conviction went with these brethren in those early days, as it does now, but under different circumstances. President Wilford Woodruff relates the experiences of some members of the Quorum of the Twelve under the commandment of going without purse or scrip. He said:

". . . I want to make a little statement of my experience in those days concerning circumstances that took place with me. When Brother Brigham [Young] left home he told me that all his family had was one barrel of rotten flour. Two hundred cents would have bought every pound of provision I left with my family when I left home. But we left our wives, for we had the commandment of God upon us, we were either going to obey it, or die trying. That was the spirit of the elders of Israel; and I blessed my wife and child and left them in the hands of God, and to the tender mercies of our noble bishops, and those who were acquainted with them know how it was in those days. . . . I mention this just to show our position. We traveled without purse and scrip, and we preached without money and without price. Why? Because the God in heaven had called upon us to go forth and warn the world." [^13]

Application of the promise

When the Lord calls men into his service through his appointed leaders, there come blessings with faithful service. It was so with the early missionaries, their wants were supplied, and the persons receiving their ministrations were benefited with the words of salvation and also material blessings. When the ambassadors of the Lord give of their time, talents, and means to help build the kingdom of God on the earth, they receive bounteous blessings in fulfillment of commandments, one of which is that of peace in this world. [^14] In addition, God's power is with his missionaries and his saints who are endeavoring to make their contributions in ward and stake positions. The Spirit of the Lord is with those who follow this commandment: "And again, I say unto you, I give unto you a commandment, that every man, both elder, priest, teacher, and also member, go to with his might, with the labor of his hands, to prepare and accomplish the things which I have commanded." [^15]

Although the commandment of no purse or scrip is no longer in force, the service performed by missionaries under a different set of circumstances is just as beneficial. The same Priesthood functions for guidance, instruction, and salvation ordinances, as formerly.

". . . The Laborer Is Worthy of His Hire." (D&C 84:79-91).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 86:8-11.
[^2] Matthew 13:24-43.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, Origin of the "Reorganized" Church, p. 55.
[^4] Journal of Discourses 18:120.
[^5] Millennial Star 56:402-403.
[^6] Journal of Discourses 7:289-290.
[^7] Archibald F. Bennett, Saviors on Mount Zion, p. 87.
[^8] Ibid. p. 88.
[^9] Ibid. pp. 89-90.
[^10] Ibid. pp. 87-88.
[^11] Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 149-150.
[^12] Abraham 2:8-11.
[^13] D&C 112:32.
[^14] Millennial Star 56:403.
[^15] Conference Report, October 1955, pp. 87-88.
