Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 27

". . . Ye Are Lawful Heirs . . . Blessed Are Ye if Ye Continue in My Goodness . . ." (D&C 86:8-11).

Therefore, thus saith the Lord unto you, with whom the priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your fathers—

For ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God—

Therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began.

Therefore, blessed are ye if ye continue in my goodness, a light unto the Gentiles, and through this priesthood, a savior unto my people Israel. The Lord hath said it. Amen. [^1]

Background of the revelation

This revelation was given through the Prophet Joseph Smith at Kirtland, Ohio, December 6, 1832. It is an explanation of the parable of the Wheat and the Tares, given by the Savior. [^2]

Background of the prophetic promise

The verses under consideration are preceded by the Parable of the Wheat and the Tares. The Lord's counsel was to permit the tares to grow with the wheat until the time of harvest (gathering), and then the tares would be burned. The relationship between the parable and the prophetic promise seems to be that the lawful heirs to the priesthood will be the gatherers in the last days, but if they do not fulfill their responsibilities they may be as the tares in the parable.

Contents of the prophetic promise

(1) The priesthood has continued through the lineage of the fathers. (2) Ye [elders] are lawful heirs according to the flesh. (3) These lawful heirs have been hid from the world. (4) The priesthood must remain through these elders and their lineage until the restoration of all things has been completed. (5) Blessed are those who continue in goodness, a light unto the Gentiles, and a savior of Israel.

Analysis of the prophetic promise

The "you" of verse 8, "ye" of verses 9 and 11 and "your life" of verse 10, refer to the Elders of the Church, "my servants," and not to Joseph Smith alone. [^3]

The Holy Priesthood did not come down to our dispensation from one person to another, as it does today; but it has come down from the fathers. This means that the Priesthood has come down from those who held it anciently; in fact, ancient prophets restored the priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. This priesthood must remain through the lineage of the elders, as promised.

The promise is given, however, that this authority will continue with the faithful members of the Church. The elders are lawful heirs to the priesthood, because they are literally of the lineage of Joseph, son of Jacob, and most often of the tribe of Ephraim. In fact, the priesthood will continue in this lineage until all that is necessary for the salvation of man on this earth has been accomplished.

Fulfillment of the prophetic promise

The testimonies received by the Holy Ghost are convincing evidence of the truth that Latter-day Saints are literally and lawfully heirs to the priesthood. President Wilford Woodruff said the following:

"I say to the brethren and sisters—you have your appointment; the Lord has raised up these Elders of Israel, and I can prove from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants that you received the Priesthood from eternity, and your lives have been hid with Christ in God, and you knew it not. You are literally and lawfully heirs of the Priesthood through the lineage of your fathers, and that Priesthood will continue throughout eternity; therefore, you have received your appointment, and the Lord looks to you to build up his Zion and kingdom upon the earth." [^4]

Elder Franklin D. Richards, an apostle and Church Historian of this dispensation, in reference to the prophetic promise said: "What a glorious development! What! the Priesthood came down from the days of the ancients . . . Yes, certainly. It is evident the eye of God has been over us, and the eyes of His angels have watched over the continuation of the fathers down through the generations that have come unto us." [^5]

About the Prophet Joseph Smith, President Brigham Young said:

"It was decreed in the councils of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man. He was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation. . . . [^6]

It is a remarkable fact that many families of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have common ancestors. The late Archibald F. Bennett, probably the greatest genealogist the Church has produced, said that during their lifetime the knowledge of the progenitors of some early leading families was very meagre. For example, Heber C. Kimball did not know the names of his grandparents, and Brigham Young knew no further than his great-grandparents. [^7] With recent information available, Brother Bennett traced many genealogies and learned of relationships with the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Prophet and Brigham Young were 6th cousins; Heber C. Kimball and the Prophet were 5th cousins, and from Zaccheus Gould, an ancestor of the Prophet, "have come, in addition to the Prophet, Hyrum Smith, Joseph F. Smith, and President George Albert Smith, and such other progeny as Willard Richards, Franklin D. Richards, George F. Richards, LeGrand Richards, and Orson F. Whitney," all of whom were general authorities of the Church. [^8]

Sometimes the Lord reveals genealogical connections by dreams and visions when genealogical information is not available. So it was with the Orson and Parley P. Pratt family. The writer has in his possession a photostat copy of a letter given him by Mrs. Una Pratt Giles, granddaughter of Parley P. Pratt, written on October 11, 1853, to Parley from his brother Orson. An excerpt follows:

"I have published the history and genealogy of Joseph Smith as written before his death: this includes six or seven generations of his ancestry. You will recollect that Joseph had a vision and saw that our fathers and his all sprang from the same man a few generations ago. I should be pleased to trace both genealogies back to their junction, if it be possible."

About the relationship of the Smith and Pratt families, Brother Bennett, who quoted the aforementioned vision wrote:

"Another of her [Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother] ancestors was Rev. John Lathrop, a Puritan preacher who was thrust into prison for the principles he taught. . . .

"Only in recent years has the name of his wife who died in England been discovered, so that her memory can be honored. She also was the daughter of a minister. Of their children, a son Samuel Lathrop the 4th great-grandfather of President Wilford Woodruff and also of Parley P. Pratt and Orson Pratt; a daughter Jane is the 4th great-grandmother of the Prophet. Thus was the Prophet's statement of his relationship to the Pratts verified." [^9]

Joseph Loomis, an ancestor of the Prophet Joseph Smith, was also the progenitor of President Lorenzo Snow, President George Albert Smith, and Elder Joseph F. Merrill, among others. [^10]

Brother Archibald F. Bennett, who was also a member of the Brigham Young University faculty, once told the writer that he believed that in time a very great many Latter-day Saint families would find a common progenitor not too far removed from them. Through patriarchal blessings, members of the Church have learned that they have a common progenitor a long, long time ago, in Joseph, son of Jacob, and father of Ephraim and Manasseh because they are "lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God." The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the gentiles, not of Israel, are adopted into the house of Israel when they receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. [^11]

Application of the prophetic promise

Our fathers (Adam and his descendants, the prophets) received the priesthood, and we are of their lineage (Israel); therefore, we are lawful heirs for Abraham was promised that his seed would bear the priesthood through the generations of time. [^12] Our fathers, during the great apostasy from the gospel, were "hid from the world" by Christ, but in the last dispensation, we Latter-day Saints are revealed to the world as descendants of Israel who have a legal claim to the priesthood. Because we are of the royal lineage of Abraham, we have the commission to become saviors to our fellowmen in assisting the Savior. We have a destiny given us of the Father. Some may not accept and carry forward that commission, but each is under obligation to perform the Lord's work.

Unto the Twelve Apostles, the Lord said: "For verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you." [^13]

Elder Franklin D. Richards said:

". . . the Lord has cared for a lineage which has given you and me the right to the Holy Priesthood, and has awakened our souls to trace back that lineage as far as it can be discovered by records, or dreams, or visions, or revelation, or by Urim and Thummim, until we go back with our labors on that lineage, and thus return the only grateful acknowledgment we can make to them for being our fathers and mothers and giving us such honorable birth, and at such a period of time, when the Priesthood is revealed again, and that we can receive blessings of untold worth, that we never ourselves shall know the full or, until we overcome this mortality, put on immortality and enter into the exaltation which is promised unto the faithful." [^14]

Another Prophet has said:

"What are we? We are the agents of God, himself, through the Holy Order of the Priesthood of the Son of God. I wonder if we think of that. I wonder if that is on our minds when we deal with one another, when we deal with our families, with our neighbors, and with our friends. We hold these powers with which out of his abundance God has endowed us, that we might be able to carry on the mission with which we were charged when we came here." [^15]

". . . Ye Are Lawful Heirs . . . Blessed Are Ye if Ye Continue in My Goodness . . ." (D&C 86:8-11).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 87:1-3.
[^2] Ibid., 130:12-13.
[^3] DHC 1:301.
[^4] Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants 3: 140-142.
[^5] William B. Hesseltine, The South in American History, p. 198.
[^6] D&C 38:29.
[^7] Ibid., 45:63.
[^8] DHC 1:301.
[^9] D&C 130:12.
[^10] Edwin C. Rozwenec (ed.), Slavery As A Cause of the Civil War.
[^11] Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants 3:143.
[^12] Lynn Montross, War Through the Ages (Harper and Brothers Publishers: New York and London, 1944), p. 591.
[^13] J.F.C. Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, Vol. 3, p. 6.
[^14] Lynn Montross, War Through the Ages, pp. 591-592.
[^15] D&C 38:30.
