Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 28

"The Wars That Will Shortly Come to Pass" (Part I)—The American Civil War (D&C 87:1-3; 130:12-13).

(A) Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls;

And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place.

For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured out upon all nations. [^1]

(B) I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God, that the commencement of the difficulties which will cause much bloodshed previous to the coming of the Son of Man will be in South Carolina.

It may probably arise through the slave question. This a voice declared to me, while I was praying earnestly on the subject, December 25th, 1832. [^2]

Background of the revelation

(A) In commenting upon conditions at the time Section 87 was received, the Prophet referred to plagues in India, cholera in other parts of the world, and the threatened dissolution of the Union due to South Carolina declaring itself free from the United States. President Jackson issued a proclamation against this measure and quelled this rebellion. [^3]

(B) Section 130 consists of a series of doctrinal instructions correcting some statements made by Elder Orson Hyde in April 1843.

The revelation on wars was first printed in the first edition of the Pearl of Great Price, 1851. The first time it appeared in the Doctrine and Covenants was in 1876. In addition, a number of the elders carried a copy of the revelation and read it to congregations long before the Civil War commenced. [^4]

Background of the prophecies

(A) Several years before 1832, discontent was manifest in the South over Federal tariff laws which protected the industrialists of the North while the Southern planters suffered. The tariff act of 1828 was called a tariff of abominations in the South, and the one of 1832 was also considered with equal or greater abhorrence. This discontent led South Carolina to favor the nullification of the Federal tariff laws, and, if necessary, to withdraw from the Union. President Andrew Jackson issued his proclamation of Nullification on December 10, 1832, which denied to any State the power to secede from the Union. Although South Carolina appealed to the other states for support, it was not forthcoming. Virginia and Georgia were sympathetic to the cause, but would do nothing for South Carolina. [^5] Although a crisis had developed in the Nation, the ingredients to bring about an armed conflict between the States were not there. New tariff legislation in 1833 indicated a conciliatory attitude on the part of the South and the North.

(B) Two prophetic verses in the Doctrine and Covenants received at the beginning of 1831, herald the coming American Civil War: (1) "Ye hear of wars in far countries, and you say that there will soon be great wars in far countries, but ye know not the hearts of men in your own land." [^6] (2) "Ye hear of wars in foreign lands; but, behold, I say unto you, they are nigh, even at your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own lands." [^7]

On January 4, 1833, The Prophet made the following prophecy: "And now I am prepared to say by the authority of Jesus Christ, that not many years shall pass away before the United States shall present such a scene of bloodshed as has not been paralleled in the history of our nation." [^8]

Contents of the prophecy

(1) The wars of the last days would commence with the rebellion of South Carolina. (2) This war would terminate in the death and misery of many souls. (3) The Southern States would be divided against the Northern States. (4) The South would call upon Great Britain for help. (5) The conflict between North and the South would probably arise through the slave question.

Analysis of the prophecies

On the same day Section 87 was received, Christmas, 1832, a "voice" declared to the Prophet that the war between the North and the South would "probably arise through the slave question." [^9] Significant in this prophecy is the word "through", not because of slavery, but that slavery would be a contributing cause. Historians have differed in their understanding of the cause of the Civil War, some advocating one cause—slavery, while others believed that other causes in addition to slavery was the reason. [^10]

Fulfillment of the prophecies

South Carolina rebelled against the Federal Government, and war commenced on April 12, 1861, with twenty-two Northern States against eleven Southern States. The war was long and costly in human life and material. "The death and misery of many souls"—is affirmed by a correspondent in these words: The Americans "have certainly fought more desperately, for a longer time, and with more dreadful slaughter, than any nation before them!" The war ended in 1865 with victory won by the North. [^11]

"As measured by anything in Europe's past, the American Civil War is astronomical in its statistics. The theater of operations embraced an area so vast that a single flanking movement covered a distance of 800 miles. More than 2,000 combats took place, of which 149 were engagements of enough importance to be called battles. Half a million soldiers gave their lives, either on the battlefield or as a direct consequence of the campaigns. The cost in money to the North alone amounted to nearly five billion dollars; and the South did not admit defeat until every resource, both moral and material, had been exhausted." [^12]

The Southern States did call upon Great Britain for aid, but that nation did not enter the conflict. Britain allowed Southern cruisers to be fitted out in her shipyards, resulting in the payment of $15,000,000 damage claim to the Union after the War.

The American Civil War was the first of modern wars, as prophesied.

"The first of the unlimited industrialized wars was the Civil War in America. It was the first great conflict of the steam age, and the aim of the Northern, or Federal, states was unconditional surrender—that is, total victory. Its character was, therefore, that of a crusade, and because of this, as well as because it put to the test the military developments of the Industrial Revolution, it opened a radically new chapter in the history of war." [^13]

"In its tactics as well as weapons this struggle is the first in history which can readily be identified with the warfare of the present day. The railway and telegraph at last came into their own, after having confused and annoyed the professional soldiers of Europe. Hundreds of steamships, plying the great rivers and the 3,500-mile coast line, supplied and transported the armies of both sides. Eli Whitney, the father of mass production in arms, had inadvertently helped to bring on the strife by his invention of the cotton gin, which provided the Confederates with the sinews of war. Cyrus McCormick's reaper, by opening up the prairies of the West, added enormously to the strength of the Federal cause.

"The first duel between ironclad warships was followed by the first railway gun, the first electrically exploded torpedo and the first recorded instance of a vessel being sunk by a submarine. The first metallic cartridges were invented for the first breech-loading repeating rifles to meet the test of war. The machine gun had its first demonstration on the battlefield, and wire entanglements made their first appearance.

"To this list might be added such recent arms as the revolver and rifled cannon, neither of which had as yet proved its worth in largescale operations. Nearly as much originality was shown in the adaptation of weapons which had been thought obsolete. Among these revivals were the military observation balloon, lamp and flag signaling, the land mine and the hand grenade." [^14]

Application of the prophecy

The prophecy about the American Civil War is an outstanding example of the prophetic powers possessed by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Its importance to the Latter-day Saint is not only in this connection, but also because it is a direct answer to the Prophet's prayer. In addition, the background of the prophecy in Section 38, as a prelude to Section 87, is also one received as an answer to prayer. In the context to that prophecy we read: "I tell you these things because of your prayers; wherefore, treasure up wisdom in your bosoms, lest the wickedness of men reveal these things unto you by their wickedness, in a manner which shall speak in your ears with a voice louder than that which shall shake the earth; but if ye are prepared ye shall not fear." [^15]

Not only the Prophet but others had prayed for guidance in view of European troubled conditions in 1830 and 1831. The answer to the prayers came through the Prophet. Latter-day Saints may take a valuable lesson from this experience. Look to the Prophet for guidance in a troubled time! Your prayers may have been answered in the scriptures already given or received by the living Prophet!

"The Wars That Will Shortly Come to Pass" (Part I)—The American Civil War (D&C 87:1-3; 130:12-13).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 87:3-8.
[^2] Ibid. 38:29; 45:63.
[^3] Ibid. 87:1-3.
[^4] J.F.C. Fuller, A Military History of the Western World, Vol. 3, p. 182.
[^5] F.P. Chambers, C.P. Harns, C.C. Bagley, This Age of Conflict, preface.
[^6] 2 Nephi 28:2; Alma 46:23; 3 Nephi 15:12; 21:21-24.
[^7] Millennial Star 27:186-187.
[^8] D&C 38:21-22.
[^9] Revelation 6:9-11.
[^10] Alma 14:17-29, 15:1, 16:9-11.
[^11] D&C 101:17-24.
[^12] Ibid. 100:15-17.
[^13] F.P. Chambers; C.P. Harris, C.C. Bagley, This Age of Conflict, Preface.
[^14] D&C 38:29.
[^15] D&C 38:30.
