Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 30

". . . Conspiring Men in the Last Days . . ." (D&C 89:4).

Behold, verily, thus saith the Lord unto you: In consequence of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days, I have warned you, and forewarn you, by giving unto you this word of wisdom by revelation—. [^1]

Background of the revelation

President Brigham Young related the circumstances which made the Prophet Joseph Smith inquire of the Lord regarding the use of tobacco. He said that the Prophet instructed a school of brethren, in a small room attached to the store of Bishop Newel K. Whitney in Kirtland, Ohio. During these sessions some of the men would smoke and chew tobacco and expectorate on the floor creating a situation which he did not like and about which his wife complained. The revelation known to the Church as the Word of Wisdom was received on February 27, 1833.

Background of the prophecy

This revelation is addressed to the council of high priests in Kirtland, the church, and also the saints in Zion, not as a commandment but a revelation expressing the will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints. Subsequently, the Church in general conference accepted this revelation as binding upon its members; therefore, the revelation became a commandment, or the will of the Lord. [^2]

Contents of the prophecy

This prophecy may not be worded like others, but nonetheless it carries the same prophetic intent. The words:

"In consequence of evils and designs . . ." clearly sets the meaning for what will happen in the future. (l) Evils and designs do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days. (2) The efforts of designing men would be concentrated upon fostering the use of the items mentioned in the revelation—hot drinks (tea and coffee), tobacco, and strong drink. These things are declared by the Lord to be "not good for man." [^3] Because of these evil efforts of men, the Lord provided his people with counsel and commandment that their salvation might be complete by obedience to his word.

Fulfillment of the prophecy

It took years after this prophecy was received for science to affirm its truth. There will no doubt be further information discovered that will certify these harmful products as "not good for man." Many Latter-day Saint writers have brought together the research of science to show how tea, coffee, tobacco, and liquor are definitely harmful to one's health. [^4]

Probably the most damaging conclusion which is known against cigarette smoking is its association with lung cancer. About twenty years ago, researchers deduced that there was an association of cancer and tobacco-tar condensates. Further studies have shown that lung cancer is a contributing factor in the death of cigarette smokers. Conclusions reached by the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General of the United States Public Health Service, in a report issued in 1964, verify not only that cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer, but also to chronic bronchitis, coronary artery disease, as well as being associated with accidental deaths from fires in the home. [^5]

Despite this evidence the advertising of cigarettes continues with millions of dollars being spent annually to encourage people to smoke. In 1958, a sub-committee of the Committee on Government Operations of the United States House of Representatives, reported that when the tobacco-lung cancer "scare" hit the public in 1953 there was a considerable decline in cigarette sales. [^6] The tobacco companies have recouped these losses and increased their profits by introducing the filter-tip cigarette. The conclusions of the Committee, however, speak for themselves regarding their false advertising:

"In view of the publicized health hazards a strange though completely explicable transformation has occurred in the filter cigarette since its introduction. Many smokers apparently found the filters to be less satisfying (as in the case of Kents) than their old regular cigarettes. They tried different brands, presumably in search of a filter cigarette which not only afforded health protection but also (as one brand advertised) 'tastes good like a cigarette should.'

"The cigarette manufacturers obliged—at least with respect to taste. Unfortunately, the much advertised health protection—that is, less nicotine and tar—was an unpublicized casualty. The filter cigarette smoker is, in most cases, getting as much or more nicotine and tar from the filter than he would get from the regular cigarette the advertisers have persuaded him to abandon—for his health's sake." [^7]

"Evidence submitted to the subcommittee showed how the cigarette industry accomplished the feat of achieving a higher level of nicotine and tar in cigarette smoke despite the filter.

"First the filters were loosened to permit a larger number of smoke particles to get through. Second, the blend was changed to include more of the stronger, heavier-bodied tobaccos. This 'switch' to the 'low grade' darker leaves has turned the tobacco market upside down. The mild, light, bright tobaccos, the most desirable of tobacco in the pre-filter period, are accumulating as surplus in Government warehouses, while the low grades of former years have moved rapidly into the hands of the cigarette manufacturers." [^8]

In its final conclusions the Committee Report without knowing it, affirmed the prophecy in the Word of Wisdom by testifying in this manner:

"1. The cigarette manufacturers have deceived the American public through their advertising of filter-tip cigarettes.

"Ironically, while denying the alleged health hazards of cigarette smoking, the cigarette industry has, in its advertising, made these charges appear true.

"Without specifically claiming that the filter tip removes the agents alleged to contribute to heart disease or lung cancer, the advertising has emphasized such claims as 'clean smoking,' 'snowy white,' 'pure,' 'miracle tip,' '20,000 filter traps,' 'gives you more of what you changed to a filter for' and other phrases implying health protection, when actually most filter cigarettes produce as much or more nicotine and tar as cigarettes without filters.

"2. The effectiveness of this deceptive advertising is evidenced by the rise in filter-cigarette sales from 1.4 percent of total cigarette sales in 1952 to 40 percent in 1957. The American public have paid premium prices of 2 to 6 cents per pack for filter cigarettes for 'protection' they did not receive. . . ." [^9]

Liquor advertising today suggests that benefits are derived from drinking—socialibility, good cheer, and happiness. These claims are made despite the damaging effects of the use of alcohol. Dr. L. Weston Oaks gives the following summation of the use of alcohol:

"A study of alcohol's effects upon the human body reveals undeniable evidence that the drug is derogatory to our best welfare; that its use precludes our enjoyment of the highest intellectual, spiritual, physical or social life." [^10]

A motivational research agency provided the coffee industry with some suggestions on how to best sell their product after determining in some depth interviews the attitudes of coffee drinkers toward their consumption of this beverage. It was discovered that there were lingering feelings of sin and punishment associated with this habit. It was considered by these coffee drinkers as a drug-provoking habit, a dangerous drink because of its overstimulating the heart and other organs of the body, and it was accused of aiding in laziness! The task of the industry was to change this sinful and escapist attitude to a beneficial and life-accepting one. Suggestions were made whereby coffee would be dramatized as a positive helper in life! The initiation of children to the use of coffee was advocated by using it as a symbol of initiation into maturity, a small amount in milk to be increased as a part of the growing up process was recommended. [^11]

Application of the prophecy

Latter-day Saints have come to recognize in recent years that their faith in the Prophet Joseph Smith's mission has been vindicated by science in the Word of Wisdom. They have come to realize better that the efforts of men to promote the use of deleterious substances and liquids fulfills the prophecy concerning these efforts which are evil and designing. President David O. McKay once expressed gratitude that the Lord did not say, "Strong drink to excess is not good;" nor "Drunkenness is not good. . . ." But like other eternal, truths it stands unqualified; strong drink is not good." [^12] Social drinking, the taking of a cocktail or a small quantity of liquor, is damaging to the brain! Dr. Melvin H. Knisely, chairman of the department of anatomy at the Medical College of South Carolina reported that social drinking may result in a "great deal of damage to the brain." The brain consists of between 10 billion to 18 billion cells, but if only as few as 10,000 cells were destroyed at a time by heavy drinking this could be significant over a long period of time. [^13]

". . . Conspiring Men in the Last Days . . ." (D&C 89:4).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 89:18-21.
[^2] Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 12:158.
[^3] 1 Peter 1:12-16.
[^4] L. Weston Oaks, The Word of Wisdom and You, pp. 39-40.
[^5] Ibid. pp. 41-42.
[^6] Conference Report, October 1952, pp. 32-33.
[^7] G. Homer Durham (comp.), Gospel Standards, p. 50.
[^8] John A. Widtsoe and Leah D. Widtsoe, The Word of Wisdom, A Modern Interpretation, pp. 235-236.
[^9] Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1968, p. 47.
[^10] Conference Report, April, 1960, 1966.
[^11] John A. Widtsoe and Leah D. Widtsoe, The Word of Wisdom, A Modern Interpretation, p. 239.
[^12] Harold B. Lee, "Faith," Y Speeches of the Year, June 28, 1955.
[^13] John A. Widtsoe and Leah D. Widtsoe, The Word Of Wisdom, A Modern Interpretation, p. 242.
