Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 31

"And All Saints . . . Shall Find Wisdom and Great Treasures of Knowledge . . ." (D&C 89:18-21).

And all saints who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in their navel and marrow to their bones;

And shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures;

And shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint.

And I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them. Amen. [^1]

Background of the revelation

Section 89 of the Doctrine and Covenants is known as the Word of Wisdom. During the winter of 1833, a school of the prophets held in Kirtland, Ohio, was conducted in a room occupied by the Prophet Joseph Smith and his family. Due to the brethren using tobacco, the Prophet inquired of the Lord regarding this practice, and the Word of Wisdom was received. [^2]

Background of the prophetic promise

The Word of Wisdom contains instruction on food and drink which are beneficial and also food and drink which are harmful to one's health. It antedated scientific data regarding much of its contents. In fact, there is a prophecy in it regarding the evils and designs of men to foster harmful products on the public. (See "Conspiring Men in the Last Days."—D&C 89:4). Among the beverages which are condemned are: tea, coffee, and alcoholic drinks. Tobacco is also singled out as harmful. Foods which are prescribed for man's use are: wholesome herbs, fruits in the season thereof, meat used sparingly, and grains.

Contents of the prophetic promise

(1) Saints who obey the Word of Wisdom, and who walk in obedience to the commandments shall receive health. (2) They shall find wisdom and treasures of knowledge, "even hidden treasures." (3) They shall run and neither be weary nor faint. (4) The destroying angel shall pass them by.

Analysis of the prophetic promise

The word "saint" means "a holy one"; consequently, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints profess to be holy ones. This does not mean that the member of the Church is without blemish or blame, but it does mean, as one definition suggests, that "holy" applies to exclusive service in the cause of God. In other words, the "saint" or "holy one" is set apart from the world as one of God. [^3]

Special notice should be taken of the qualification that those who receive the blessings of the Word of Wisdom, must walk in "obedience to the commandments," and not only those who "keep and do these sayings."

From Dr. L. Weston Oaks, the following is given:

"The expression, 'health in the navel,' is of clear-cut significance, not only for those of us who live now, but especially for those who are to become our posterity. For individuals who have passed their natal day, the navel or umbilicus has little importance, save that it testifies of one's having come into the world in the natural way. In the fetus and unborn baby all nourishment, fluids, regulating materials such as hormones, enzymes and chemicals—as well as every bit of waste materials to be carried away—during the growth and preparation of the infant body to sustain itself after birth, must pass through this portal. . . .

". . . if his prenatal development is hampered by parents who break the rules of health laid down, he becomes the innocent victim of their ignorance and carelessness. Since every poison which enters the mother's bloodstream, whether it be alcohol, nicotine, caffeine, poisons generated by acute infection, or the insidious toxins of chronic disease, readily passes from the blood of the mother to that of the unborn child, there is little indeed that nature can do to protect him against what she does." [^4]

From the same source the following is pertinent: ". . . 'marrow to the bones' is likewise of major significance in human health. Bone marrow may be yellow—as seen in the marrow cavities of long bones—or red. Yellow marrow consists of fat cells, blood vessels and a framework of cells and fibers. Red marrow, which is present even in the long bones of the newborn infant, contains many mature blood cells of all kinds, along with countless immature forms which are in the course of completing development, and which later will find their way into the circulation. As an individual grows in years, red bone marrow becomes more fatty, and by one's twentieth birthday almost the entire marrow content of long bones has become yellow in type.

"So long as it is adequate for the job, bone marrow manufactures the various blood cells to replace those millions destroyed in our daily activities, or by such things as acute infections, choronic anemias, and especially by accidents or illness associated with hemorrhage. . . .

". . . 'marrow to their bones' is clearly a significant promise, in this day when anemias of severe grade are more common than ever before." [^5]

Elder Marion G. Romney, of the Council of the Twelve, gave this discussion of the "destroying angel" mentioned in this prophetic promise:

"From this promise in the Word of Wisdom and other scriptures, it appears that there are destroying angels who have a work to do among the peoples of the earth in this last dispensation. (D&C 86:4-7). The Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith that because all flesh was corrupted before him, and the powers of darkness prevailed upon the earth, these angels were 'waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned.' (Sec. 38:11-12). That was in 1831. In 1894, President Woodruff said: 'God has held the angels of destruction for many years lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things.' (IE 17:1165).

"Now . . . in view of this revealed knowledge and understanding which the Lord has given concerning what is transpiring about us, is it not a glorious thing to have the assurance that if we will clothe ourselves with bodies purified through observance of the Word of Wisdom, these destroying angels will pass us by, as they did the children of Israel, and not slay us? Well, this is one of the blessings to follow observance of the Word of Wisdom." [^6]

Fulfillment of the prophecy

Data are not available regarding the number of members of the Church who live the Word of Wisdom. It is probably safe to say that most members of the Church to some degree live it. President Heber J. Grant said:

"I would like it known that if we as a people never used a particle of tea or coffee or of tobacco or of liquor, we would become one of the most wealthy people in the world. Why? Because we would have increased vigor of body, increased vigor of mind; we would grow spiritually; we would have a more direct line of communication with God, our Heavenly Father." [^7]

Elder John A. Widtsoe and Leah D. Widtsoe gave these four rewards for faithfully obeying the Word of Wisdom: "First, strength and vigor of body; second, protection against disease; and third, the possession of knowledge and wisdom, even 'hidden treasures of knowledge.' A fourth reward is implied, namely 'temporal salvation,' in which may be included economic welfare." [^8] Though this book was written over 30 years ago, the published information on Latter-day Saint birth rates covers the period from 1900 to 1936, making it a useful source of information. The writers indicate that bodily vigor might be shown in the Latter-day Saint birth rates which are consistently higher than the United States population. For the period 1960 through 1967, except 1961 for which there was no United States information, from 23.7 births per thousand (1960) in the United States to a low of 17.8 in 1967, with each year decreasing. [^9] in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the highest birth rate per thousand was 35.00 in 1960, with a low of 25.23 in 1966. There has been a general decrease of births in the Church, but not consistently each year. [^10] On the average during the seven year period, the Church has had an additional 10 births more per thousand than the United States. Death rates per thousand in the Church were 4 persons less than in the United States for the period 1960 through 1967, except 1961. Also, for the years 1927 and 1928, the death rate was strikingly lower than the rate in twenty-five nations. "The death rates from specific diseases, among Latter-day Saints are low compared with other large groups of people." [^11]

The living of the Word of Wisdom and the other commandments opens the door for opportunities in acquiring "wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures." Because Latter-day Saints are the only people who may receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, they may seek for these rich treasures. Elder Harold B. Lee related the experience of Elder Don B. Colton, who was also a Sunday School teacher in Washington, D.C., while serving in the house of Representatives and who was asked by members of his class why the Latter-day student was not academically ahead of students who did not observe the Word of Wisdom. The answer was not then available to Brother Colton, but during the week, while at lunch with a non-member of the Church, his friend said:

"'Congressman Colton, I've been out in your state. While I was there I was a guest of some of the members of your Church, and they invited me in to attend your meetings, and one of these meetings you hold is called a fast and testimony meeting.' And he said, 'I sat there and heard young men and women get up and bear testimony that I knew, and the sincerity with which they spoke their testimonies left no doubt that they knew the gospel was true; they knew that Jesus was the Savior of the world.' And then he said, 'Gentlemen, those people out there have hidden treasures of knowledge that the rest of us don't have.' And Brother Colton said, 'Think of it. I had to have a non-member colleague of mine tell me what the Lord meant in the Word of Wisdom, that we would find great treasures of knowledge, the depths of the mysteries of godliness.' The great undiscovered truths can only be perceived by the spirit. We put ourselves in spiritual tune when we keep God's commandments." [^12]

In addition to the personal testimonies of God's existence and Jesus Christ as the Son of God, that Joseph Smith is a prophet and his successors divinely appointed, the Latter-day Saint has a living knowledge of questions which learned men have pondered over the centuries. They have "hidden knowledge" answering the questions of Where did I come from? Why am I here? and Where do I go at death? These and many more questions for which answers are not available in the world are in the theology of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The living of the commandments provide a person with wisdom to assist him in his temporal welfare. "A wise person will conserve his economic resources. Adherence to the Word of Wisdom reduces the cost of living—the main economic problem of our day—by the larger use of the less expensive foods, such as grains, vegetables and fruits, and by saving the huge sums expended elsewhere for harmful alcoholic beverages, tobacco, tea and coffee." [^13]

One criterion of the high degree of spirituality possessed by those who keep the commandments, including the Word of Wisdom, is the Church activity in which Latter-day Saints engage. The four Priesthood programs—Home Teaching, Welfare, Missionary, and Genealogy—promote this important aspect of religious life. There is ample opportunity for saints to be active participants in Church activity throughout their lives.

Application of the prophecy

Every Latter-day Saint rejoices in the increased information available to sustain the Word of Wisdom as an authentic guide to living. In recent years the scientific research into tobacco and alcohol evidence the truth of this revelation. (See ". . . Conspiring Men in the Last Days . . ."—D&C 89:4).

Sometimes members of the Church are not sure as to what constitutes wisdom in the living of this law of health. In addition to the specifics mentioned in the revelation, the following from President Joseph Fielding Smith should help these inquirers:

"A safe guide to each and all is this: If in doubt as to any food or drink, whether it is good or harmful, let it alone until you have learned the truth in regard to it. If anything offered is habit-forming, we will be safe in concluding that it contains some ingredients that are harmful to the body and should be avoided." [^14]

The Word of Wisdom is a commandment, having been accepted as such by the Church. [^15] Where is there a Latter-day Saint who does not need wisdom, even hidden treasure of knowledge, in this day of uncertainty?

Although good health is a highly desirable blessing, the Word of Wisdom is intended to contribute to one's spirituality. No commandment is temporal only, but all commandments are spiritual. [^16] The blessings of the eternities are contingent upon the rebirth by the Holy Spirit through accepting the laws by which that birth is possible. The body is the temple of the Holy Spirit and must be clean to inherit this blessing. [^17]

"And All Saints . . . Shall Find Wisdom and Great Treasures of Knowledge . . ." (D&C 89:18-21).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 90:1-4.
[^2] Ibid. 88:138-141; Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 576.
[^3] Ibid. 576-577.
[^4] D&C 27:12-13.
[^5] Ibid. 110.
[^6] 2 Nephi 3:6-11.
[^7] D&C 43:1-7.
[^8] Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 577.
[^9] D&C 90:6; 107:18-19, 22.
[^10] Ibid. 107:23-24.
[^11] Times and Seasons 5:651, 664, 698; Millennial Star 10:115.
[^12] DHC 7:224-225.
[^13] Ibid. pp. 229-230.
[^14] Ibid. p. 233.
[^15] Tullidge, Life of Brigham Young, 1877, p. 115.
[^16] DHC 7:236, footnote.
[^17] Ibid. p. 240.
