Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 35

"Mighty in Testimony" (D&C 100:10).

And I will give unto him power to be mighty in testimony. [^1]

Background of the revelations

On October 12, 1833, while at Perrysburg, New York, enroute to Canada, the Prophet Joseph Smith received Section 100 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Sidney Rigdon and the Prophet were accompanying Brother and Sister Freeman Nickerson whose married children were in Canada.

Background of the prophecy

While on this missionary trip where the Prophet was to teach the gospel to the Nickerson family the Lord promised both Sidney and Joseph that they should speak the thoughts he would put into their hearts, but they should be spoken in meekness and solemnity of heart. [^2] If this regimen were followed, the Holy Ghost would testify of their teachings.

Sidney Rigdon was appointed spokesman to the Prophet. [^3] This calling was prophesied by Joseph, son of Jacob of biblical fame, and related by Lehi about 600 B. C. when he said: "And the Lord said unto me also: I will raise up unto the fruit of thy loins [Joseph Smith, the latter-day seer]; and I will make for him a spokesman. And I, behold, I will give unto him that he shall write the writing of the fruit of thy loins, unto the fruit of thy loins; and the spokesman of thy loins shall declare it." [^4]

Contents of the prophecy

This one sentence prophecy in its context implies that a spokesman was necessary to assist Joseph Smith in the delivering of the message, as Aaron was appointed to be a spokesman to Moses, but the Prophet would be powerful in testimony. The means by which he would have power would be, according to the context, through the Holy Ghost.

Fulfillment of the Prophecy

Upon reaching their destination, Mount Pleasant, Canada, the Prophet's party was welcomed at the homes of the two wealthy Nickersons, sons of Brother and Sister Freeman Nickerson. The reception accorded the Prophet and Brother Rigdon was out of respect for their parents, since they had read some newspaper accounts which were very unfavorable to their visitors. In fact, one of the sons when the party had gathered for a discussion, said to his wife about the Prophet: "Oh, just let him talk; I'll silence him if he undertakes to talk about the Bible. I guess I know as much about the scriptures as he does." The father of the family invited the Prophet and his missionary companion to explain their religious beliefs. Whereupon, the oldest son turned to his wife and whispered: "Now you'll see how I shall shut him up." The Prophet began by telling the story of the restoration of the gospel and Church through the instrumentality of angelic beings. From the history of Lydia Bailey Knight, the account continues as follows:

"As the speaker continued his wonderful narrative, Lydia, who was listening and watching him intently, saw his face become white and a shining glow seemed to beam from every feature.

"As his story progressed he would often allude to passages of scripture. Then Mr. Nickerson would speak up and endeavor to confound him. But the attempt was soon acknowledged even by himself to be futile.

"The Prophet bore a faithful testimony that the Priesthood was again restored to the earth, and that God and His Son had conferred upon him the keys of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods. He states that the last dispensation had come, and the words of Jesus were now in force—'Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.'" [^5]

Within a few days, Mr. Nickerson and his family were baptized. The testimony of the Prophet was convincing and powerful!

A classic example of the fulfillment of this prophecy was related by Elder Parley P. Pratt, an eyewitness to the following event which occurred in Richmond, Missouri, jail in November 1838:

"In one of those tedious nights, we had lain as if in sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the 'Mormons' while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men.

"I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the spirit of indignant justice that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph, or any one else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

"'SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!'"

He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, be looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

"I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the Courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri." [^6]

Application of the prophecy

The promise that the Prophet would be mighty in testimony was literally fulfilled as he bore witness to the truth that the gospel had been restored. The convincing manner in which he wrote his testimony is also well presented in his story of the First Vision in which he beheld the Father and the Son. The truth of this testimony is evident to one who has the Spirit of the Lord with him.

"However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise.

"So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true, and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation." [^7]

Not only the Prophet and the apostles may have the testimony of the Spirit to convince them but other faithful Latter-day Saints may enjoy this same blessing. Each member of the Church should have this witness that he might also convince others of the truth. [^8]

"Mighty in Testimony" (D&C 100:10).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 100:15-17.
[^2] Ibid. v. 13.
[^3] Ibid. 52:9, 36.
[^4] Abraham 3:25.
[^5] 3 Nephi 11:32-39.
[^6] 1 Corinthians 3:16-17; D&C 1:31-33.
[^7] D&C 20:31-34; Helaman 3:35.
[^8] Ibid., 88:66-68.
