Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 38

"Triumph of the Kingdom of God" (D&C 103:5-8).

But verily I say unto you, that I have decreed a decree which my people shall realize, inasmuch as they hearken from this very hour unto the counsel which I, the Lord their God, shall give unto them.

Behold they shall, for I have decreed it, begin to prevail against mine enemies from this very hour.

And by hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God, shall speak unto them, they shall never cease to prevail until the kingdoms of the world are subdued under my feet, and the earth is given unto the saints, to possess it forever and ever.

But inasmuch as they keep not my commandments, and hearken not to observe all my words, the kingdoms of this world shall prevail against them. [^1]

Background of the revelation

Beginning in the summer of 1833 and continuing into the winter of 1834, the saints in Jackson County, Missouri, were driven from their homes, and at the time this revelation was received, February, 1834, were locating in other counties of Missouri. They were in poverty, subsisting in huts and dugouts and depending upon the charity of the people of Clay County. The inclemency of the weather added to their woes. Elder Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wright traveled to place before the Prophet Joseph Smith and the brethren the plight of the saints and to receive instruction.

Background of the scripture

The Lord speaks of a vengeance to come upon those who have smitten his people; yet, the saints were being chastened because they did not hearken altogether to his commandments. [^2]

Contents of the prophecy

The prophecy stated in three verses may be summarized as follows: (1) The saints will prevail against God's enemies, provided, they observe his words. (2) By their obedience they shall continue to prevail against the kingdoms of this world. (3) Their inheritance will eventually be the earth, to possess it forever.

Fulfillment of the prophecy

The number of members of the Church in 1834 is not known, but six years later in 1840, there were an estimated 30,000, but during those six years the Church had considerable growth. At the close of 1968 there were almost 2,700,000 members of the Church found in many nations. The annual increase in convert baptism is from 60,000 to 80,000. Needless to say, the Church has grown materially also. With almost 500 stakes and about 4,400 wards and independent branches, and 13 temples with three others to be constructed soon, the increase continues. The five auxiliary organizations, each with its hundreds of thousands of members, were not in existence in 1834. Whereas, there were only a very few missionaries in the mission field at that time, there are now about 12,000 preaching the gospel annually.

By the testimony of the Holy Ghost Latter-day Saints are empowered to affirm that this prophecy will continue to be fulfilled. President Joseph F. Smith gave the following testimony in this regard:

"Is there a person within the sound of my voice, or anywhere else upon the face of the wide earth, who can say that this promise [D&C 103:5-7] has failed, that this prediction is not founded in truth, that so far it has not been fulfilled? I stand before this vast congregation, and am at the defiance of any human being to say, that this was not pronounced by the spirit of truth, by the inspiration of the Almighty, for it has been fulfilled, and is being fulfilled, and that, too, in the face of opposition of the most deadly character: and what remains will be fulfilled literally and completely." [^3]

Application of the prophecy

"By hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God, shall speak . . ." concerns (1) the individual member of the Church and (2) the Church as a whole. The Church has seen many of its members fall away and even some in high places, as in 1837, but the strength of the Church has moved forward despite persecution and hardships.

The fulfillment of the prophecy attests to the fact that, by and large, the individual members constituting the Church have lived well enough for the Lord to recognize their efforts. It is still no doubt true, as it was in 1831, that the following is the Lord's evaluation of the Church:

". . . the only true and living Church upon the face of the whole earth, with which I, the Lord, am well pleased, speaking unto the church collectively and not individually—

"For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance;

"Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven;

"And he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts." [^4]

The Church will continue to flourish, because there will be a sufficient number of its members who will be striving to "observe all the words" which the Lord has given. (See "I Will Raise Up Unto Myself a Pure People . . ."—D&C 100:15-17) The question, always must be: Am I living so that I shall be numbered among those who are seeking for the individual salvation to which I am entitled by my faithfulness?

"Triumph of the Kingdom of God" (D&C 103:5-8).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 103:11-14.
[^2] Ibid. 101:35-38.
[^3] Ibid. 103:13.
[^4] Ibid. 101:18.
