Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 43

"Yea the Hearts of Tens of Thousands Shall . . . Rejoice . . . and the Fame of This House Shall Spread . . ." (D&C 110:7-10; 88:119-120).

(A) For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house.

Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine own voice, if my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy house.

Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house.

And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people. Even so. Amen. [^1]

(B) Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God;

That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord; that your outgoings may be in the name of the Lord; that all your salutations may be in the name of the Lord, with uplifted hands unto the Most High. [^2]

Background of the revelations

(A) Section 110 is the historical account of the appearance of four personages—Jesus Christ, Moses, Elias, and Elijah—to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.

(B) Section 88, known as the Olive Leaf, is one of the longest and most informative revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. It was named the Olive Leaf by the Prophet because it is a message of peace to the saints.

Background of the prophetic promises

(A) Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on April 3, 1836, in the Kirtland (Ohio) Temple "saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber." [^3]

(B) The Lord revealed events before and after Jesus' second coming and the Millennium, even to the time when everything is done for the salvation of men belonging to this earth. There follows in the revelation a series of great truths, with the command to call a solemn assembly.

Contents of the prophetic promises

(1) The Lord Jesus Christ accepted the Kirtland Temple. (2) He will appear to his servants and manifest mercy to his people. (3) These blessings will follow if the people keep the commandments and thereby not pollute the Temple. (4) Thousands will rejoice because of the blessings to be poured out. (5) The fame of the temple will be known in foreign lands. (6) The temple is to be a house of prayer, fasting, faith, learning, glory, order, of God. (7) Those who enter therein should be prayerful people.

Fulfillment of the prophetic promises

The Kirtland Temple was used as a house of learning, prayer, fasting, and faith to the glory of God.

"There were two schools conducted in Kirtland. One was a school of the Elders where they carried out some of the provisions of this revelation (Sec. 88) in seeking knowledge of countries and kingdoms and languages, all such information as may be gained in the regular daily school. . .

"The other was the 'School of the Prophets,' and a very good description of this school and its purpose is given in this section of the Doctrine and Covenants, (Sec. 88:117 to the end of the section). . . . This School of the Prophets and the schools where the ordinary branches were taught continued in Kirtland until the exodus from that place. It was for this school that the lectures on faith were prepared and which were delivered to the Elders." [^4]

A function of the Kirtland Temple was the holding of public meetings which set this temple apart from the other temples erected by the Church. The endowment administered in that Temple was only partial. [^5] Meetings, such as fast meetings, solemn assemblies, and sacrament meetings were held there. There was every opportunity to exercise and to build faith, receive learning, pray, fast, and contemplate the glory of God in that holy house. In fact, glorious days were enjoyed by faithful saints as they were participants in marvelous spiritual manifestations. The endowment mentioned in the prophetic promise probably refers not only to the partial endowment administered but also to the spiritual occurrences which came into the lives of God's servants during the period March-April 1836. Some of the brethren saw angels, others spoke in tongues with the interpretation being given. The Prophet called upon the congregation to encourage the Spirit that prophecy and other manifestations might be enjoyed. Elder George A. Smith prophesied, and in the words of the Prophet:

". . . a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the Temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and I beheld the Temple was filled with angels, which fact I declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. This continued until the meeting closed at eleven p.m. [^6]

Elder Heber C. Kimball in referring to the meeting of April 6th, 1836, said:

"The meeting continued on through the night; the spirit of prophecy was poured out upon the assembly, and cloven tongues of fire sat upon them; for they were seen by many of the congregation. Also angels administered to many, for they were also seen by many.

"This continued several days and was attended by a marvelous spirit of prophecy. Every man's mouth was full of prophesying, and for a number of days or weeks our time was spent in visiting from house to house, administering bread and wine, and pronouncing blessings upon each other to that degree, that from the external appearances one would have supposed that the last days had truly come, in which the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon all flesh, as far as the Church was concerned, for the sons and daughters of Zion were full of prophesying." [^7]

Did the saints in Kirtland continue to keep the commandments that the Temple might not be polluted? Lucy Mack Smith, mother of the Prophet, refers to the time shortly after the completion of the Temple when "Joseph had a vision, which lasted until he besought the Lord to take it from him; for it manifested to him things which were painful to contemplate. It was taken from before his eyes for a short time, but soon returned again, and remained until the whole scene was portrayed before him." [^8] The following day, he preached a sermon in which he prophetically said:

"We have accomplished more than we had any reason to expect when we began. Our beautiful house is finished, and the Lord has acknowledged it, by pouring out his Spirit upon us here, and revealing to us much of his will in regard to the work which he is about to perform. . . .

"But, brethren, beware; for I tell you in the name of the Lord, that there is an evil in this very congregation, which, if not repented of, will result in setting many of you, who are here this day, so much at enmity against me, that you will have a desire to take my life; and you even would do it, if God should permit the deed. But, brethren, I now call upon you to repent, and cease all your hardness of heart, and turn from those principles of death and dishonesty which you are harboring in your bosoms, before it is eternally too late, for there is yet room for repentance." [^9]

In the spring of 1837, Elder Parley P. Pratt returned to Kirtland from Canada and found ". . . there were jarrings and discords in the Church at Kirtland, and many fell away and became enemies and apostates. There were also envyings, lyings, strifes and divisions, which caused much trouble and sorrow. By such spirits I was also accused, misrepresented and abused. And at one time, I also was overcome by the same spirit in a great measure, and it seemed as if the very powers of darkness which war against the Saints were let loose upon me. But the Lord knew my faith, my zeal, my integrity of purpose, and he gave me the victory." [^10]

This spirit of apostasy which had taken hold of the saints in Kirtland was manifest in the Temple. In her history of her son the Prophet's mother wrote of the time that a fight occurred and a sword was drawn by one of the apostles against the person of William Smith. [^11] Wilford Woodruff mentioned the occasion when this same spirit of bitterness was demonstrated against the Prophet by another apostle when he cursed him while the sacrament was being passed during a Temple meeting:

"He turned as black in the face almost as an African with rage and with the power of the devil. What did he do? He ate and drank damnation to himself. He did not go and hang himself, but he did go and drown himself, and the river went over his body while his spirit was cast into the pit where he ceased to have the power to curse either God or His Prophet in time or eternity." [^12]

By the end of 1837 and the beginning of 1838, Brigham Young and Sidney Rigdon, and the Prophet fled Kirtland in order to save their lives. In a relatively short time the Kirtland Temple was lost to the Church. It was further desecrated, until on January 19, 1841, the Lord revealed that there was no place upon the earth to which he could come and give the fulness of the Priesthood to the members of the Church. A new Temple was to be erected in Nauvoo (Illinois) where the full priesthood endowment might be administered to faithful saints. [^13]

A summary of the history of the saints in Kirtland, Ohio, and the present status of the Kirtland Temple is given by Elder James E. Talmage, as follows:

"Within two years following the dedication, a general exodus of the Saints had taken place, and the Temple soon fell into the hands of the persecutors. The building is yet standing, and serves the purposes of an ordinary meeting-house for an obscure sect that manifests no visible activity in temple building, nor apparent belief in the sacred ordinances for which temples are erected. The people whose sacrifice and suffering reared the structure no longer assert claims of ownership. What was once a Temple of God, in which the Lord Jesus appeared in person, has become but a house—a building whose sole claim to distinction among the innumerable structures built by man, lies in its wondrous past." [^14]

"Its wondrous past" is the foundation for the fulfillment of the prophetic promise: "And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people." [^15] On April 3, 1836, the Savior appeared in the Kirtland Temple; Moses restored the keys of the gathering of Israel; Elias restored the Gospel of Abraham, which blessings are received in the House of the Lord; and the blessings of the sealing powers of the Priesthood, with the genealogical powers of research and temple activity were restored. The power and influence of these keys of authority have publicized the name and fame of this Temple wherever the gospel has been preached. In the hearts of the "tens of thousands" of people who become members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints annually, the fame of the Temple and the blessings which originated in that House of the Lord not only bring them into the Church, but inspires them to receive the ordinances of exaltation in temples accepted by the Lord Jesus Christ as his House. They walk in the Lord's paths by having been taught in the House of the Lord. [^16]

Application of the prophetic promises

Two lessons may be derived from the fulfillment of these prophetic promises: (1) that even faithful members of the Church may fall into apostasy, and (2) they who have not yet received the blessings of the House of the Lord should work to that end.

Though a person may have reached the heights of great knowledge and become sanctified by the Holy Ghost, he may fall from the faith. [^17] (See "Pray Always Lest You . . .Lose Your Reward"—D&C 31:12; 61:39; 10:5; 93:49; ". . .From Him Shall Be Taken Even The Light Which He Has Received"—D&C 1:31-33).

The Lord has decreed that the fulness of blessings available to his children comes only by obedience to the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The capstone of salvation ordinances are the temple endowment and marriage for eternity. [^18]

"Yea the Hearts of Tens of Thousands Shall . . . Rejoice . . . and the Fame of This House Shall Spread . . . " (D&C 110:7-10; 88:119-120).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 112:23-26.
[^2] DHC 2:487-489, 499.
[^3] Hebrews 10:21.
[^4] Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 736.
[^5] Journal of Discourses, 15:330.
[^6] Conference Report, April 1880, p. 10.
[^7] Ibid. October 1922, p. 59.
[^8] Mosiah 2:36-38.
[^9] D&C 20:77-79.
[^10] Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 168.
[^11] Ibid. pp. 240-241.
[^12] Millennial Star 57:339-340.
[^13] D&C 124:25-34; 40-43.
[^14] James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord, p. 123.
[^15] D&C 110:10.
[^16] Isaiah 2:2-3; Micah 4:1-2.
[^17] D&C 20:30-34.
[^18] Ibid. 76:51-62; 124:28, 36-42; 131:1-4; 132:15-25.
