Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 45

"A Prophecy with a Date" (D&C 118:4-6).

And next spring let them depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name.

Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next, on the building-spot of my house, saith the Lord.

Let my servant John Taylor, and also my servant John E. Page, and also my servant Wilford Woodruff, and also my servant Willard Richards, be appointed to fill the places of those who have fallen, and be officially notified of their appointment. [^1]

Background of the revelation

The spirit of apostasy was rampant in the Church. Some of the leading brethren planned the destruction of the Church, but their efforts failed. Numbered among the apostates who were excommunicated were the following members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles: John G. Boynton, Lyman E. Johnson, Luke S. Johnson, who later returned to the Church, and William E. McLellin. Several high councilors and other priesthood members also fell at this time. Mobocracy prevailed in Missouri during the fall of 1838, including the issuance of the exterminating order by Governor William Boggs, driving the saints from Missouri.

Contents of the prophecy

The Twelve were commanded to leave for missions across the waters to Europe in the spring of 1839. They were to leave from the site of the temple lot at Far West, Missouri, on April 26, 1839. The business of the meeting at the temple lot was to appoint brethren to fill the vacancies created by apostasy.

Fulfillment of the prophecy

With the saints expelled from the state of Missouri by its citizenry, including the governor of the state, there was serious concern on the part of some members of the Church as to whether or not the meeting should be held. Several members of the Twelve, some being absent, met with other members of the Church at the building site of the temple on April 26, 1839, as commanded, and transacted the business appointed. The minutes of that meeting are as follows:

"At a conference held at Far West by the Twelve, High Priests, Elders, and Priests, on the 26th day of April, 1839, the following resolution was adopted:

"Resolved: That the following persons be no more fellowshiped in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but excommunicated from the same viz.: [the names of the excommunicants follow]

"The council then proceeded to the building spot of the Lord's House; when the following business was transacted: Part of a hymn was sung, on the mission of the Twelve.

"Elder Alpheus Cutler, the master workman of the house, then recommenced laying the foundation of the Lord's House, agreeable to revelation, by rolling up a large stone near the southeast corner."

The following of the Twelve were present: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, and John Taylor, who proceeded to ordain Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith, ". . . who had been previously nominated by the First Presidency, accepted by the Twelve, and acknowledged by the Church, to the office of Apostles and members of the quorum of the Twelve, to fill the places of those who were fallen. Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer (who had just been liberated from the Richmond prison, where they had been confined for the cause of Jesus Christ) were then ordained to the office of the Seventies.

"The Twelve then offered up vocal prayer in the following order: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith. After which we sang Adam-ondi-Ahman, and then the Twelve took their leave of the following Saints, agreeable to the revelation, viz.: [Names of these individuals follow].

"Elder Alpheus Cutler then placed the stone before alluded to in its regular position, after which, in consequence of the peculiar situation of the Saints, he thought it wisdom to adjourn until some future time, when the Lord shall open the way; expressing his determination then to proceed with the building; whereupon the conference adjourned.

Brigham Young, President. John Taylor, Clerk." [^2]

Elder John E. Page, mentioned in verse 6 of the prophecy, was ordained an apostle December 19, 1838, and Elder Willard Richards was in Europe and was ordained April 14, 1840.

The following account was related by Elder Wilford Woodruff with reference to his call to the apostleship:

"In the time of the great apostasy in Kirtland the Spirit of the Lord said to me. 'Get you a partner and go to Fox Islands.' I knew no more what was in Fox Islands than what was in Kolob. I went there, however, baptized a hundred and brought them up to Zion with me. It was upon that island where I received a letter from Joseph Smith, telling me that I was called by revelation to fill the place of one of the Twelve who had fallen. You will see it in the Doctrine and Covenants. That thing was revealed to me before I received the letter from Joseph Smith, but I did not feel disposed to tell it to any mortal man, for I knew it was my duty to keep such things to myself." [^3]

Following the reporting of the minutes of the meeting, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote the following:

"Thus was fulfilled a revelation of July 8, 1838, which our enemies had said could not be fulfilled, as no 'Mormon' would be permitted to be in the state.

"As the Saints were passing away from the meeting, Brother Turley said to Elders Page and Woodruff, 'Stop a bit, while I bid Isaac Russell goodbye;' and knocking at the door, called Brother Russell. [He and his wife had just been excommunicated because of apostasy]. His wife answered, 'Come in, it is Brother Turley.' Russell replied, 'It is not; he left here two weeks ago;' and appeared quite alarmed; but on finding it was Brother Turley, asked him to sit down; but the latter replied, 'I cannot, I shall lose my company.' 'Who is your company?' inquired Russell. 'The Twelve.' 'The Twelve!' 'Yes, don't you know that this is the twenty-sixth, and the day the Twelve were to take leave of their friends on the foundation of the Lord's House, to go to the islands of the sea? The revelation is now fulfilled, and I am going with them.' Russell was speechless, and Turley bid him farewell." [^4]

Application

Although this prophecy is not as momentous as the one on the wars of the latter days, which began with the American Civil War, it nonetheless is outstanding in the execution of its fulfillment due to the circumstances which developed subsequently. (See ". . . The Wars That Will Shortly Come To Pass. . ." Part I—The American Civil War—D&C 87:1-3.) In any case, as a prophecy, it adds one more to the numerous prophecies given by the Prophet Joseph Smith to attest to his calling as a prophet.

The circumstances under which the prophecy was fulfilled provide Latter-day Saints with increased assurance that the Lord will assist his servants to accomplish the mission to which they are called. The words of Nephi are remembered by members of the Church as significant in this regard: ". . .I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." [^5]

A Prophecy with a Date (D&C 118:4-6).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 121:26-29.
[^2] Ibid. 42:61.
[^3] Ibid. 76:5-10.
[^4] Ibid. 101:32-34.
[^5] Acts 3:19-21; Ephesians 1:9-10.
