Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 48

". . . The Tribe of Judah, after Their Pain Shall Be Sanctified . . ." (D&C 133:35; 45:48-53; 133:20; 77:15).

(A) And they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and ever. [^1]

(B) And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake.

And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly.

And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in shine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities, then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. [^2]

(C) For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion. [^3]

(D) Q. What is to be understood by the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter of Revelation?

A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers. [^4]

Background of the revelations

(A, C) Section 133 is known as the "Appendix." This revelation was received on November 3, 1831, immediately after the conference where the "Preface" to the Doctrine and Covenants Section 1 was received. Some elders were desirous to learn about preaching the Gospel, and the doctrine of the gathering.

(B) Section 45 was received to combat some false ideas which were being circulated about the Church. Its contents are largely prophetic concerning the last days.

(D) Section 77 is an explanation of certain verses in the Book of Revelation, the last book of the New Testament.

Background of the prophecies

(A, C) Preparation should be made for the second coming of Christ. No one knows the day nor the hour when he shall come; consequently, the elders should be sent forth to proclaim the gospel. Great physical changes will come upon the earth. The ten lost tribes will return from the land of the north to receive their blessings at the hands of Ephraim.

(B) Following the reasons why Latter-day Saints should be obedient to the commandments, the Lord relates his conversation with his ancient disciples concerning the signs of the times in the Dispensations of the Meridian of Times and of the Fulness of Times. Included in the events of the last days is the fulfillment of this prophecy.

(D) Verse 15 of Section 77 is the last verse in the revelation. The revelation provides a key for the interpretation of the Book of Revelation. Immediately preceding the prophecy is an explanation of a mission given to the author of Revelation, John the Apostle, who has a mission to gather the tribes of Israel, a part of which is Judah.

Contents of the prophecies

(1) Before the Jewish people are sanctified, they will suffer pain. (2) The Lord will stand upon Mount Olivet in Jerusalem and nations will mourn. (3) The Jewish people will ask when he received the wounds in his hands and feet, and he shall reply: "In the house of my friends." (4) Jesus will then identify himself as the crucified Son of God. (5) The Jews will mourn because of their rejection of him. (6) Two prophets will be raised up to the Jewish nation after the restoration of the Jews to their land and the building of Jerusalem.

Analysis of the prophecies

The Mount of Olivet, or Olives, is a hill east of the Jerusalem city wall. On the western side is the Garden of Gethsemane.

Beginning with the 16th verse of Section 45, the Lord relates his conversation with his former day disciples regarding the signs of his coming. In the first unit of this material [^5], the circumstances of the Jewish people in the meridian dispensation are told. The temple in Jerusalem will be thrown down, and the people scattered among all nations. The scattering of the Jews was preceded by a Roman sedge of Jerusalem which left about one and one-half million dead and many sold into slavery. "But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

"And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth." [^6] For information about the gathering of Judah to her homeland, see "The Children of Judah"—D&C 109:61-64. (Information which is complementary to Section 45 can be found in the revision of Matthew chapter 24, which is found in Joseph Smith 1:1-21).

Fulfillment of the prophecies

With the return of the Jewish people to the state of Israel, the stage is set for the predicted events in these prophecies. (A, B, C). Elder Parley P. Pratt has given an account of the fulfillment of these prophecies. It is as follows:

"Zechariah, in his 14th chapter, has told us much concerning the great battle and overthrow of the nations who fight against Jerusalem, and he has said, in plain words, that the Lord shall come at the very time of the overthrow of that army, yes, in fact, even while they are in the act of taking Jerusalem, and have already succeeded in taking one-half the city, and spoiling their houses, and ravishing their women. Then, behold their long-expected Messiah, suddenly appearing, shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, a little east of Jerusalem, to fight against those nations and deliver the Jews. Zechariah says the Mount of Olives shall cleave in twain, from east to west, and one-half of the mountain shall remove to the north, while the other half falls off to the south, suddenly forming a very great valley, into which the Jews shall flee for protection from their enemies as they fled from the earthquake in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah, while the Lord cometh and all the saints with him. Then will the Jews behold that long, long-expected Messiah, coming in power to their deliverance, as they always looked for Him. He will destroy their enemies, and deliver them from trouble at the very time they are in the utmost consternation, and about to be swallowed up by their enemies. But what will be their astonishment when they are about to fall at the feet of their Deliverer, and acknowledge Him their Messiah! They discover the wounds which were once made in His hands, feet, and sides; and, on inquiry, at once recognize Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews, the man so long rejected. Well did the Prophet say, they shall mourn and weep, every family apart, and their wives apart. But, thank heaven, there will be an end to their mourning; for He will forgive their iniquities and cleanse them from uncleanness. Jerusalem shall be a holy city from that time forth, and all the land shall be turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon, and she shall be lifted up and inhabited in her place, and men shall dwell there, and there shall be no more utter destruction of Jerusalem; 'And in that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one, and He shall be king over all the earth.' (Zech. 14:9).

"John, in his 11th chapter of Revelation, gives us many more particulars concerning this same event. He informs us that, after the city and temple are rebuilt by the Jews, the Gentiles will tread it under foot forty and two months, during which time there will be two Prophets continually prophesying and working mighty miracles. And it seems that the Gentile army shall be hindered from utterly destroying and overthrowing the city, while these two Prophets continue. But, after a struggle of three years and a half, they at length succeed in destroying these two Prophets, and then overrunning much of the city; they send gifts to each other because of the death of the two Prophets, and in the meantime will not allow their dead bodies to be put in graves, but suffer them to lie in the streets of Jerusalem three days and a half; during which the armies of the Gentiles, consisting of many kindreds, tongues and nations, passing through the city, plundering the Jews, see their dead bodies lying in the street. But, after three days and a half, on a sudden, the spirit of life from God enters them, and they will arise and stand upon their feet, and great fear will fall upon them that see them. And then they shall hear a voice from heaven saying, 'Come up hither,' and they will ascend up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beholding them. And having described all these things, then comes the shaking, spoken of by Ezekiel, and the rending of the Mount of Olives, spoken of by Zechariah. John says, 'The same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand.' And then one of the next scenes that follow is the sound of voices, saying, 'The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign forever and ever.'

"Now, having summed up the description of these great events spoken of by these Prophets, I would just remark, there is no difficulty in understanding them all to be perfectly plain and literal in their fulfillment.

"Suffice it to say, the Jews gather home, and rebuild Jerusalem. The nations gather against them in battle. Their armies encompass the city, and have more or less power over it for three years and a half. A couple of Jewish Prophets, by their mighty miracles, keep them from utterly overcoming the Jews; until at length they are slain, and the city is left in a great measure to the mercy of their enemies for three days and a half; the two Prophets rise from the dead and ascend up into heaven. The Messiah comes, convulses the earth, overthrows the army of the Gentiles, delivers the Jews, cleanses Jerusalem, cuts off all wickedness from the earth, raises the Saints from the dead, brings them with Him, and commences His reign of a thousand years; during which time His Spirit will be poured out upon flesh; men and beasts, birds and serpents, will be perfectly harmless, and peace and the knowledge and glory of God shall cover the earth as the waters cover the sea; and the kingdom and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the Saints of the Most High." [^7]

Soon after the nation of Israel was organized in 1947, the Arabs attempted to overcome this little nation, but as told by Arthur U. Michelson, it appears that God intervened in their behalf and thwarted this attempt. According to this account in at least two battles though the Arabs were the stronger of the two armies, they stopped fighting and gave up their arms. When asked the reason, it was said they believed they saw three men with long beards, who warned them not to fight any longer. Becoming frightened they gave up. On another occasion during the war, the Jews were surrounded by the Egyptians, when the Arabs surrendered. The Jews were told that the Egyptians saw an old man, dressed in a long robe, who warned them not to fight, else they would perish. Elder LeGrand Richards of the Council of the Twelve, who published Mr. Michelson's account, suggests the possibility that these persons might have been the Three Nephites. [^8] These ancient American prophets were promised by the Savior that they would not die until his second coming, and as Mormon said:

"And behold they will be among the Gentiles, and the Gentiles shall know them not.

"They will also be among the Jews, and the Jews shall know them not." [^9]

Enmity between the Jews and the Arabs has continued through the years. In June 1967, Israel defeated the Arab armies in a six-day war. Since that time there have been almost daily, if not daily, border skirmishes between the Arab nations of Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and Egypt. These clashes are continuing unabated despite United Nations efforts to bring quiet to the area. The Soviet Union which supplied the Arab nations with fighting equipment before their defeat in 1967 is rebuilding the Arab arsenal for a future confrontation with Israel. The Soviets are also building up their Mediterranean fleet far beyond any earlier period with the avowed purpose of assisting the Arabs.

Application of the prophecies

The prophecies, ancient and modern, indicate that the sedge of the Jewish people in their homeland is a major sign of the imminence of the second coming of Christ to the world. The second coming of the Savior will consist of three appearances rather than one to the world at large. His first appearance will be to the saints, in their temples, and at Adam-ondi-Ahman. (Malachi 3:3; D&C 84:21-34; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 171-173). The second appearance will be to the Jews, as indicated, and the third, to the world in power and glory to destroy the wicked. [^10]

The sanctification of the Jewish people will be in the same manner as that of any individual. Salvation comes individually when they accept the Gospel of Jesus Christ by faith in Christ, repentance of sin, baptism, and the receiving of the Holy Ghost by an authorized servant of the Lord. That Judah will receive the benefits of the atonement was prophesied by Nephi in these words:

"And now my beloved brethren, I have read these things that ye might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel—

"That he has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of his holy prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to generation, until the time comes that they shall be restored to the true church and fold of God; when they shall be gathered home to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in all their lands of promise." [^11]

Before this time, however, they will "begin to believe in Christ." [^12]

When the Jewish nation will undergo the grave calamity mentioned in these prophecies is not known, but what is known is that it will surely come to pass. Only revelation holds the answer to the future.

". . . The Tribe of Judah, after Their Pain Shall Be Sanctified . . ." (D&C 133:35; 45:48-53; 133:20; 77:15).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 136:31.
[^2] Ibid. 121:7-8.
[^3] Ibid. 122:5-7.
[^4] DHC 3:289-301.
[^5] D&C 25:1; 34:2.
[^6] Ibid. 41:1.
[^7] Ibid. 42:1.
[^8] Journal of Discourses, 6:169.
[^9] Ibid. 15:338; D&C 64:41-43.
[^10] Jacob 2:1-2.
[^11] 2 Nephi 4:34-35; 9:28-29; D&C 42:61.
[^12] Moses 4:1-4; D&C 29:36-38.
