Roy W. Doxey, Prophecies and Prophetic Promises from the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1969)

Chapter 50

"Be Diligent in Keeping All My Commandments . . ." (D&C 136:42; 3:10-11; 19:20, 63:23; 93:20).

(A) Be diligent in keeping all my commandments, lest judgments come upon you, and your faith fail you, and your enemies triumph over you. So no more at present. Amen and Amen. [^1]

(B) But remember, God is merciful; therefore, repent of that which thou has done which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you, and thou art still chosen, and art again called to the work;

Except thou do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and have no more gift. [^2]

(C) Wherefore, I command you again to repent, lest I humble you with my almighty power; and that you confess your sins, lest you suffer these punishments of which I have spoken, of which in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit. [^3]

(D) But unto him that keepeth my commandments I will give the mysteries of my kingdom, and the same shall be in him a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life. [^4]

(E) For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. [^5]

Background of the revelations

(A) The last revelation printed in the Doctrine and Covenants, known as "The Word and Will of the Lord," was received on January 14, 1847, by Brigham Young, President of the Quorum of the Twelve. The instructions given therein are about the trek of the pioneer companies which journey westward.

(B) Section 3 was received by the Prophet July 1828, and relates to the loss of the 116 pages of manuscript, the contents of which came from the Book of Mormon plates.

(C) Section 19 was received for the benefit of Martin Harris though its contents apply to all. It is an important doctrinal revelation.

(D) Section 63 was received at Kirtland, Ohio, in August 1831. It contains information about the land of Zion, particularly the gathering of the saints, the purchase of land, and other matters.

(E) Section 93, received on May 6, 1833, is considered one of the great doctrinal revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. Its contents are about Jesus Christ and man.

Background of the prophetic promises

(A) After giving some details about the organization of the camps of Israel and how members should comport themselves while traveling, reference is made to the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

(B) Because Joseph Smith had implored of the Lord to permit him to allow Martin Harris to take some of the translated material from the Book of Mormon to show to some of his relatives, it was lost, and the Prophet came under censure. The prophetic promise is preceded by the warning that if the Prophet transgresses he may fall from his appointed place.

(C) The doctrines of everlasting punishment, and the atonement of Jesus Christ, especially the great suffering he underwent to redeem man from his sins, precede the prophetic promise.

(D) A warning is issued to the wicked that the day of wrath approaches in which they will be punished. The sign seeker is condemned. Among the saints there were adulterers and adulteresses, all of whom will one day be made known. The punishment of hell awaits these unrepentant people.

(E) The doctrine in Section 93 preceding the prophetic promise is John's testimony of Christ as the Son of God.

Contents of the prophetic promises

(1) Keep the Lord's commandments. (2) Judgments follow disobedience to the commandments. (3) Repentance of sin is commanded, which includes confession of them. (4) The rewards of repentance (keeping the commandments) are: (a) a continuation of the gift received; (b) surcease from punishment; (c) receive the mysteries of the kingdom; (d) receive the fulness of glory.

Analysis of the prophetic promises

Diligence means constancy of performance. If one does not keep the commandments, judgments follow; that is, punishment by withdrawal of the spirit. The judgments may be mental punishment in the prison of the spirit world, and eventually loss of the highest kingdom following the resurrection. [^6]

Man's enemies are not always those who come to do him physical harm, but sins which prevent him from accepting and living the way of salvation. The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Salvation means a man's being placed beyond the power of all his enemies." [^7] That the enemies here mentioned includes knowledge and the ability to apply that knowledge for salvation is apparent in the following from the Prophet: "Salvation is nothing more nor less than to triumph over all our enemies and put them under our feet. And when we have power to put all enemies under our feet in this world, and a knowledge to triumph over all evil spirits in the world to come, then we are saved, as in the case of Jesus, who was to reign until He had put all enemies under His feet, and the last enemy was death." [^8]

Repentance in its fullest sense means to keep the commandments, not only to desist from a specific sin but to be diligent in keeping other commandments. Repentance includes confession to the bishop. The loss of the Spirit brings darkness of mind and reduces the ability to repent. (See ". . . From Him Shall Be Taken Even The Light Which He Has Received."—D&C 1:31-33).

All people sin to a certain degree, some more grievously than others. Sexual sin is one of the most heinous, and, if not repented of, brings loss of faith and eternal damnation. [^9]

All members of the Church are entitled to one or more gifts of the Holy Ghost, but they must seek them. [^10]

The "mysteries of the kingdom" include at least two kinds of information: (1) an understanding of the principles of salvation that may be received by everyone, such as the fundamental principles and ordinances of the gospel, the doctrines of resurrection, eternal judgment, future kingdoms, and so forth; (2) the principles and ordinances of exaltation which are received only in the temple.

The "fulness of glory" is exaltation, or eternal life, the highest measure of salvation available. (See "They Are They . . . Who Have Received Of His Fulness, And Of His Glory . . ."—D&C 76:50-60; 132:4-5; 131:1-4; 132:15-22).

Fulfillment of the prophetic promises

In the early days of the Church Ezra Booth and Isaac Morley were chastized by the Lord for sins which they had committed. Although specific information is lacking regarding the precise sins committed, there were many at this time who were charging the Prophet as being false. The revelation says of these two brethren: "They condemned for evil that thing in which there was no evil." The following is found in the revelation:

"Behold, I, the Lord, was angry with him who was my servant, Ezra Booth, and also my servant Isaac Morley, for they kept not the law, neither the commandment.

"They sought evil in their hearts, and I, the Lord, withheld my Spirit. They condemned for evil that thing in which there was no evil; nevertheless I have forgiven my servant Isaac Morley." [^11]

The prophetic promises say that diligence in keeping the commandments is required of all, but if one repents, he shall be forgiven. However, there are times when the sin committed is so serious, or the individual lacks sufficient faith to seek for the spirit of repentance that apostasy results. The two brethren—Booth and Morley—are examples of the unrepentant and the repentant. The Lord forgave Brother Morley because he repented, and thus he remained "my servant." On the other hand, Ezra Booth did not repent, and as a consequence he lost the Spirit and became an apostate.

Although complete information is not available on Brother Booth's life after his apostasy, the following is given concerning him:

"About this time Ezra Booth came out as an apostate. He came into the Church upon seeing a person healed of an infirmity of many years standing. He had been a Methodist priest for some time previous to his embracing the fulness of the Gospel, as developed in the Book of Mormon; and upon his admission into the Church he was ordained an Elder. As will be seen by the foregoing revelation [Sec. 64:15-16], he went up to Missouri as a companion of Elder Morley; but when he actually learned that faith, humility, patience, and tribulation go before blessing, and that God brings low before He exalts; that instead of the 'Savior's granting him power to smite men and make them believe,' (as he said he wanted God to do in his own case)—when he found he must become all things to all men that he might peradventure save some; and that, too, by all diligence, by perils by sea and land; as was the case in the days of Jesus—then he was disappointed. In the 6th chapter of St. John's Gospel, 26th verse, it is written: 'Verily, verily I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled.' So it was with Booth; and when he was disappointed by his own evil heart, he turned away, and as said before, became an apostate, and wrote a series of letters, which by their coloring, falsity, and vain calculations to overthrow the work of the Lord, exposed his weakness, wickedness, and folly, and left him a monument of his own shame, for the world to wonder at." [^12]

The letters to which reference is made by the Prophet, were printed in the Ohio Star, a paper printed in Ravenna. These nine letters were republished several times, according to Elder George A. Smith, in opposition to the Church. His apostasy also culminated in forming a mob which tarred and feathered the Prophet, and caused an adopted infant to die. [^13]

Ezra Booth did not completely eliminate the enemies of his soul, and he became as other natural men, without the gift of the Holy Ghost, and he was left to his own devices.

Isaac Morley, on the other hand, is an example of one who repented, retained the gift, and remained faithful to the end. In a revelation not included in the Doctrine and Covenants, Isaac Morley is commended for the integrity of his heart in laboring in the vineyard, and his sins were forgiven him. [^14] He was a counselor in the bishopric to Bishop Edward Partridge, and he underwent the persecutions in Missouri. The last ten years of his life in Utah, where he settled in Sanpete County, were spent as patriarch, a calling to which he was ordained by the Prophet Joseph Smith. In this exalted office one can believe that the mysteries of the kingdom were in him "a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life."

Numerous examples of the faithful and the unfaithful whose lives demonstrated the provisions of these prophetic promises might be given. The unrepentant, who have fought against the kingdom are remembered only in infamy, but honest, devoted Latter-day Saints have left a posterity and a people who revere their names, and the eternities await their coming in glory.

Application of the prophetic promises

When one has accepted the atonement of Christ for his individual salvation in the waters of baptism, he covenants to keep all of the commandments. "And again, every person who belongeth to his church of Christ, shall observe to keep all the commandments and covenants of the church." [^15]

When covenants are broken by disobedience, the loss of the Spirit removes the protection which helped and assisted the person to overcome his enemies. No longer is the covenant of force, and blessings formerly pronounced upon him are not available. (See "The Covenant . . . They Made Unto Me Has Been Broken . . . It Has Become Void."—D&C 54:4-6; 82:21; 84:41; 104:4-9).

"Be Diligent in Keeping All My Commandments . . ." (D&C 136:42; 3:10-11; 19:20, 63:23; 93:20).

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 136:42.
[^2] Ibid. 3:10-11.
[^3] Ibid. 19:20.
[^4] Ibid. 63:23.
[^5] Ibid. 93:20.
[^6] Ibid. 76:73-76; 84:88.
[^7] DHC 5:392.
[^8] Ibid. 5:387-388.
[^9] D&C 42:22-26.
[^10] Ibid. 46:10-12.
[^11] D&C 64:15-16.
[^12] DHC 1:215-217.
[^13] Journal of Discourses, 11:4-5.
[^14] DHC 2:302-303.
[^15] D&C 42:78.
