# Joseph: a Legacy of Greatness ("Gen. 37:1"Gen. 37:2"Gen. 37:3"Gen. 37:4"Gen. 37:5"Gen. 37:6...

### Joseph: a Legacy of Greatness ("Gen. 37:1"Gen. 37:2"Gen. 37:3"Gen. 37:4"Gen. 37:5"Gen. 37:6...
Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 3: Genesis to 2 Samuel ( 1985)
 
 

6

JOSEPH: A LEGACY OF GREATNESS (Genesis 37-51)

GEORGE A. HORTON, JR.

The chances are probably more than nine out of ten that you and I are the lineal blood descendants of Joseph, the son of Jacob. In fact, "Nearly every member of the Church is undoubtedly a literal blood descendant of Jacob." 1 More specifically, President Joseph Fielding Smith explained, "At the present time most of those who are receiving the Gospel are of the tribe of Ephraim [son of Joseph]." 2

Why search out this great patriarch? President Spencer W. Kimball has said, "Whether we recognize it or not, we are connected with our past and we can fashion a better future if we draw upon the inspiration of the past and the lessons of history." 3 Few examples could surpass that of Joseph. What manner of man was he? Where was he born? Where did he live? What did he do? What was he like? Did we inherit any of his characteristics? What legacy did he leave us?

Joseph was born in Haran (ancient Padan-aram) in the north-western reaches of the great Mesopotamian plain, the first child of Jacob's beloved second wife Rachel. Jacob had served seven years for her hand in marriage, but he loved her so much "they seemed unto him but a few days" (Gen. 29:20). By the time Jacob moved back to Canaan, Joseph was the youngest of eleven boys and the only child of his mother. At a young age he became motherless when Rachel died, on the return journey, as she was giving birth to his younger brother Benjamin. The family lived for short times at Succoth, Schechem, Bethel, and near the tower of Edar (Gen. 33:17-18; 35:1, 21; hereafter, all references will be to Genesis unless otherwise specified). Finally they settled at Hebron (the city of many springs), about twenty miles south of Jerusalem near the southern end of the central mountain range. Here Joseph spent the remaining years of his youth primarily watching over the family flocks of sheep and goats. That he was herding with the sons of his father's concubines nearer his own age suggests that Joseph was under the care of Bilhah, Rachel's maid (37:2). Jacob would have provided for his well-being, because he "loved Joseph more than all his children" (37:3).

Though the family had lived two centuries in the land of Canaan, it was in the land of the Nile that Joseph lived all ninety-three years of his adult life. The ancestral roots of the family of Joseph were planted, sprouted, matured, and flowered in the soil of the delta and verdant valley of the Nile. Some of our forefathers' graves lie beneath the drifting sands not far from the shadows cast by cities, tombs, and royal pyramids of the pharaohs. Although genealogically of Israel—geographically, politically, and culturally, they became Egyptians. They would have been exposed to the ancient Egyptian religion with its complex pantheon of gods: Ra, Ptah, Hapi, Horus, Osiris, Anubis, Amon, Khons, Sobek, Seth, Toth, Sokar, Mont, Isis, Nephthys, Hathor, Geb, Nut, Atum, Mut, Khnum, Maat, Sekhemt, Shu, Khepri, Nekhbet, and more—each playing some seemingly mysterious role. It is little wonder that the Lord God, Jehovah, was to remind Israel later: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" (Ex. 20:3).

The culture of Israel was Egyptian, as evidenced by the fact that the writings of Abraham were handed down through this period in the Egyptian language. 4 An apocryphal source says that Joseph "remembered the Lord and the words which Jacob, his father, used to read from amongst the words of Abraham . . . and Joseph remembered these words." 5 At a much later date, the Plates of Brass, the extended family's sacred scriptures, were written in Egyptian (Mosiah 1:4) and may have had some influence on later Nephite records being written in "reformed Egyptian" (Mormon 9:32).

Dreams

In his youth, Joseph was taught through dreams, visions, and revelation about his mission in mortality. Divine dreams played a central role in his life. They were not filled with strange sequences, flights of fantasy, or haunting horrors, but with visions of meaning and eternal implications. As a teenager, Jacob's eleventh son likely knew that he would receive the birthright. It had been forfeited by his oldest half-brother, Reuben, for transgression with one of his father's concubines (35:22). But Joseph was in no position to exercise its privileges and responsibilities in his youth. Nevertheless, it was his right by divine designation (see Gen. 49:25-26; Deut. 33:13-17). Perhaps the coat of many colors was the "badge of birthright" or first outward sign of his coming role. It became a symbol of the father's favoritism. This compounded the brothers' antagonism toward him until "they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him" (37:4). Joseph was given special spiritual guidance in preparation for his great mission. It was the same guidance available to the brothers—it is available to anyone who complies with the laws upon which spiritual blessings come— through humility, dedication, and obedience to the light and knowledge the Lord bestows upon the faithful.

Joseph had a dream which revealed the special relationship he would have with his family and also foreshadowed the eventual mission of his posterity in the eternal salvation of the House of Israel. Little wonder the unreceptive brothers did not appreciate his special spiritual gifts. Instead, they planned his death. Did they even have a fleeting thought that the dreams might be from the Lord? They resented any such implication, "and they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words" (37:8). Their reaction brings to mind Nephi's two older brothers: "Thou hast declared unto us hard things, more than we are able to bear" (1 Ne. 16:1). Jacob's sons already had problems (37:2), and a principle can be seen in operation, i.e., "Light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved" (John 3:19-20). Or, as Nephi put it, "the guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center" (1 Ne. 16:2).

Adversity

What prompted Jacob to send Joseph sixty miles north to find his older brothers is not known. Perhaps it was fatherly concern, or interest in the flocks. Or perhaps it was to observe the behavior of the brothers after earlier reports (37:2). Whatever the reason, the journey ended twelve miles north of Shechem near Dothan. Even "before he came near . . . they conspired . . . to slay him" (37:18). The text does not specify whether this conspiracy was simply a sudden flight of evil emotion, or whether the brothers were murderers at heart. Fortunately, Reuben, in his upper twenties and feeling responsible for his younger brother, saw the folly of their plan and argued that they should not shed blood: the boy must be returned to their father. The eldest son's entreaty was partially heeded, for they stripped Joseph of his "coat of many colors" and threw him down into a dry cistern. The coat was then covered with goat's blood, torn into pieces, and eventually returned to the father as evidence of the son's untimely death by some wild beast. 6

Dothan, where their flocks foraged, was on an old caravan road which connected Damascus and Egypt. Caravans traveling it were often laden with spices such as gum, balm from Gilead, and ladanum 7 (the fragrant resin of a cistus-rose 8). After Reuben was gone, as the brothers sat down to eat, Judah looked up and saw a caravan of Ishmeelites. 9 He advised his brothers to draw Joseph out of the pit and sell him. Whether this was prompted by a concern for the young brother's welfare, financial profit, or with the subsequent reaction of his father in mind, is unclear. At any rate, he posed the question, "What profit is it if we slay our brother" (37:26). The traders purchased the lad for twenty pieces of silver and continued toward the south. Arriving in Egypt, they sold the young Hebrew slave to Potiphar, a captain of the Pharaoh's guard.

"The Lord was with Joseph" (39:2), and he remained true to the faith of his fathers. When all seemed lost, he exercised implicit trust in the Lord. Though not specifically mentioned, we may assume Joseph had been taught and lived the covenant of Abraham (i.e., the New and Everlasting Covenant). The record also does not mention whether he held the Melchizedek Priesthood, but President Joseph Fielding Smith said: "He must have had the priesthood before [he was sold] . . . for he exercised it in the land of Egypt." 10

Rising to the position of overseer in his master's household, the Hebrew slave was soon confronted by an ominous adversary. It was an awkward situation—his master's wife made an immoral play for this young Hebrew. She used flattery, coaxing, threats, and played on his sympathies with unrelenting pressure. Regarding this, President Spencer W. Kimball wrote:

He stood tall and stalwart as he resisted his evil temptress. Exerting the wiles of a wicked, voluptuous woman, displaying all her advantages of high station, beauty, and political power, she did everything she could to attract the handsome young leader. When all else failed she attempted force and intimidation and blackmail. But Joseph stood his ground. He refused to yield to her pleadings, her clothing, or lack of, her perfumes, her sexy advances, her pleading—all these bombarded a clean young man willing to suffer any penalty in order to keep his virtue. When all her womanly wiles failed, and he attempted to escape from her, she held to his clothes and tore them off his body. With lies of deceit she reported the incident, reversing the guilt to him. 11

Potiphar's wife tried everything to get Joseph to lower his guard just once. But just that once would have been fatal. He chose the bonds and bars of an earthly prison rather than the everlasting torments of a spirit prison. Again, Joseph's lot was undeserved adversity.

Interpretations Belong To God

Dreams once again became a pivotal point in Joseph's life. Presented with the night visions of the butler and baker, Joseph demonstrated his inspired ability to interpret their dreams correctly. But the forgetful butler waited two years before finally telling Pharaoh that the Hebrew servant "interpreted to us our dreams. . . . and [they] came to pass" (41:12-13). Pharaoh also had dreams; can we doubt that they were to prepare a people for a coming calamity? They revealed God's hand at work in the affairs of men in order that he could perform his will in their behalf. Pharaoh's dream was a small but integral part of the unfolding drama in the history of Israel as foreseen before the foundation of this world by an all-knowing Heavenly Father. Since the beginning, he has had purposes and designs for his children, a mission for Israel, and a special call for Joseph.

The perplexed Pharaoh called for his wise men, but none could interpret the strange antics of the cows and grain concerning which he had dreamed. Finally, Joseph was delivered directly from the dungeon, shaved, dressed, and presented to the royal ruler. "I have heard say of thee, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it" (41:15). Here was a great opportunity. Still loyal to the faith of his fathers, Joseph gave credit to him to whom it is due: "God shall give Pharaoh an answer" (41:16). "The dream of Pharaoh is one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do" (41:25). Seven years of abundance would be followed by seven years of famine. The royal court was pleased with the interpretation, and Pharaoh made a decision—he would faithfully follow the counsel of the one who could speak the mind of God.

The Man

There is always need for spiritually sensitive leaders, and ample opportunities have been provided by the Lord for them to arise. He foreordains them long before they step through the veil into mortality. Of these he has said, "there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—that the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness" (D&C 121:34-36). Joseph chose righteousness and the Lord chose him; this redounded to the everlasting blessing of all his literal and spiritual posterity. The far-sighted Pharaoh recognized something in this stalwart slave not found in most ordinary men—i.e., the attributes of godliness. Said he, "Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the spirit of God is?" (41:38). Without waiting for the answer, he turned to Joseph, "Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than you" (41:40).

Joseph had risen from the depths without compromise. Principles were paramount and devotion to duty was his imperative. The rewards of righteousness were realized. He had kept his life clean; he had resisted the strongest of temptations under the most trying circumstances, relying on the Holy Spirit. His life became an example for all Israel. He was a type of the Lord Jesus Christ, who "took on him the seed of Abraham [became mortal like the rest of Israel] . . . for in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted" (Heb. 2:16, 18). He was near unto him who "was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin" (Heb. 4:15).

It is commonly believed that Joseph came to Egypt during the reign of the non-Egyptians called Hyksos. 12 These were Semitic-speaking invaders who conquered Egypt and ruled it for many years. They adopted the Egyptian culture, ruled as pharaohs, and their few remaining monuments and scarabs 13 are scattered from lower Egypt up into Nubia. When Joseph was elevated to authority, most likely it was under one of these pharaohs, otherwise his non-Egyptian connection would never have been countenanced.

It must have been a dramatic moment as the Pharaoh appointed Joseph "ruler over all the land of Egypt"—governor, viceroy, grand vizier, and chief minister. The following material illustrates the exalted status of Egypt's kings and may shed some light on Joseph's position second only to Pharaoh. However, not all of the details may be applicable to Joseph's time.

Pharaoh, the powerful potentate—Ruler of the Upper and Lower Land, Son of the Sun, the holder of life and death, Osiris on-earth, Beloved of Horus-Re, and wearer of the Red and White Crown—presented a stark contrast with one directly from the royal dungeon. Unlike other empires where the king was viewed as the deputy of the gods, in Egypt the emperor was god incarnate, wearer of the royal beard, and son through the heavenly matriarchal lineage. At one period Pharaoh had five titles, 14 serving to illustrate his divine descent and the legitimacy of his rule. Whether the Hyksos rulers adopted the full role surrounding the kingship of Egypt or adapted it to their own style is not fully known, but it is believed that they adopted the trappings and traditions surrounding the throne of the "great house." Their god Baal was quickly identified with the Egyptian god Seth, son of Osiris.

The biblical description of Joseph's promotion as grand governor reflects the historical pattern of protocol as it is depicted in ancient Egyptian art. First, the investment with an insignia (i.e., the royal ring or signet) of the high office is given, including the pharaoh's seal. Then came a linen vestment (i.e., a royal robe or gown), and finally the placing of the golden chain around the neck. Ancient art depicts the servants of the king placing these accoutrements on the chief minister while he held the wand of authority and the crook of judicial power. Also there were pictures of ceremonial chariots with prancing, tight-reined steeds carved into granite temple walls. 15 By the king's command, Joseph would now wield administrative authority, issue decrees, and have runners precede his chariot, announcing his coming and instructing the people to "bow the knee" (41:43). Without his permission, no man could "lift up his hand or foot" (41:44), meaning that this Israelite was empowered with full control of all internal affairs.

The new supreme governor was promptly endowed with an Egyptian name, Zaphnath-paaneah, 16 and given a new bride, the great grandmother of most members of the Church—Asenath, daughter of Potipherah, priest of On. 17

No matter how many times Joseph was put down, or ill-treated, he picked himself up and quietly worked his way back. He accepted those circumstances over which he had no control and immediately set about to improve them. Few have had more reason to dwell on the problems persistently presented to them, but few have so graciously turned them into feelings of love and service. He did not wait for opportunity but patiently created his own.

By Sevens

Joseph, the governor, now had the responsibility to save an empire, and a people who would become the Lord's "peculiar treasure" (Ex. 19:5). Key to the plan for the temporal salvation of both Egyptians and Israelites was adequate forewarning. An earthly monarch was warned of a coming catastrophe by means of puzzling dreams, and a Hebrew slave was given divine inspiration to provide an interpretation and a solution. If divine direction was heeded, the plan was sure to succeed. Prophetic preparation is far better than trying to patch up a problem long after it occurs. The critical ingredients in the inspired plan included both receiving the Lord's counsel and following it.

Pharaoh's fertile kingdom was an ideal place to initiate a food storage program, because of its high productivity, a long growing season, and the benefit of the "annual" innudation. The floods came from the longest of the world's rivers. Beginning with the Blue and White Nile in the heart of Africa, they converge to form a mighty stream flowing 2,900 miles into the Mediterranean Sea. For centuries, during flood stage, this river carried millions of tons of rich silt—spilling it out on the valley floor, from one to ten miles in width. The growing season usually starts in March and lasts into November. From March to May comes the khamsin—a hot, dust-laden wind off the desert which can become very devastating. Because of the ready source of water, even under the blistering summer sun, plant life flourishes. The hottest part of the year starts in June, when the maximum daily temperatures reach 110-115 degrees Fahrenheit, with twelve-hour days. Fortunately, there is a rapid drop of about 15 degrees each night, with spring and fall being more moderate and providing ideal growing periods.

Normally, these conditions provided abundant opportunities for bounteous harvests, but a severe period of drought was now here. Just how far north and south this seven-year famine extended, that brought Israel to Egypt for grain, is unknown, but it encompassed Canaan and may have covered the entire area to which the khamsin generally comes. For Canaan, this hot blast usually blows from the desert of the eastern plateau; it is mentioned in scripture as the destroying "east wind" (Ezek. 19:12). In Egypt it is a southerly wind.

In any event, this time Egypt was prepared. Under Joseph's direction: (1) For seven years they gathered and stored as the land "brought forth by handfuls" (41:47). (2) During the famine, the governor sold from the ample storage. (3) When the people's money was gone, he accepted their cattle, horses, and other beasts of burden in exchange for bread. (4) Finally, he accepted land until all was owned by the Pharaoh. "Only the land of the priests bought he not" (47:22). 18

In Canaan, with grain supplies exhausted, Jacob sent his sons to Egypt to buy grain. 19 To this day an artist's conception of a Semitic caravan, arriving at the Egyptian border-post, can be seen painted on the side of a tomb at Beni Hasan. The Semites can be recognized in the pictures by their general appearance. The men have an identifiable hair style and pointed beards; the women have free-flowing hair tied around the top of the head with a small white band, plus curls in front of their ears; also shown are long garments, bows and arrows, spears and sticks, an eight-stringed musical lyre, and water rations in artistically embroidered containers made of animal skins. The people are leading their pack animals and goats. Jacob's sons came for grain, not knowing that their arrival was a date with destiny—an unexpected reunion after twenty-two years.

A Savior

The ten brothers were now on the way to Egypt. They traveled from their Hebron home toward the southwest along the coast near Gaza, followed the ancient "way of the sea," passing over the wadi (a dry channel) of the river of Egypt (near modern El Arish), and on to the frontier. The political capital of Egypt at the time was probably Avaris. The large mound there, Tell ed-Daba, has yielded artifacts that indicate a strong Hyksos presence, plus evidence of strong fortifications. 20 At its location in the northeast section of the delta it would have been accessible to the Israelite caravan soon after they crossed the border.

Another possibility was the magnificent Memphis, referred to in the scriptures as Noph (located about ten miles south of present Cairo). An apocryphal source points to this location. 21 If the Pharaoh was living in this great capital at the time, the brothers' journey to see the Chief Minister would have taken them near the ancient city of On (Heliopolis), home of their new sister-in-law, Asenath, across the branches of the Nile toward the west and then south past the great pyramids at Giza, the step pyramid of Djoser (which was nearly a millennium old by that time), and finally to the royal city of Memphis.

As the Canaanite shepherds gave obeisance by bowing before the great Egyptian ruler, what emotion must have surged through Joseph's soul as he recognized his brothers! Quickly he changed his behavior. How much had twenty-two years changed him? His Egyptian clothes, the sumptuous court, and his speaking through an interpreter kept them from realizing who he was. But, "Joseph remembered the dreams" (42:9). This was the fulfillment of divine prophecy. His brothers had meant to shed his blood; he had been sold; he had been imprisoned after being ill-treated by his master's wife; and he had been in a dark dungeon for two years while the forgetful butler failed to remember his help. Nonetheless, "the works, and designs, and the purposes of God cannot be frustrated, neither can they come to naught" (D&C 3:1).

Hiding his emotions, Joseph accused his brothers of being spies. They denied it, claiming that they were "twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not" (42:13). Getting Benjamin to Egypt was now a major goal for Joseph. They had to bring their brother or go to jail. Simeon had to remain as surety while the others returned to bring the youngest brother. The nine others started back with heavy hearts, becoming more distraught when they discovered that the money with which they had paid for the corn had been put in their bags. What evil omen was this?

Arriving back in Canaan, Jacob listened to their tale with grief. Two sons were gone. Now they were asking for the beloved son of his old age. He would never allow this. All of his sons were now grown and probably were married and had children of their own. Yet as the grandfather and patriarch of the extended family, Jacob was recognized as the supreme authority in all family matters. Therefore, permission of the patriarch was necessary before Benjamin could go to Egypt. It was not until the family storage of grain was gone that Jacob reluctantly gave his permission for Benjamin to go.

On arrival in Egypt, the brothers were ushered into the presence of Joseph, the royal governor, whose heart was now filled to overflowing at the sight of his full brother. Quickly leaving the room, he shed tears of joy and emotion. Then washing away the tears, he returned to the banquet hall, still hiding his identity. This grand vizier amazed them as he had them seated according to age from Reuben to Benjamin. Joseph sat at a separate table because to eat with Hebrews was an "abomination unto the Egyptians" (43:32). Such a custom perhaps stemmed from the Hebrew practice of eating animals considered sacred by Egyptians. Joseph was aloof, eating apart, but his favoritism for Benjamin must have aroused the curiosity of the brothers, for he was given treatment like a special guest. The servants heaped his plates with "five times" as much as any of the others.

Just as the brothers' caravan was departing to return to Canaan, Egyptian guards rushed down upon them and demanded to search their loads. A special silver cup had been "stolen." Very upset, the brothers volunteered that the guilty person should die. To their great dismay, it was found in Benjamin's sack, where it had been planted at Joseph's request. Now distraught, they were returned to the governor full of anxiety for their welfare.

The next objective was to entice father Jacob to Egypt. Joseph, whose identity was still unknown, decided to keep Benjamin for surety. The brothers "rent their clothes" (44:13) and pleaded, yet Joseph ordered them to leave Benjamin and bring their father. Judah pleaded for Benjamin (44:20), declaring: "The lad cannot leave his father" (44:22), or his father would die. By that time, Benjamin was likely over twenty years of age and may have been married and had children. Jacob's love for him was great; his life was "bound up in the lad's life" (44:30). Judah, who had suggested that they sell their brother Joseph nearly a quarter of a century earlier, now offered himself as surety instead of Benjamin. Judah's plea for the welfare of his aged father and his willingness to place his own life in jeopardy reveal a heart full of love.

The emotion of the moment was too much for Joseph, who waved all of his servants and assistants out of the room. With his soul filled to overflowing, he "made himself known" (45:1) and wept. His sobs were so loud that they could be heard beyond the room and were even made known in the palace of the Pharaoh. His brothers were frightened, not knowing what he would do. Beckoning them closer, he proclaimed, "I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt" (45:4). The reunion was a mixture of fear and joy, but since his tone was not filled with vengeance, their anxiety slowly changed to reassurance, and grief turned into gratitude. Joseph recognized the hand of the Lord in the entire affair: "God sent me before you to preserve you . . . and to save your lives" (45:7). The Lord works with mortals to bring to pass his eternal purposes, and through his foreordained servant he had preserved his "chosen" people Israel. Joseph was a "type" of the foreordained Savior of the world, who will save all that come down in the depths of humility and accept him. 22

The youngest brothers fell on each others' necks and wept. Tears also flowed for the forgiven brothers. And now, with five years of famine still facing the family, they were urged to bring their aging father to live in Joseph's adopted land.

Jacob was overcome by the news that Joseph was alive. He fairly fainted, but seeing the wagons brought for his conveyance to the land of the Nile, he revived and took up his journey. As he began, the Lord, who foresaw and foretold of the long Israelite sojourn in Egypt (15:13), gave this prince a vision of reassurance: "Fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation" (46:3). Twenty-two years after Joseph was placed in the pit, his father and all his brothers came to join this son sold as a slave, but who was now supreme governor, grand vizier, ruler of all Egypt, and "father" to Pharaoh (45:8). These shepherds now brought wives, children, flocks, herds, and all their possessions to the land of the pharaohs.

Father's Blessings

Pharaoh had a generous and receptive heart toward the family of Israel. Undoubtedly, this was in deference to his great esteem for Joseph, to whom he said, "The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen" (47:6). The brothers were also given appointments as overseers of Pharaoh's cattle. This kindness prompted Joseph to bring his father and five of the brothers into the palace, where "Joseph . . . set [Jacob] before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh" (47:7). This may merely have been a salutation or greeting, yet it is possible that this 130-year-old patriarch laid his hands on Pharaoh and gave him a blessing. Precedent is found in a Dead Sea Scroll account of Abraham giving such a blessing to an ailing Pharaoh: "So I prayed [for him] . . . and I laid my hands on his [head]; and the scourge departed from him." 23

Israel received a possession in the "best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as the Pharaoh had commanded" (47:11). The precise bounderies of Goshen are not known, but most scholars feel that it was an area in the eastern part of the delta. This is reflected when Joseph, discovering that his father and brothers were entering Egypt (i.e., at its northeast border), took his chariot "to Goshen" (46:29) to greet them. The Nile delta was an ideal area for the foraging of flocks and herds. It was conducive to the herding life-style of the Israelites and would not have been as subject to the annual innudation as were other areas. Because of the famine, conditions would have been more severe had they stayed in Canaan, for they would have had "no pasture for their flocks" (47:4). It was near the area of Goshen where later Israelites helped build "treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses" (Ex. 1:11), following their enslavement. 24

Jacob lived here for another seventeen years (i.e., twelve beyond the famine) to see his children and grandchildren multiply and prosper. When his declining health was reported, Joseph quickly brought his own two young sons to visit their bedfast grandfather. If this was a few years after the patriarch's arrival in Egypt, the boys were perhaps five or six years old, because they were born two years before the famine, and Jacob arrived two years after it began. But, if this was near the time of blessing the twelve sons, they could have even been in their middle or late teens.

The grandfather's eyes were failing; he could not see "well" (JST, Gen. 48:10). The presence of Joseph's sons gave him renewed vigor, and he raised up out of bed, pulled the boys near, and kissed them. At this point the text seems to reflect the younger ages, for it says, "Joseph brought them out from between his knees" (48:12). Joseph ushered Manasseh to the patriarch's right hand and Ephraim to the left, but "Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn" (48:14). Joseph abruptly lifted his father's right hand, "to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manasseh's" (48:17), saying, "Not so, my father: for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head" (48:18). But the father refused, and in prophetic vision, this aged grandfather foretold that "truly [the] younger brother shall be greater . . . and his seed shall become a multitude of nations" (48:19). Joseph learned that it is God who gives the blessing.

Ephraim and Manasseh were "adopted" by Jacob as though they were his own, like Reuben and Simeon (48:5). "Therefore they were called Israel" (JST, Gen. 48:5) and were to receive an inheritance like the other tribes of Israel. Through this action, Joseph's tribe received "one portion above" his brethren (48:22). The birthright now passed on to Ephraim (Jer. 31:9) through Joseph (1 Chr. 5:1). His tribe was not only to receive a "double" land inheritance in Canaan, through Ephraim and Manasseh, but would also receive another land, the American continents, for the remnant of Joseph (Ether 13:8). From a gospel perspective the birthright included two aspects: (1) The birthright inheritance included a double portion of the land and possessions left by the father. With this inheritance came the responsibility to care for the needs of the mother, the sisters until they were married, to be a resource for the other brothers, and to serve as the family leader. (2) The birthright blessing was spiritual in nature and included the patriarchal priesthood keys and spiritual leadership. From these came the full patriarchal responsibility.

The patriarch Jacob concluded with a further blessing to his grandsons, saying, "In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and Manasseh" (48:20). 25

Growing out of the birthright and inheritance blessing, Joseph's son Ephraim "was to assume the leadership responsibilities for the House of Israel in the last days." 26 Just as Joseph gathered ancient Israel for their temporal salvation, so the latter-day temporal and spiritual gathering is to be directed by the descendants of Ephraim. Thus far, it is primarily the descendants of Joseph who have responded to the gospel message and entered into the Abrahamic Covenant—the covenant passed down through Isaac (21:12) and Jacob, whose name was changed to Israel (32:28). To Jacob was given the blessing of having all the covenant people, the heirs of salvation, called after his name (28:4). As Paul said, "And so all Israel shall be saved" (Rom. 11:26), hastening to explain that "they are not all Israel, which are of Israel" (Rom. 9:6), but only those who do the works of Abraham.

It is not clear exactly when Jacob decided to bless all of his twelve sons, but he finished in his last hours (49:33). It seems that these blessings were more than just divinely inspired prophetic declarations. Jacob wanted to tell his sons about "that which shall befall you in the last days" (49:1). He blessed them, "every one according to his blessing" (49:28). Reflections of foreordination and future divine destiny with implications of great interest to latter-day Israel were expressed.

Speaking directly to each son, he identified some of their characteristics and the course this would take them in life. Two blessings stand out. Judah was to be the forebear of the Messiah (see JST, Gen. 50:24), and the kingly power would not leave his line until the Messiah would come. With this exception, the blessing of Joseph transcended all the others. We learn that (1) Joseph's posterity would be numerous; (2) some of his posterity (branches) would go over the wall from their brethren (i.e., over the waters to another continent—to the utmost bound of the everlasting hills); (3) in spite of persecution, he would be strengthened by the Lord; (4) he would receive great spiritual and temporal blessings; and (5) his blessings would be greater than those of his forefathers. In Moses' later review of Joseph's blessing (Deut. 33:13-17), he hinted that Joseph would have the birthright blessing, wield great power, and assist in the gathering of Israel. Ephraim and Manasseh were to be the instruments of this ministry.

An emotional and dramatic scene climaxed the giving of the prophetic blessings—Jacob laid back on his bed and was gone from the labors of this life.

Joseph "fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and kissed him" (50:1). Then, in keeping with his father's request, the servants were instructed to see that his body was embalmed. This was undoubtedly done after the manner of the Egyptians. 27 The process took forty days, plus another thirty days for the period of mourning for those of "high" station.

Jacob was to be buried in his homeland, Canaan. With permission from the Pharaoh, a great company went to Hebron, where the Patriarch's body was placed in the cave of Machpelah alongside his first wife Leah, his father Isaac, his mother Rebekah, and his grandparents Abraham and Sarah.

With the patriarch gone, the older brothers began to fear for their lives, assuming that Joseph would be vindictive and vengeful, not knowing that Joseph was living "the law [which the Lord] gave unto . . . Joseph, and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, and all mine ancient prophets and apostles. . . . As oft as thine enemy repenteth of the trespass wherewith he has trespassed against thee, thou shalt forgive him, unto seventy times seven" (D&C 98:32, 40). Prompted by fear, the brothers quickly sent an emissary to Joseph, saying "Forgive . . . the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; . . . forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy father" (50:17). The request caused Joseph to weep. Whether their fear and grief grew from their present vulnerability, or as part of the process of repentance is not clear, but there was remorse as they reached their extremity during the famine. Joseph reassured them that their father had commanded him to forgive them. He gave God credit for what had transpired in all of their lives. Though the brothers intended to do evil, God's purposes are not frustrated by men (D&C 3:1), and though men will have to answer for their personal thoughts and actions, the Lord often turns the unrighteous acts of some to the accomplishment of his eternal purposes. Though Israel was still to pass through many tribulations in their adopted land, they would yet fulfill their foreappointed prophetic destiny as his chosen people—his peculiar treasure.

A Promise

Joseph spent ninety-three of his one hundred ten years in Egypt. He lived to see Ephraim's children to the third generation and was able to hold great-great-grandchildren on his knees (50:23).

If we were limited to the biblical book Genesis, our story would now be near the end. Three more verses complete the narrative and tell of Joseph's death. Fortunately, we are twice blessed. First, because one of his namesakes, a Nephite, was taught about the prophecies that had been given by Joseph in his last days (2 Ne. 3:5-22), and second, because another seer in the latter days was inspired to restore some of these same prophecies, formerly recorded by Moses (JST, Gen. 50:24-37). Both the Book of Mormon and Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible inform us that Joseph the revelator of ancient Egypt was visited by the Lord and given several significant promises. Included were the following: (1) the Messiah would manifest himself unto a branch of Israel that would be broken off (JST, Gen. 50:25); (2) a seer would be raised up from his posterity in the last days whose name would also be Joseph, as would be his father's (i.e., Joseph Smith Jr. and Sr.; JST, Gen. 50:33, 36); (3) a seer called Moses would deliver Israel from bondage (JST, Gen. 50:29); (4) this seer would have a spokesman named Aaron (JST, Gen. 50:35); (5) the descendants of Judah and Joseph would keep sacred records (JST, Gen. 50:30-31); and finally (6) a warning was added that after they were to come out of Egypt, Israel would be scattered again, but with a promise of yet another gathering (JST, Gen. 50:25).

Nephi said of Joseph's prophecies that there are not many greater, because "he prophesied concerning us, and our future generations" (2 Ne. 4:2).

In faith, Joseph asked his sons to take his bones to Canaan upon their return (Ex. 13:19). This was fulfilled later (Ex. 13:19; Josh. 24:32). He reminded them of God's promise to bring them out of Egypt into the land he gave to their fathers. Then he "took an oath" of them that "God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence" (50:25). And "so Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt" (50:26). An old Jewish commentary says that his embalmed body was kept in a mausoleum along with many others of nobility, and when they were ready to leave, it was difficult for Moses to find it. 28 It had been many long years and very trying times; this people endured slavery and were subject to a new pharaoh, a "king of Egypt, which knew not Joseph" (Ex. 1:8).

The Search for Joseph

In archaeology or history we would expect to find evidence or at least references to such a great one as he who rode next to the Pharaoh, "ruled" the land, saved the people, and took possession of their land in exchange for bread. Likewise, we would expect that the Israelites, after centuries of life in Egypt, would have left records, artifacts, or monuments. Unfortunately, there have been no physical remains found in all the land of Egypt which unquestionably document the Israelite presence there. As a matter of fact, there is very little historical evidence of any type that comes from the period during which Israel was in Egypt.

As mentioned above, many scholars believe that Joseph and the Israelites entered Egypt during the period of the Hyksos. The Hyksos pharaohs, who were non-Egyptians who conquered and ruled Egypt for almost two centuries, would have been much more likely to accept a foreigner like Joseph into power than would have the native Egyptians. A relationship to the Hyksos would provide a persuasive reason why there is no trace of Joseph or his descendants in Egyptian history. The Egyptians hated these foreign overlords, which resulted in battles between these invaders and the Egyptian princes of the South (Thebes). After chaffing under the rule of the "intruders," they threw off their yoke under the leadership of Kamose and Ahmose, founders of the eighteenth dynasty.

During the era that followed the Hyksos period, it became a common practice to blot out the memory of a person or people by destroying their records, marring their monuments, and defacing their images. It was believed that when one destroyed a person's physical remains (e.g., mummy, statue, picture, or name), one destroyed his chance of resurrection and ability to join the gods in the blessed afterlife. Thus it was possible to destroy enemies and jeopardize their eternal life. This destruction was supposed to decrease the likelihood that the Ba (the soul) could recognize the body (mummy) when it returned to help the deceased person resurrect. For this reason, the Egyptians went to elaborate pains to leave the person's name and statue near the tomb and preserve the body.

Four lion-maned sphinxes of the Hyksos period, now in the Egyptian Museum, also show this destruction. Their cartouches (i.e., the royal names) have been carefully removed and the name of Rameses II added instead.

Thus it is not surprising that most of the Hyksos monuments covering the period of their occupation have been destroyed or lost. Is it a coincidence that the Hyksos period (1720-1550 B.C.), an era when no historical monuments are evident, would comfortably cover the time when Joseph was in Egypt?

There are other reasons why there is no evidence of Israel's stay in Egypt. As with the vast majority of Egyptians, tens of thousands of Israelites, who were not of royalty or nobility, would not have received elaborate burials or mummification. Therefore, little effort would have been made to preserve valuable artifacts or writings.

Only one monument in all of Egypt has the name "Israel" chisiled in stone. It is the Merneptah Stele, now displayed in the Egyptian Museum of Cairo. 29 This monument, though giving ancient evidence of Israel's existence, dates from after the Israelite exodus from Egypt.

Only a few traditions of protracted famine years have surfaced. Several ancient texts have references to "a year of low Nile." 30 One records, "I collected the harvest, for I was a friend of the harvest god. I was watchful at the time of sowing, and now when a famine came lasting many years I issued corn to the city to each hungry person." 31 Another record is difficult to date. Copied from Ptolemaic times (late second century B.C.), it claims to be of the time of Djoser, which would have been before Israel's arrival. It does establish, however, that Egypt had a tradition of seven lean years:

Year 18 of the Horus: . . . the King of Upper and Lower Egypt: . . .

I was in distress on the Great Throne, . . . since the Nile had not come in my time for a space of seven years. Grain was scant, fruits were dried up, and everything which they eat was short. Every man robbed his companion. They moved without going (ahead). The infant was wailing; the youth was waiting; the heart of the old men was in sorrow, their legs were bent, crouching on the ground, their arms were folded. The courtiers were in need. The temples shut up; the sanctuaries held [nothing but] air. Every[thing] was found empty. 32

Obviously the best place to continue our search for the story of Joseph and Israel in Egypt is in the same place it commenced—in holy writ, the writings of the prophets, and related sources. Until silent tombs yield records of Joseph's stay in Egypt, we are grateful for his story, as divinely preserved in the scriptures (cf. Moses 1:41). It is evident Genesis was never intended to be a comprehensive history or definitive biography. This one book covers twice as much time (e.g., ca. 4,000-1500 B.C.) as all other Old Testament books combined. In recording Genesis, Moses was not writing a detailed history but was giving the Hebrews those things the Lord directed. This included who the Lord was, who Israel was, what the covenant was, what their blessings and responsibilities were under the covenant, and their inheritance in a promised land. It also gave them their genealogical heritage. Fully one-fourth of the Genesis narrative is devoted to the story of Joseph. He was truly a great exemplar of righteous living for the posterity of Israel.

It is possible that an ancient record will yet come forth dealing with this great ancestor of so many Latter-day Saints. When Joseph Smith and others in Kirtland purchased the mummies and manuscripts, he announced that one manuscript was that of Joseph. 33 It is not known whether it was translated, as was the record of Abraham, but hints of what it contained were in a letter written by Oliver Cowdery. 34 It is assumed that his information came from Joseph Smith, but the Prophet did not elaborate on the content of the ancient record.

However scarce our information, Joseph the Seer of olden time left an indelible mark on our world's history, and a mighty legacy for millions of his literal and spiritual descendants.

Promised Lands

During forty years of wandering, Moses saw to it that the bones of Joseph were carried with the Israelites (Ex. 13:19). It fell to the lot of Joshua (an Ephraimite) to take the bones into Canaan, where he placed them in Shechem on a parcel of ground purchased earlier by Jacob (Josh. 24:32). 35

Joshua led the tribes of Israel across the Jordan into their promised land. Once settled, the tribe of Joseph in its two divisions—Ephraim and Manasseh—became strong numerically and eventually united with the other northern tribes in rebellion against the House of David (1 Kings 12). For two centuries Ephraim was the predominant influence in what became known as the Kingdom of Israel, often referred to as Ephraim (Isa. 7:1-2, 7-8, 17). This Northern kingdom disregarded the law of Moses and committed the sins of the Canaanites, until the Lord allowed them to be taken captive between 740 and 721 B.C. by the Assyrians (2 Kings 17). They did not return from their captivity and hence are commonly referred to as the "lost ten tribes."

An apocryphal source tells us that these captive tribes lived in the territories of their captors for a short time but decided that the Lord had allowed their captivity because of failure to keep his law. If they were to return to his good favor, they must move away where they could practice their religion without interference. According to the legend, they migrated north and were soon lost to the knowledge of the people (2 Esdras 13:39-45).

Where are these "lost tribes"—the children of Joseph? Are we descended from them? Are they in a group? Were they scattered? Are they found in Scandinavia or Great Britain? Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggested very persuasively that they are scattered widely throughout many places in the world, and that they are now and will yet be converted and "gathered" by Latter-day Saint missionaries.

Are they not in a body somewhere in the land of the north? Answer: They are not; they are scattered in all nations. The north countries of their habitation are all the countries north of their Palestinian home, north of Assyria from whence they escaped, north of the prophets who attempted to describe their habitat. And for that matter, they shall also come from the south and the east and the west and the ends of the earth. . . .

Did not Jesus visit them after he ministered among the Nephites? Answer: Of course he did, in one or many places as suited his purposes. He assembled them together then in exactly the same way he gathered the Nephites in the land of Bountiful so that they too could hear his voice . . . and we suppose that he also called twelve apostles and established his kingdom among them even as he did in Jerusalem and in the Americas. Why should he deal any differently with one branch of Israel than with another? . . .

What happened to the Ten Tribes after the visit of the Savior to them near the end of the thirty-fourth year following his birth? Answer: The same thing that happened to the Nephites. There was righteousness for a season, and then there was apostasy and wickedness. Be it remembered that darkness was destined to cover the earth. 36

Joseph in the Last Days

When Moses repeated Joseph's blessing, he said that Joseph would "push the people together to the ends of the earth" (Deut. 33:17), this being a reference to the role his descendants would play in the latter-day gathering. He further explained that the instruments of this gathering would be the "ten thousands of Ephraim, and . . . the thousands of Manasseh." Today, these are represented by the prophets and other general authorities administering the work in many lands, and thousands of missionaries who are going into the nations of the earth to preach the gospel and call on scattered Israel to repent, be baptized, and receive again their ancient blessings (Gal. 3:27-29).

Ancient and latter-day Ephraim were given the keys of presidency 37 in Israel as part of the spiritual aspects of the birthright blessing. It would be Ephraim's responsibility to direct the work for the spiritual salvation of Israel and all of God's children. When the children of wayward Israel not only hear but hearken to the call of the Lord's servants, they will come from their condition of spiritual darkness and "bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim. . . . The boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence. And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim" (D&C 133:30-32). When Israel comes home, they will receive again the ordinances and covenants of the holy priesthood and be "crowned" in the holy temples with their endowments and sealing blessings.

Faithful Ephraim and Manasseh must seek to serve and share their priesthood power in behalf of those who are searching. Others in innocent ignorance or outright rebellion must come to the covenant. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught, "Come home, ye wanderers; turn to the Lord, ye prodigals; leave the husks and the swine and feast upon the fatted calf! Come home, O Ephraim, and fill thy appointed place in pushing together thy fellows from the ends of the earth!" 38

The faithful descendants of Joseph who enter anew into the Abrahamic Covenant through the waters of baptism (Gal. 3:27-29) accept the responsibilities that are implicit in the New and Everlasting Covenant as they are made known to them. Foremost is to live a life of purity and service like Joseph and his grandfather (Abraham) before him—the Father of the Faithful who was commanded to be perfect (JST, Gen. 17:1). The same priesthood powers which bring us the blessings of the covenant of baptism, priesthood, temple endowments, and celestial marriage in our quest for perfection, are the ones that contain within them the responsibility to serve. Joseph's literal and spiritual posterity were foreordained and elected to serve. Israel was chosen—yes, they are chosen to serve (Isa. 41:8).

Joseph of old prophesied of a great seer in the latter days whose "name shall be called after me" (2 Ne. 3:15). He will "be called Joseph; and it shall be after the name of his father" (JST, Gen. 50:33). That seer was Joseph Smith, Jr., referred to by a fellow prophet as a "pure Ephraimite." 39 He was called to establish the Lord's work in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Like our common great ancestor, he too was foreordained to be a "savior" to Israel. God used him to restore the ancient covenants and blessings, and to initiate the important work of Ephraim in the latter days. Through him the Stick of Joseph, the Book of Mormon, has been translated and sent out to be instrumental in the gathering of scattered Israel. Through keys restored to this modern Joseph, everyone can come to Christ through the ordinances and covenants and gain eternal exaltation. We honor this last Joseph as one fully worthy to bear the name of Jacob's most illustrious son. As might have been said of Joseph of old at the time, it has been said of this contemporary Joseph: "He has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world than any other man that ever lived in it" (D&C 135:3).

A Tribute

How can we adequately laud the life and legacy of Jacob's beloved son—the great ancestor of most Latter-day Saints. His Christ-like character stands as a magnificent model for us and all the world. Beset by trials and temptations, he remained true. He endured the chaffing of chains without complaint. He served selflessly and returned love and forgiveness when others would have responded with vengeance and vindictiveness. He had the noble capacity to rise above his temporary troubles and see the hand of the Lord in his life. His indomitable spirit was submissive and sensitive to the living light from the Lord. From an ancient pseudepigraphic text, written well over two thousand years ago as though it were Joseph's last testament, comes the following:

My brothers and my children.

Listen to Joseph, the one beloved of Israel.

Give ear to the words of my mouth.

In my life I have seen envy and death.

But I have not gone astray: I continued in the truth of the Lord.

These, my brothers, hated me but the Lord loved me.

They wanted to kill me, but the God of my fathers preserved me.

Into a cistern they lowered me; the Most High raised me up.

They sold me into slavery; the Lord of all set me free.

I was taken into captivity; the strength of his hand came to my aid.

I was overtaken by hunger; the Lord himself fed me generously.

I was alone, and God came to help me.

I was in weakness, and the Lord showed his concerns for me.

I was in prison, and the Savior acted graciously in my behalf.

Assaulted by bitter words of Egyptians, and he rescued me.

A slave, and he exalted me. 40

The author undoubtedly had in mind an earthly exaltation like sitting next to Pharaoh's throne. But there is a throne far greater than that. Surely he has now been exalted to a heavenly throne alongside his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather. They have gone on to the royal realms of celestial glory—they are one with the Gods (D&C 132:29, 37).

Our roots go back by two, then four, then eight, to sixteen and so on, reaching back into our ancestral past until some of them reach to "the ruler of all the land of Egypt." We have a rich temporal and spiritual heritage. Are we worthy of so great a legacy? In the spirit of humble gratitude we speak to him as though he were here—"We are proud to come from your glorious family. We express our deep gratitude for the magnificent and noble example you set for us. We humbly pray that we will be worthy to join you in the royal courts on high."

Footnotes

 1. Theodore M. Burton, God's Greatest Gift (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 120. Joseph Fielding Smith has also said, "It is reasonable . . . that we one and all have come through a mixed relationship, and that the blood of Ephraim and also of Manasseh could be in the veins of many of us" (Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), 5:70.

 2. Joseph Fielding Smith, ibid.

 3. Spoken in Salt Lake City, at the Church Museum, 16 August 1980.

 4. The Egyptian papyri obtained by some Church members with the mummies in 1835 contained both hieroglyphic and hieratic writing.

 5. Book of Jubilees 39:6-7, quoted in Hugh W. Nibley, Abraham in Egypt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981), pp. 21-22.

 6. Sixteen hundred years later, General Moroni spoke of Joseph's torn coat as a symbol to rally his people: "We are a remnant of the seed of Joseph whose coat was rent by his brethren into many pieces . . . and now . . . let us remember to keep the commandments of our God, or our garments shall be rent by our brethren [the Lamanites], and we be cast into prison, or be sold, or be slain" (Alma 46:23).

 7. E. A. Speiser, Genesis, Anchor Bible 1, 3rd ed. (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1979), p. 288.

 8. John C. Trever, "Myrrh," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 5 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962, 1976), 3:478.

 9. Unless the text refers to separate groups, the traders are called both Ishmeelites and Midianites. Perhaps they were descendants of Ishmael, born to Abraham and Hagar, who lived in the land of Midian, which was named after Abraham's son by Keturah. These people are considered to be the forebears of the Arabs. See Josephus, Antiquities 2.3, available in Josephus' Complete Works, William Whiston, trans. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregel Publications, 1970).

 10. Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers, 2:9.

 11. The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), pp. 70-71.

 12. The term "Hyksos" means "Rulers of Foreign Lands." See John Van Seters, "Hyksos," Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, supp. vol., pp. 424-25; also, Gary Lee Walker, "The Origin and Ethnic Background of the Hyksos" (Unpublished Masters thesis, Brigham Young University, 1985), pp. 86-89.

 13. Scarabs are usually small bone or rock representations of the sacred dung beetle. They were a favorite place to inscribe the royal name or cartouche of the pharaoh.

 14. Sir Alan Gardiner, Egyptian Grammar, 3d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973), p. 72. Pharaoh's titles included Horus' Strong-Bull-arising; Two Ladies' Enduring-of-Kingship-like Re-in-Heaven; Horus of God, 'Powerful-of Strength, Holy-of Diadems'; King of Upper and Lower Egypt, 'Menkheperre' Son of Re; Beautiful-of-Forms, Beloved of Hathor, Lady of the Turquoise.

 15. The Hyksos are believed to have been the first to introduce ceremonial chariots into Egypt on public occasions on a large scale.

 16. Probably meaning "The God Speaks, and He [the one who bears the name] Lives." See O. S. Wintermute, "Zaphenathpaneah," in Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 4:934; see also Speiser, p. 311.

 17. Some believe that Asenath, given to Joseph by the pharaoh to be his wife, was also Semitic. See Joseph Fielding Smith, Improvement Era, December 1953, p. 906.

 18. The Egyptian priesthood was rather immune from royal edicts, and often had an influence on governmental policies. At ancient No (Thebes or modern Luxor) in the Karnak Temple there was said to be twenty thousand priests who cared after the temple matters. The fact that priests were not subject to tribute or taxes on their land is similar to the non-taxing of property dedicated solely to religious purposes in many countries today.

 19. The "corn" mentioned in the King James translation is a variety of many-headed wheat that is still grown in Egypt and has been found buried with many mummies. "Corn" is an archaic English word for grain.

 20. See M. Bietak, "Tell ed-Daba," Archiv fur Orientforschung 23:199-203; William C. Hayes, "Egypt: From the Death of Ammenemes III to Seqenenre II," Cambridge Ancient History, 3rd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), vol. 2, p. 50.

 21. The Testament of Joseph 16, 17, "Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs," trans. H. C. Kee, in James H. Charlesworth, ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2 vols. (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1983), 1:823.

 22. Consider some of the following correlations that would make Joseph a "type" of the coming Messiah:

a) Each was a beloved son (37:3; Matt. 3:17).

b) Both were rejected by their brethren (37:4; John 1:11).

c) Both were sold into hands of Gentiles (37:25; Matt. 20:19).

d) Judah and the leaders of Judah proposed the sale (Judas is a New Testament spelling of Judah) (37:26; Matt. 27:3).

e) Both were sold for the price of a slave (37:28; Matt. 27:3).

f) By selling them, their abductors were unwittingly setting up the necessary conditions for their own temporal salvation.

g) Both began critical parts of their missions at the age 30 (41:46; Luke 3:23).

h) As "all" bowed the knee to Joseph, so will all bow the knee to Jesus Christ (41:43; D&C 88:104).

i) As Joseph provided bread for Israel without cost, so Christ will be the living bread for all men (42:35; Jn. 6:48-57).

 23. The Genesis Apocryphon, col. 20. Geza Varmes, trans. and ed., The Dead Sea Scrolls in English, 2nd ed. (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1975), p. 220.

 24. See Josephus, Antiquities, 2.9.1.

 25. Orthodox Jews today take this injunction seriously, and each Sabbath evening, in conjunction with the evening meal, the father lays hands on his young sons while saying, "May God bless you to be as Ephraim and Manasseh."

 26. Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), p. 189.

 27. The preservation of the body, called mummification, was practiced as early as the third dynasty (about 2770 B.C.). The attempt was made to maintain the exact identity of the deceased, and the basic technique utilized was the principle of dehydration. This practice reached its highest degree of perfection in the New Kingdom shortly after the time of Joseph. See Zaky Iskander, Mummification in Ancient Egypt (Cairo: Egyptian Museum, n.d.). Mummies are currently on display in the Egyptian Museum that are over three thousand years old. Joseph Smith observed: "It is well known that the art of embalming was known among the Hebrews, as well as among the Egyptians, although, perhaps, not so generally among the former, as among the latter people; and their method of embalming also might be different from that of the Egyptians. Jacob and Joseph were no doubt embalmed in the manner of the Egyptians, as they died in that country" (TPJS, p. 232).

 28. Midrash Rabba: Beshallach, 20.19; Zohar: Beshalah, 46a, cited in Marcus Von Wellnitz, Christ and the Patriarchs (Bountiful, Ut.: Horizon Publishers, 1981), p. 132.

 29. The Merneptah Stele contains the following lines of poetry:

Desolation is for Tehenu; Hatti is pacified;

Plundered is the Canaan with every evil;

Carried off is Ashkelon; seized upon is Gezer;

Yanoam is made as that which does not exist;

Israel is laid waste, his seed is not.

(John A. Wilson, trans., in James B. Pritchard, ed. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament, 3rd ed. [Princeton N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1968], p. 378.)

 30. Pritchard, ibid., p. 31.

 31. J.R. Dummelow, A Commentary on the Holy Bible (New York: MacMillan, 1955), p. 41.

 32. Wilson, trans., in Pritchard, p. 31, emphasis added.

 33. HC 2:236. The statement is dated July 1835.

 34. Letter from Oliver Cowdery to William Frye, printed in Messenger and Advocate 2 (December 1835), pp. 234-37: "The inner end of the same roll, (Joseph's record) presents a representation of the Judgment: At one view you behold the Savior seated upon his throne, crowned, and holding the sceptres of righteousness and power, before whom also, are assembled the twelve tribes of Israel, the nations, languages and tongues of the earth, the kingdoms of the world over which Satan is represented as reigning. Michael the archangel, holding the key of the bottomless pit, and at the same times the devil as being chained and shut up in the bottomless pit. But upon this last scene, I am able to give you only a shadow, to the real picture. I am certain it cannot be viewed without filling the mind with awe . . . I might continue my communication to a great length upon the different figures and characters represented upon the two rolls [Abraham and Joseph], . . . When the translation of these valuable documents will be completed, I am unable to say, neither can I give you a probable idea how large volumes they will make; but judging from their size, and the comprehensiveness of the language, one might reasonably expect to see a sufficient to develop much, it must be an inestimable acquisition to our present scriptures, fulfilling, in a small degree, the word of the "prophet." See also H. Donl Peterson, "The History and Significance of the Book of Abraham," in Millet and Jackson, eds., Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price (Sandy, Ut.: Randall Book Co., 1985), pp. 161-81.

 35. The traditional site, just northeast of the tell (ruin) of the ancient city of Shechem and a few hundred yards from Jacob's well, is now marked by a small building containing a cenotaph (empty coffin). LDS tourists are its main visitors, which seems appropriate, as they are the lineal and spiritual descendants of this patriarch.

 36. Millennial Messiah, p. 216.

 37. Ibid., p. 189.

 38. Ibid., p. 192.

 39. Brigham Young in JD 2:268.

 40. The Testament of Joseph 1.2-7, trans. Kee, in Charlesworth, p. 819.

 
 
© 1985 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
