John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

Foreword

In 1964 a cynical Gordon H. Fraser published this claim: "The fact that the Book of Mormon is void of any literary content, credible history, biography, romance or ethical teaching, assures that it will not be read or analyzed in a thoughtful manner; hence there is little danger of the average reader studying it to the point of arriving at an opinion as to its credibility."

The book now in your hands demonstrates the error and bias of Fraser's bleak assessment. Here is consistent history. Here are the results of careful reading. Here is information credibly establishing the Book of Mormon in its ancient New World environment.

This book has been many years in preparation and will undoubtedly endure for many years to come. It will become required reading for all people interested in the antiquity of the Book of Mormon. Those who comment on the historicity of Book of Mormon accounts henceforth are irresponsible or uninformed if they ignore or neglect Dr. Sorenson's present work.

Just as this study will be fundamental for future research, it is also the product of a trend toward increasingly serious Book of Mormon scholarship over the past three decades. Many readers of this volume can appreciate how far these studies have come.

During these years, different approaches to Book of Mormon research have been taken. Some have been apologetic, hostile, polemical, or eclectic. Some have represented the book as evidence of the authenticity, fecundity, and power of the Restoration under the leadership of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Early Latter-day Saint scholars like George Reynolds and B. H. Roberts suggested the need for an earnest and systematic examination of the relevant secular literature, but they could only anticipate the day when serious historical and analytical work would be undertaken.

The rise of historical-critical methodologies in biblical studies (which B. H. Roberts once called "hanging heavy weights on slender threads") brought techniques for examining the language and composition of ancient Hebrew scriptures, and these skills have often proved effective in examining the texts of the Book of Mormon. The stunning discovery of documents like the Dead Sea Scrolls also invited LDS scholars to compare Book of Mormon materials with the practices of other ancient religious peoples. Sidney B. Sperry took the linguistic tack; he often said that, on the grounds of his knowledge of Hebrew alone, he knew the Book of Mormon could not have exclusively nineteenth-century origins. For some years, his course at Brigham Young University on "Hebrew Manners and Customs" examined case after case in the Book of Mormon narrative demonstrating the volume's Hebrew background. Hugh W. Nibley and M. Wells Jakeman, meanwhile, looked to context. Jakeman built up a picture of the Book of Mormon's fit in terms of Mesoamerican tradition, while Professor Nibley pursued with astonishing acumen huge quantities of historical materials that put the book squarely into its claimed time and place in the ancient Near East.

But Nibley made no effort to pin down the New World connections. "What of the mighty ruins of Central America?" he pondered. "Until the people who study that area can come to some agreement among themselves as to what they have found, the rest of us cannot very well start drawing conclusions." Such extreme caution can now give way to concrete possibilities. With Dr. Sorenson's approach, the process of spelling out an explicit geographical and archaeological context has begun in earnest. He presents a credible model for an ancient American background for the Book of Mormon. This model takes notice of details given in descriptions of the Book of Mormon lands, of battle movements, of cities built and abandoned, and of demographic data. He suggests that highland Guatemala is a good candidate for the land of Nephi, that the Isthmus of Tehuantepec fits the requirements of the "narrow neck of land," and that hundreds of other facts fall into place as this theory is carried to its logical conclusions. This is a model and hypothesis for other serious Mormon and non-Mormon scholars to consider. Unlike many of his predecessors, Dr. Sorenson insists that this model must not be held sacrosanct. He invites critical as well as confirming considerations.

How does he proceed? In a word, he asks more questions than he answers. Many stones are turned. His words are probing and carefully weighed. Great surprises and rewarding insights await the reader on every page. He asks questions like "Who were these people?" "What might they have looked like?" "Who were their neighbors?" "How many Nephites were there?" "How did they live, eat, speak, work, and fight?" He then finds plausible answers to these questions by matching specific data from reliable archaeological and anthropological studies of Mesoamerica with the entire spectrum of cultural and historical information found in the Book of Mormon. This approach is panoramic and exhilarating. It sees things that have simply never been seen before.

Just as a good question is half an answer, however, a good answer raises yet further questions. This book is never flawed with any pretension that confirmation is final "proof." The most that a scientific approach can do in this realm, as in any other, is to achieve probability. This volume clearly achieves plausibility, although (inescapably) questions still remain. Thus, the religious dimension is "bracketed," however relevant these studies may turn out to be for apologetic purposes. Much to his credit, John Sorenson is acutely and consistently aware of all these limitations.

An Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon, for the first time, writes Nephite cultural and natural history in the context of American hemispheric reality. While there may always be resistance and controversy surrounding the Book of Mormon, here is a solid invitation to continuing research and comprehension. The book cannot be dismissed, as by Fraser's slightings, with a wave of the hand.

Leonard J. Arrington

Truman G. Madsen

John W. Welch
