John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

Preface

The knowledge in this book would have waited longer to appear and would have taken another form without the urging and assistance of particular people. By 1974 I had worked on the relation of the Book of Mormon to Mesoamerican geography and cultural data for twenty-five years but had been reluctant to impose my views on the public or my colleagues. David A. Palmer urged me at that point to prepare a paper explaining and documenting my position; he offered to circulate it privately for comment to a selected group, along with a paper taking a different position. Palmer and others became convinced from the interchange of comments that my material should be better known, so he prevailed upon staff members from several LDS Church offices to listen. In the fall of 1975 we met one afternoon each week, and I presented in some detail a version of what is in this book.

Jay Todd, managing editor of the Ensign, who was a participant in those sessions, then invited me to prepare a series of articles for the Church magazine. He and his staff (especially Lavina Fielding Anderson and Lane Johnson) worked at length to improve what I produced. Without editor Todd's continued faith in the importance of our project, I would not have persisted. Not until 1983 did our attempts to phrase the material in terms acceptable for publication in the Ensign come to an unsuccessful end. By then about 1,500 copies of the manuscript of an earlier version of the book had been circulated to people who had heard about it from friends. It seemed clear that publication as a book would meet a widespread need.

The Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies determined in 1983 to publish the book. John Welch and Kirk Magleby have been strong supporters of that decision and have helped substantially with arrangements. Others are thanked for laying a basis for Deseret Book Company's enthusiastic participation as joint publisher with F.A.R.M.S.

It would be impossible to thank explicitly all who ought to be thanked, but some stand out: George Reynolds, for A Complete Concordance of the Book of Mormon, that invaluable tool; Tom Ferguson, for giving me my first experience in Mesoamerica; Hugh Nibley, for his example of patience and integrity that kept pulling me back to this task from lesser ones; Ben Alexander, who taught me the importance of thinking the unthinkable; my friends who have provided the foreword; editors, including Don Norton and Jack Lyon, for forcing me to say what I meant; Kathryn, my wife, who never begrudged the time it took; and the archaeologists, bless them, who kept on digging under absurd conditions when more rational people would have opted for comfort. Tom Patterson and Steve Gordon prepared the valuable maps, and Gary Gillum prepared the indexes. If there are faults in the book, they are no doubt due to my own limitations, not those of others. Of course, the views expressed are strictly my own and do not claim to represent those of Brigham Young University, where I work, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, or Deseret Book Company.

All royalties from sale of the book go to the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies to continue scriptural research.
