John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

1

The Book of Mormon Mapped

Before any other type of investigation, we must establish where the Book of Mormon story took place within the western hemisphere. If it occupied all the two American continents, we should know that. If a restricted territory was the scene, then that fact is essential. To mistake the geography would involve us in a set of entrained errors that would inevitably flaw any conclusions we made. If we were not to know where, and of course when, to find our comparative data, we might as well attempt to shed light on the Book of Mormon by assuming a setting in Spain or Siberia.

A Map by Authority?

Many Latter-day Saints facing problems like Book of Mormon geography automatically turn to the leaders of the Church for answers. It seems appropriate, then, to begin by determining whether or not Book of Mormon geography has already been settled by these leaders.

The historical sources give no indication that Moroni's instructions to young Joseph Smith included geography, nor did Joseph Smith claim inspiration on the matter. Ideas he later expressed about the location of events reported in the book apparently reflected his own best thinking. What looks like the first consensual interpretation of Book of Mormon geography among him and his associates was sweeping: The land southward was the whole of South America; the land northward, the North American continent. One indicator of that is an 1836 record in Frederick G. Williams's handwriting attributing the statement to Joseph Smith that "Lehi and his company . . . landed on the continent of South America, in Chile, thirty degrees, south latitude." [^1] Church leaders B. H. Roberts and John A. Widtsoe, both careful critics, were hesitant to accept the statement's origin with the Prophet, [^2] yet it certainly wouldn't be surprising if the Prophet had once held this view, since other early Church members seem to have believed it. [^3] (Williams later claimed that the statement about Chile was made to him by an angel rather than by Joseph. [^4]) In view of the fact that the Prophet's ideas matured on other subjects over time, his thinking on Book of Mormon geography could also have undergone change. In 1842, an editorial in the Church newspaper the Times and Seasons (September 15, pages 921-22) asserted that "Lehi . . . landed a little south of the Isthmus of Darien (Panama)." Joseph Smith had assumed sole editorial responsibility for the contents of the paper six months before (page 710), although John Taylor was the formal editor. The location mentioned is, of course, about three thousand miles north of the point in Chile mentioned in the Williams note.

Within a few weeks, another geographical item appeared in the newspaper. A remarkable bestseller of the time was John Lloyd Stephens' Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas and Yucatan, published in 1841. The September 1842 issue of the paper gave an enthusiastic review of the Stephens book, with long extracts from the fascinating account, which described the wonders of the Maya ruins for the first time in a readily available English-language source. In commenting on the first extract, the unnamed writer stated that the Nephites "lived about the narrow neck of land, which now embraces Central America, with all the cities that can be found" (page 915). Two weeks later (October 1, 1842, p. 927), the writer reached a new conclusion:

Since our "Extract" was published from Mr. Stephens' "Incidents of Travel" etc., we have found another important fact relating to the truth of the Book of Mormon. Central America, or Guatemala is situated north of the Isthmus of Darien and once embraced several hundred miles of territory from north to south. The city of Zarahemla, burnt at the crucifixion of the Savior, and rebuilt afterwards, stood upon this land.

The editorialist added, with picturesque phrasing but commendable caution,

We are not agoing to declare positively that the ruins of Quirigua [in Guatemala] are those of Zarahemla, but when the land, and the stones, and the books tell the story so plain, we are of the opinion, that it would require more proof than the Jews could bring to prove the disciples stole the body of Jesus from the tomb, to prove that the ruins of the city in question, are not one of those referred to in the Book of Mormon.

We lack assurance that the newspaper statements were actually made by Joseph Smith, although he had taken editorial responsibility for the paper. Neither can we be sure from any other source exactly what Joseph concluded on the matter. Whether the Prophet Joseph personally believed that the Nephite lands were in Central America or not, leaders in daily association with him felt that this was the best answer to the question "where?" Even more important for Latter-day Saints may be to realize that they considered it an open question, one to be pondered and researched, and they supplemented their scriptural study with the best resources from the limited secular scholarship available to them at that time. Twenty-one months after the Times and Seasons statements Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum were dead. The events crowded into that hectic period before the martyrdom left the Prophet scant leisure for studies on the question of geography. However, an 1848 statement of Orson Pratt's shows the continuing influence of the ideas voiced in the Times and Seasons six years before. The Nephites, said Pratt, "inhabited the cities of Yucatan" at the time they were attacked and driven from the land southward; [^5] this obviously ruled out Panama as "the narrow neck of land."

Sheer survival was the chief concern of the Saints for the next generation. When, later in the nineteenth century, interest in Book of Mormon geography revived, Church leaders were careful not to let the Saints divide into camps on the question or to turn opinion into dogma. Elder George Q. Cannon, one of the intellectual forces in the Church at the time, said in 1890,

There is a tendency, strongly manifested at the present time among some of the brethren, to study the geography of the Book of Mormon. . . . The brethren who lecture on the lands of the Nephites have often been asked to prepare a suggestive map illustrative of Nephite geography, but have never consented to do so. Nor are we acquainted with any of the Twelve Apostles, who would undertake such a task. The reason is, that without further information they are not prepared even to suggest [a solution]. [^6]

President Joseph F. Smith, Seventies President Anthony W. Ivins, and Apostle John A. Widtsoe were among later authorities who affirmed that the Church took no position on specific Book of Mormon locations. President Smith, for instance, when asked to approve a map "showing the exact landing place of Lehi and his company," declined, saying that the "Lord had not yet revealed it." [^7] Elder Ivins cautioned in 1929, "There has never been anything yet set forth that definitely settles the question [of Book of Mormon geography]. So the Church says, yes, we are just waiting until we discover the truth." [^8] This caution has been the consistent course followed ever since, leaving individuals free to examine and study the topic without getting Church authorities into the predicament of having to defend or refute someone's personal viewpoint.

Even from so brief an overview as this, it becomes clear that Church authorities from the time of Joseph Smith to the present have come to no consensus, made no authoritative statement, and reported no definitive solution to the question of Book of Mormon geography. Yet the problem has never seemed insoluble to them, only difficult. Elder Widtsoe felt that "out of diligent, prayerful study, we may be led to a better understanding of times and places in the history of the people who move across the pages of the divinely given Book of Mormon." [^9] No, the Church authorities have not settled for us any of the major issues concerning the setting of the Book of Mormon. We must search elsewhere for answers.

What Does the Book Say?

The first place to seek for knowledge of the Book of Mormon context is in the book itself. Going back to the original is the basis of sound scholarship whenever anyone works with an ancient text. A renowned expert on biblical lands and the Old Testament makes the point this way: "It cannot be overemphasized that the discoveries of archaeology tend to justify the literal meaning of the text as against [any contrary] scholarly and traditional interpretation. This holds not only for the Bible but for ancient texts in general." [^10]

But is there enough solid information in the volume itself to produce a consistent, reliable picture? Many Latter-day Saints have scrutinized the Book of Mormon's clues about geography and constructed various maps showing what they consider to be the relations among the cities and lands mentioned. It is an understatement to say they have reached varied conclusions. We must indeed construct such a map—systematically and comprehensively. Every statement in the volume must be milked of relevant information, and all of it ought to fit together without contradiction. Despite their contributions, all previous maps have been incomplete and inconsistent in dealing with the relevant information in the Book of Mormon. None are fully reliable.

Building an internally consistent map is but the first step. Next we must match up Book of Mormon lands and rivers and mountains with actual places, location for location, as scholars have done for much of the information in the Bible. Short of that, Book of Mormon events will remain in geographic limbo; we would have only a make-believe map.

Our first task is to analyze from the text the key characteristics of the lands described. This will produce a set of requirements. Any area in the Americas proposed as the location of Book of Mormon events must match these criteria or else be judged mistaken. As we check the requirements against portions of a real-world map, we must eliminate from consideration all territories that seriously conflict with the requirements. Conceivably we could end up without sufficient information to identify any location positively as the area where the Book of Mormon events took place. Nevertheless, let's proceed.

The most obvious requirement configuration concerns the basic outline of Book of Mormon lands. We quickly learn that a "narrow neck of land" or isthmus separated a "land northward" from a "land southward," in the general shape of an hourglass. (See map 1.)

Map 1. Hourglass Shape of Book of Mormon Lands.

Alma 22:32 tells us that the land southward was "nearly surrounded by water," but no clear statements are made about the relation of the land northward to adjacent seas. As conceived by the Nephites, the land southward had two main divisions: the land of Nephi in the far south, then to its north the land of Zarahemla, which stretched so far that it nearly reached the neck of land. The southerly portion of the isthmus itself was termed the land of Bountiful. Immediately to the north of Bountiful at the narrow neck was the land Desolation. Not far northward from Desolation was the Jaredites' first major settlement area, the land of Moron (Ether 7:6). Northward from Desolation along the east coast lay a wet land (Alma 50:29; Ether 15:8-11). North of Moron and from Nephi south, the situation remains hazy; but in between, the overall relationships—land northward/isthmus/land of Zarahemla/land of Nephi—are beyond dispute.

Dimensions

How wide and how long were those lands? The hourglass model could, after all, fit either the entire western hemisphere or a relatively small portion of it. It is vital to establish the scale of the territory where the scriptural events were played out.

The crucial information in the record for determining dimensions is how long it took people to get from one place to another. Consider the distance between the city of Nephi and the city of Zarahemla. Ammon's party of missionaries trying to reach the land of Nephi "knew not the course they should travel in the wilderness to go up to the land of Lehi-Nephi"; consequently they found the place only after 40 days' journeying (Mosiah 7:4). More helpful is the journey of Alma and his converts, who traveled the same general route in reverse. They left the waters of Mormon, a place probably no more than a couple of days from the city of Nephi, and made it to Zarahemla in 21 days (Mosiah 18:1-7; 23:1-3; 24:20, 25). The party included women, children, and "flocks." How fast could they have traveled?

Mormon pioneers driving ox teams across flat Nebraska averaged 10 to 11 miles a day. In Guatemala it takes drovers eight days to herd pigs 90 miles through mountainous terrain to market—an average of a little more than 11 miles a day. [^11] Other groups of travelers don't move even this fast. R. E. W. Adams, an archaeologist who has worked in Guatemala, reports that travelers on routine trading trips on jungle trails and streams from the Cotzal Valley to the Peten, about 120 air miles away, take 19 days or more, averaging a little more than six miles a day. Much of their trip is via dugout canoe down rivers. Furthermore, a person walking in that area can cover in six hours a distance that would take seven riding a horse. If he drives animals along, the time stretches out to ten hours. [^12]

Other travelers are much speedier. R. F. Heizer reports that in the nineteenth century small groups of Mohave Indians in California could cover nearly 100 miles a day, sometimes going without food or even water for days. About 75 years ago, one Indian reportedly made a hundred-mile trip, then turned around after only a few hours rest and went back again. Averaging six miles an hour, not a day, was not exceptional in their case. [^13] Father Sahagun wrote of a prehispanic Mexican people, "The Toltecs were tall, of larger body than those who now live; for which reason they called them tlanquacemilhuique which means they could run an entire day without tiring." [^14] During the movements of the Toltecs described in the Mexican chronicles, dawn-to-dusk marches without animals along averaged six leagues, somewhere between 15 and 24 miles. [^15]

Other data on travel rates fall within these established ranges. There exists a wide range of possibilities, depending on the terrain, how accustomed the people were to traveling, and whether a single messenger, a whole people, or an army was involved.

If we assume that Alma's people and animals went at ordinary speeds, they might plausibly have traveled at a rate of around 11 miles a day. From the waters of Mormon where Alma's party started, Zarahemla would then be 21 days or 231 miles of actual travel at 11 miles per day. Helam, the land to which Alma fled, seems to have been off the main route, which might have been a little shorter (subsequent travelers did not go through it; compare Mosiah 23:30, 35). Besides, the text makes clear that part of the journey was through mountainous wilderness (where the headwaters of the river Sidon were located—Alma 16:6; 22:27; 27:14), over a crooked route with which Alma's party was unfamiliar. The location termed the waters of Mormon was up to a couple of days away from the city of Nephi (Mosiah 18:4-7, 30-34; 23:1). So the actual trail or road mileage between Zarahemla and Nephi, the two dominant early cities, must have been on the order of 250 miles, assuming an 11-mile-per-day rate of travel. Given the twists and turns a real route would likely follow in such terrain, the distance as the crow flies would be more like 180. (See map 2.)

Map 2. Journeys Indicating Distances.

Using this distance between Nephi and Zarahemla as a tentative standard, we can work out how far it was between some other places. The city of Zarahemla was said by Moroni to be in the "heart" or "center" of the land of Zarahemla (Alma 60:1, 19, 22; Helaman 1:17-18, 22-32). Yet Zarahemla was not very far from the edge of Lamanite lands. One Coriantumr led a Lamanite army down from the land of Nephi straight to the city of Zarahemla "with such exceedingly great speed that there was no time for the Nephites to gather together their armies" (Helaman 1:19). Had the distance from the border of Nephite settlement to the chief city been very great, the Nephites would have had warning of the approaching force. Earlier another Lamanite army from Nephi burst onto the scene near Zarahemla with only slight warning (Alma 2:23-25). Corroboration appears in the account of King Mosiah, who, years earlier, had led his people out of the land of Nephi; they seem to have come "down into the land [and even the city] . . . of Zarahemla" rather abruptly (Omni 1:13-14). These facts suggest that the city of Zarahemla might be somewhat south of the land's geographical center, though still conceptually in "the heart" of it.

There is another reason to think that the city of Zarahemla might not have been exactly in the center of the land of Zarahemla. North of the city, between Zarahemla and Bountiful, which was still farther north (Helaman 1:27-28), lay "the most capital parts of the land." This important zone seems to have been along the river Sidon, which flowed northward from Zarahemla (Alma 22:27-33; 2:15). With the most important settlement area lying downstream from Zarahemla, we get the impression that the capital city was nearer to the Lamanite border than was the population focus of the greater land of Zarahemla.

In late B.C. times a continuous wilderness strip separated Nephite Zarahemla from Lamanite territory. Furthermore, at least during the events recorded in the books of Mosiah and Alma, the city of Nephi (also called Lehi-Nephi) was some distance from the "narrow strip of wilderness" proper. On the Lamanite side of the border zone considerable wilderness space seems to have separated the city of Nephi from the transition strip. A good deal of searching for lost lands, marchings and countermarchings of foes, and wilderness travel went on in that extensive space. (See, for example, Mosiah 19:9-11, 18, 23, 28; 23:1-4, 25-31, 35; Alma 17:8-9, 13; 23:14, in light of verses 9-12; 24:1.) No mention is ever made of travel southward from the city of Nephi, so it must have been near the southern limit of what the Nephites recognized as the greater land of Nephi (Alma 22:28). If we take all of these considerations into account, it seems reasonable to divide our tentative mileage figures this way: on the order of 180 airline miles overall separated the city of Nephi from the city of Zarahemla; about a hundred miles of this distance was from Nephi to the midpoint of the "narrow strip of wilderness" (Alma 22:27); then it was 80 miles from that point down to the city of Zarahemla itself. Though only estimates, these distances and relationships are as carefully derived and true to the Nephite record as present information allows.

Northward, beyond the borders of the land of Zarahemla, lay an unnamed "land which was between the land Zarahemla and the land Bountiful." The place is mentioned only in 3 Nephi 3:23. (The line containing these words was omitted from the printed text for many years, apparently because of a typesetter's error, but has been replaced in the 1981 edition of the Book of Mormon. [^16]) The land of Bountiful as a whole seems to have been quite narrow, since Alma 22:31-33 describes it mostly as a zone that ran across the narrow neck of land. Little more is said about it.

How far apart were Zarahemla and Bountiful? If the former city lay slightly south of geographical center, as argued above, it might have been around 100 miles from there to the north border of the greater land to which the name Zarahemla was applied in Alma's day (Alma 5:1; 6:7; 8:1-3, 6, 11-12; 16:1-15; 28:1). If we add the unnamed "land between" and also the narrow land of Bountiful, 80 miles more should be an ample distance to the northern limit of the land southward. Beyond lay the land of Desolation in the land northward, which we will discuss later.

Let's review these distances. The "land of first inheritance" would be at the extreme southward limit, but we cannot be certain of its relation to Nephi or its environs, except that the former was coastal and the latter upland territory. Our first clear point of reference, then, is the city of Nephi. Next comes a 100-mile stretch to the point where Nephite influence begins. An additional 80 miles takes us to Zarahemla city itself. Around 100 miles northward from Zarahemla was the limit of the land which the city directly controlled when the last king ruled (Alma chapters 5-15) and which continued long afterward as an effective geographical unit (3 Nephi 3:23). Eighty more miles covers the combined extent of the "land between" and Bountiful. Thus the total length of the land southward, where most of the Book of Mormon story took place, ought not to be much greater nor much less than 360 miles.

It may be helpful, conditioned as we are to the great distances we can cover by air and automobile, to remember that Palestine from Dan to Beersheba was only 150 miles long and less than half that wide, yet 95 percent of Old Testament events took place within that tiny space. In that perspective, the estimated scale we have arrived at for the Nephite scene seems reasonable.

Of course, additional clues in the Book of Mormon help confirm these dimensions. One vital check on the length of the combined lands occurs in the story of King Limhi's exploring party. Ruling over a people in bondage in the land of Nephi, Limhi sent explorers to relocate the Zarahemla from which their grandfathers had come nearly 50 years earlier (Mosiah 8:7-8). His messengers were to ask the people in Zarahemla for help in throwing off the Lamanite yoke. Unfortunately, their route somehow bypassed Zarahemla, took them through the "narrow neck of land" without their even realizing it, and brought them to the final battleground of the earlier people, the Jaredites. There they found ruins and a set of 24 gold plates left by the last Jaredite prophet, Ether (Ether 15:33; Mosiah 21:25-27). Sorrowfully, the explorers returned to their home in Nephi to report to Limhi, mistakenly, that the remains they had found must have been those of Zarahemla destroyed. The exploring party would have known approximately how long it had taken their fathers to travel from Zarahemla to Nephi only two generations earlier, so by the time they had gone, say, twice as far as the normal distance to Zarahemla, they must have wondered about their position and probably would not have gone much farther.

From Nephi to Zarahemla, on a direct line, was about 180 miles. Twice that distance would have taken them to the "line" (Alma 22:32, logically a river) separating Bountiful from Desolation, the beginning of the land northward. At such a distance from home they would have thought of turning back. Surely diligent men such as the king would have sent on this mission would not have pressed on much farther. So it is unreasonable that the battleground of the Jaredites where Limhi's explorers ended up would have been more than 100 miles into the land northward from the "line" at the neck. (See map 2.)

The hill Ramah, where the Jaredites destroyed themselves, was the same hill as Nephite Cumorah (Ether 15:11). This whole affair tells us, then, that the total distance from the city of Nephi to the last battlefield at Ramah or Cumorah is unlikely to have been more than 450, or perhaps 500, miles. Keep in mind that these figures are reasonable estimates in line with statements in the scriptures; more exact distances cannot be determined. However, any increase in the dimensions would make the story of Limhi's explorers more difficult to handle. The hill Ramah/Cumorah seems, then, to have been within 100 miles of the narrow neck of land, and this is consistent with the Nephites' naming the southernmost portion of the land northward "Desolation," which included the last battlefield, strewn with bones and rusting weapons (Alma 22:30-31).

As to the land northward itself, our key data about distances come in the Jaredite account of the last years of warfare among them. As the Jaredites neared their final destruction, the prophet Ether fled for his life from the king's headquarters in Moron, "hid himself in the cavity of a rock by day, and by night he went forth viewing the things which should come upon the people" (Ether 13:13). He lived in that cave while he made "the remainder of this record," that is, the original book of Ether, which Moroni later condensed for our reading. The great Jaredite civil war began the same year as Ether's flight, and the prophet recorded what he could learn about it from his sanctuary (Ether 13:14, 18, 22-24). After eight years of intermittent combat, battles were still going on in the land of Moron, still within Ether's observation range. And he was still in his cave after a population of more than two million, which had covered "all the face of the land," had been killed (Ether 14:11, 22-23; 15:2). Finally, after the cataclysmic battle near the hill Ramah, the Lord sent Ether from his cave to make the last entry in his record and deposit it where Limhi's exploring party would find it.

The conclusion seems clear. The final Jaredite wars all took place in the land northward within a territory small enough that Ether could observe most of the action while moving about only short distances from his cave base. Furthermore, the lineage of Jared had its primary settlement seat in Moron from soon after their landing on the coast until a short time before the final destruction. And the land of Moron was "near" the land called Desolation by the Nephites (Ether 7:6). A hundred miles from Moron to the hill Ramah would probably accommodate all these facts.

Confirmation of the close proximity of Ramah to Moron lies in the account about King Omer. He ruled early in Jaredite history, when the immigrant population could have been only tiny. Withdrawing from Moron under threat from a rival, he traveled with his family "many days" to find refuge by the east sea. A band of people would have moved slower, and with women and children probably over a longer and smoother route, than lone Ether. On his way from Moron to the sea, Omer passed by Ramah/Cumorah (Ether 9:3). When events returned to his favor at home, Omer learned of the fact and went back (Ether 9:13). If the area to which he fled, and thus of the last battle, was within a hundred miles or so of Moron, Omer's flight and return make sense; a much greater distance would seem strange, given the small population.

Many Latter-day Saints will have to change their thinking markedly to adjust to the dimensions we have discussed. And we have other evidences in the scripture that the Nephites occupied a fairly compact area. For example, 3 Nephi 3 tells how the Nephites and righteous Lamanites, threatened by Gadianton robbers, gathered to a common stronghold with a seven-year supply of food to starve the parasitic robbers out of the land. The size of the gathered population was described as "thousands and . . . tens of thousands: from the land southward and the land northward," all assembling from settlements of which Helaman's record a few years earlier said, "They began to cover the face of the whole earth, from the sea south to the sea north, from the sea west to the sea east" (Helaman 3:8). Yet all of these people are said to have come together to a single area small enough to be besieged (3 Nephi 4:16-18). Clearly the record deals with an overall area only hundreds of miles in dimension.

What are we told about the narrow neck of land itself? First, it had to be wide enough that Limhi's explorers could pass through it without even realizing that it was an isthmus. (Remember that upon their return they supposed they had been in the land southward all the time.) On the other hand, it was narrow enough that "it was only the distance of a day and a half's journey for a Nephite, on the line Bountiful and the land Desolation, from the east to the west sea" (Alma 22:32). Of course we don't know how long the "day's travel" might have been. References given earlier illustrate how wide a range of distances might be meant by this term. Interpretations of the expression could also vary. Possibly "the distance of a day and a half's journey" was a standard length. The Nephites may have understood that a "day and a half's journey" meant so many miles. In parallel fashion the Spanish legua (league) meant the distance a loaded mule could travel on the average in an estimated hour; the term said nothing about any particular mule or route or number of hours of consecutive travel. Or the phrase "a Nephite" might imply that a special messenger was the one doing the traveling, for the statement occurs in the context of military defense. And what means of transportation might have been employed? If we assume foot travel—probably the normal mode—we can work toward an estimate of the width of the isthmus. As we have already calculated, the rate for "a Nephite," a single individual, could potentially be up to six miles an hour for as long as 24 hours within the "day and a half." That would amount to 144 miles. If some mode of travel other than on foot were used, the 144 figure might be increased. Or the distance might be as little as, say, 50 miles. If the low figure applied, it would be harder for Limhi's explorers to fail to notice they were going through a narrow isthmus; if we push toward the high extreme, the "day and a half's journey" becomes more troublesome. A plausible compromise range seems to me to be 75 to 125 miles.

Yet another travel account helps us pin down distances, this time on the east coast of the land southward. The Nephite commander Moroni set up a string of garrison cities there against an anticipated Lamanite assault aimed at Bountiful and the strategic neck zone. The area soon became a crucial battle zone when the Nephite dissenter Amalickiah schemed his way into control of the Lamanite armies and blitzed along the coast, capturing city after city until he was at the very border of the land Bountiful (Alma 51:22-28). Bountiful was the city farthest north on the line of march toward the land northward. At that point one band of Nephite soldiers lured the Lamanite garrison out of their stronghold of Mulek, leading them off toward Bountiful, while a second force slipped around in the enemy rear to take possession of Mulek (Alma 52:21-31). Mulek and Bountiful were close enough together that Teancum's force could go a major part of the distance and back during part of one hot day, although it involved strenuous effort (verse 31). On the basis of these statements, we may infer that it was about a regular day's march for soldiers from Mulek to Bountiful—say nearly 25 miles.

A little later, Gid, the city next to Mulek, was recaptured by the Nephites in a single operation. After more skirmishing, four named cities remained in Lamanite hands: Morianton, Lehi, Nephihah, and Moroni. In one climactic day of battle the Nephites drove the enemy out of all of them (Alma 62:24-35). The Nephite counterattack began, probably at dawn, against Nephihah, the most important of the four. Capturing it quickly, Captain Moroni's army pursued the retreating Lamanites through Lehi and Morianton to the beach (verse 32). Along the shore they then dashed to Moroni, arriving at dark (verse 35). The day was spent mainly chasing the routed Lamanites, not fighting them. With adrenaline flowing, the armies might have gone three miles or more per hour for 15 hours, or nearly 50 miles. The route, we can tell from other evidence about the location of these cities, was more of a semicircle than a straight line. Our conclusion must be that the piece of coastline involved that day could not have been more than 30 miles long.

All these figures combined tell us something important about the length of the Nephite-held east coast. Bountiful to Mulek we saw was about 25 miles. At the other extremity the Nephihah-Moroni sector accounts for perhaps 30 more. That leaves the middle, in which the only named cities were Gid and Omner. Lacking data on that section, I simply add another 30 miles, by analogy with the other sectors. In summation, the distance from Bountiful on the north end to Moroni on the southerly extreme of the east coast cannot plausibly extend much more than 85 miles. (See map 2.)

An east coast of 85 or so miles for the Nephite-controlled area is far shorter than the length of the land southward measured via Zarahemla and Nephi. That axis was on the order of 350 miles. The difference in these lengths is so great that it cannot be due to erroneous assumptions. The Book of Mormon text really does require that the east coast of concern to the Nephites be much shorter than the west, and any map we come up with must accommodate that fact.

At the same time, "the borders of the east sea shore," as the Nephite writers called this coastal zone, had to be a sizable piece of territory. When Moronihah and his armies were fighting their way back from a disastrous later war that had left the Lamanites occupying all the Nephite territory in the land southward, they regained "half of their possessions," and the half was constituted by the east "border" area plus the land of Bountiful (Helaman 4:5, 10, 16). Since no indication is given that Bountiful itself was an extensive land, the "borders" had to be a good-sized territory for both areas together to make up half of all Nephite territory. Note further that Amalickiah's lightning attack in this sector cut a swath "down by the seashore" all along the coast to near Bountiful (Alma 51:25-28), yet it bypassed Nephihah, which was farther inland. Even after Nephihah did finally fall into enemy hands, the Nephites retained an inland tier of lowland territory, where their military base, Jershon, was located. The coastal region would have had to be at least 30 or 40 miles wide for this situation to make military sense, and the "half their possessions" statement confirms such a size.

Still, we can tell that the land southward as a whole was not nearly as wide as it was long. Note that migration, travel, missionary journeys, wars—practically all movement—trended northward or southward rather than across. Alma's missionary journey is one of the few that teach us much about the width. On a preaching tour, Alma left Zarahemla, on the river Sidon, to preach in Melek on the west edge of the settled land (Alma 8:3-5). From there he turned northward, parallel to the west wilderness (Alma 22:27-28), to reach Ammonihah (Alma 8:6). This place, like Melek, was near the western periphery, as demonstrated by Alma 16:2 and 25:2. From Ammonihah, the prophet journeyed eastward toward a city called Aaron (Alma 8:13) without actually reaching it. Later Nephihah was said to be "joining the borders of Aaron and Moroni" (Alma 50:14); Nephihah was one of the defensive cities built in the east lowlands, and the city of Moroni was by the east sea (Alma 50:13; 62:32-34). This information establishes that a string of cities stretched west to east across the land north of Zarahemla: Ammonihah, Aaron, Nephihah, Moroni. (See map 2.) These four places ranging across most of the land southward might have taken up 150 miles, but that is about the limit. The distance coast to coast on this transect probably did not exceed 200 miles. (See map 10.)

The width of the land of Nephi, the highland portion of the land southward, is never clarified. The city of Nephi was evidently not very far from the coast; Nephi's initial settling party would have gone no farther than necessary to get away from the Lamanites (2 Nephi 5:6-8), who ended up contacting them soon enough (verses 14, 34). Besides, the immediately adjacent west coastal strip was counted part of the land of Nephi (Alma 22:28—"in the land of Nephi"), although to the north the strip was conceived as only "on the west of" the land of Zarahemla. Nothing definitely to the east of Nephi is discussed. The entire area east from the land of Nephi is left undefined, except that it was part of the whole land southward "nearly surrounded by water" (Alma 22:32).

The size and shape of the land northward are also obscure. Beyond the neck it was wide enough that an upland western portion was distinguished from the lowland eastern portion (Ether 9:3; 10:32; 11:15; 14:3, 6-7, 11-12, 16-17). We cannot tell how far Moron, the Jaredite center in these highlands, was from the west coast, but since it was settled by the Jaredites soon after they landed (Ether 6:13; 7:5, 16-17, 20), we can suppose that it was not very distant from the sea. Remember too the limitation imposed by Ether's observing the final Jaredite wars from his cave location (Ether 13:13-14). In light of all these considerations the land northward in the crucial Jaredite area seems unlikely to have been over a couple of hundred miles in width.

This long excursion through the dimensions of the Book of Mormon scene has allowed us to nail down vital requirements. We can now be certain that the Book of Mormon story took place in a limited portion of the western hemisphere shaped roughly like an hourglass. The size of that territory was measured in hundreds, not thousands, of miles. The movements of peoples, the individual journeys, and the times involved in travels recorded in the scripture fit reasonably in a land southward around 350 miles long and not much more than half that wide at one point north of Zarahemla. The land northward is less well specified but seems not so long. (See map 3.)

Map 3. Relative Positions of Lands and Cities.

The data in the Book of Mormon and our assumptions that have led to these conclusions are of course not perfectly clear cut. Playing with the information in the text may yield slightly different results. If someone concludes that Nephi to Zarahemla was 25 percent longer than I have said, I would be interested in hearing the argument; perhaps that is right. But anyone who claims that the distance between the two cities was, say, 400 miles instead of the 180 suggested here could not make a plausible case out of Book of Mormon statements. Some of the text's scale requirements are quite specific. They are also tied together in intricate relationships. It is impossible to solve just part of the problem of locations and distances, for, as in a jigsaw puzzle, all the features must interlock. I find that they fit neatly together. The spatial situation thus is consistent, but other requirements must also be met in developing an acceptable Book of Mormon map. Next, let us consider the lay of the land.

Topography

We have more information about the surface features of the land than a casual reading of the scriptures might imply. The recordkeepers consistently wrote about going "up," "down," or "over." (Some readers have maintained that these expressions reflect mere cultural conventions, like the Yankee expression "down South." But in many cases, the scripture connects the words to clear, consistent topographic circumstances; I see no reason not to take the prepositions literally.) This information allows us to draw a neat picture of relative elevations. (See map 4.)

Map 4. Topography of Lands and Regions.

A dominant feature is the major river, the Sidon, which flowed down out of the mountains that separated the lands of Nephi and Zarahemla. This river ran "by" the local land of Zarahemla, which lay mainly on the stream's west (Alma 2:15). The only populated part of Nephite lands surely on the east of the river is the valley of Gideon (Alma 6:7). Since travelers had to go "up" to Gideon, and since there was a "hill Amnihu" just across the river from the city of Zarahemla extensive but gentle enough to accommodate a large battle, the Sidon basin must have slanted up more sharply on the east side than on the west. We also know that the river must have been fairly long. Its origin was deep in the wilderness above the highest Nephite city on the river, Manti (Alma 16:6). Zarahemla was downstream. The city of Sidom was still farther north and probably on the river. (Bearing a name so close to that of the famous port of the Phoenicians, the place by implication was a shipping point on the river; that it was located on the stream is reinforced by the emphasis in Alma 15:14 regarding baptism at Sidom.) The stream must have flowed through Nephite territory at least a couple of hundred miles before it emptied into the sea, given the overall scale of the land southward. It could be crossed on foot with a little difficulty, at one point and presumably during the drier part of the year (Alma 2:27, 33-35; 43:40).

Part of Nephite territory included hard-to-enter wilderness adjacent to settled areas (3 Nephi 1:27; 2:17; 4:1-13), leading us to expect that a portion of the river's route lay through inhospitable hill country. In any case, the city of Zarahemla was at an intermediate elevation, "up" from the coast (Alma 22:31) but "down" from Nephi (Alma 22:31; Helaman 1:17).

The river Sidon likely emptied into the east, not the west, sea. The east lowlands were extensive, as shown above, but the west coastal area seemingly was narrow and for the most part insignificant. Since the lower course and mouth of a major river would be expected to form and flow through a significant plain, the east lowland must be where the river debouches. Descriptions of the battles that took place on the east refer to "seashore" and "plains," but never to any hills of consequence, except in a place called Antionum, which was probably some distance inland (Alma 32:4; 51:25-26, 32; 52:20; 62:18). No mention at all is made of where the Sidon emptied into the sea, even though such a river must have had a considerable mouth. Considering the shortness of the Nephite-held section of the coast, the river likely reached the sea at or beyond the limit of Nephite possessions, where they would have had no reason to mention it.

We know, of course, that the "land of first inheritance" was on the west coast. After the breakup of Lehi's party into two groups, Nephi led his band to higher elevation; they fled to the interior highlands (2 Nephi 5:7-8; compare Alma 22:28). The coastal land of first inheritance was south of, but continuous on northward as a strip paralleling, the greater land of Zarahemla. That strip ran all the way to the isthmus (Alma 22:27-29). The west wilderness also consisted of a range of uninhabited mountains paralleling the coastal zone, for groups had to cross over the wilderness either by one pass (near Antiparah in the south—Alma 56:31-40) or another on the north (Alma 25:2). Naturally the streams on the eastward side of this range would have run down into the Sidon, which clearly drained a major basin. (No other river is mentioned in the land of Zarahemla.) The land of Melek was adjacent to the western wilderness and thus was probably at the margin of cultivable land in the basin (Alma 8:3-5). Its position was conveniently accessible from Zarahemla city (verse 3; compare Alma 35:13-14; 45:18) but was sheltered from the coast by the band of mountain wilderness on the west, for the Ammonites were put in Melek to protect them from Lamanite reprisals (Alma 35:13). (Melek was never attacked by the Lamanites, who at least twice slipped past along the coast to attack Ammonihah farther north—Alma 25:1-2; 49:1, 25.)

The city Bountiful was near sea level (Alma 51:32); it was, after all, near the east coast at the isthmus. Hagoth chose a place on the west coast "on the borders of the land Bountiful, by the land Desolation" to build and launch his ships (Alma 63:5-6). The language here may indicate that the land Bountiful did not extend all the way to the west sea at the isthmus, but at least the land must have been relatively low lying most of the way across, as implied by Alma 22:29-33.

Northward was the land of Cumorah, either a subdivision of Desolation or a continuation of it. It contained at least one "hill" (Ramah/Cumorah), high enough that the handful of Nephite survivors who climbed it hid successfully from their massed enemies who were at its base (Mormon 6:6, 11). The Jaredites' hill Comnor and two valleys were nearby (Ether 14:26-28), and the hill Shim may have been located in the same region (Ether 9:3; Mormon 4:23). Thus the final battles were fought in or adjacent to a hilly sector, which was, in a larger perspective, "in a land of many waters, rivers, and fountains" (Mormon 6:4). That implies a wet climate and drainage eastward from the uplands, which included Jaredite Moron (Ether 15:8-11). This wet territory must have been the same general area referred to by Morianton as lands "covered with large bodies of water" that he coveted. They had the potential to be formed into a bloc or alliance with nearby Bountiful (Alma 50:29, 32). The Jaredites consistently wrote of their older lands being "up" in relation to the east sea zone, and the political record makes it clear that two areas—presumably the lowland east and the highland west—were longtime rivals (Ether 7:4-6, 15-21; 8:2-3; 11:15, 18; 13:27-30; 14:3-7, 11-16, 26). The lowlands, however, seem to have become the more populous and important by the time of the Jaredite downfall, as shown by the fact that the concluding battles between the rival groups took place there. Thus the geographical division seems to have supported consistent social and political divisions.

In summary, the land northward consisted of at least two parts: lowland eastern and highland western portions. The latter contained the Jaredite capital Moron—although no city of Moron is ever mentioned—within the "land of their first inheritance" (Ether 7:5, 16-17). In the land southward, five major topographical features are notable: the southern highlands, the valley of the Sidon, a substantial coastal plain on the east, a low-lying narrow neck of land, and a thin coastal strip on the west paralleled by mountains rimming the Sidon basin.

Still Other Requirements

Details about climate and vegetation are scarce, but some information furnishes us with additional specifications for our map. The "wheat" and "barley" said to have grown in the land of Nephi, if taken at all literally, would suggest a temperate climate; in the tropics, that indicates the highlands. A more important crop (Mosiah 9:9, then especially verse 14) seems to have been maize ("corn"), a basically semi-tropical plant. The only references to snow and cold in the entire Book of Mormon are in quotations about the Near East as given by Isaiah. Endemic fevers occurred in some areas of the Nephites' area, tending to confirm the presence of a near-tropical climate (Alma 46:40). Enervating, moist heat is implied for at least the east sea borders (Alma 51:33; 52:31; 62:35). Droughts were unusual but could be serious (Helaman 11:4-6; Ether 9:28-35).

An important requirement we mention only in passing is social and cultural characteristics. Any area proposed as the Nephite promised land must meet certain cultural criteria. For example, (1) the ancient inhabitants must have been literate, with a long tradition of keeping extensive records; (2) the other basic elements of civilization were also present, such as developed agriculture and commerce; and (3) the area had to contain a total population in the millions, including cities of substantial size, by at least the fourth century A.D. Also, these characteristics and others had to appear in certain places and times but not others.

We now possess a list of requirements in sufficient detail to be valuable: the shape of the land, distances, topography, natural features, and cultural characteristics. We have been able to deal here with only a little of the information in the scriptural text, but all of it is consistent with itself and with other data too involved to cite in this general volume. What we have so far provides a preliminary checklist for use in screening any geographical area on today's map that might be the promised land of Lehi's descendants.

Correlating with the Real World

Does any area in the Americas meet these requirements laid out in the Book of Mormon?

In the history of LDS thought on the Book of Mormon, only a few correlations have been seriously proposed between the geography of the record and the map of the western hemisphere. [^17] First of all, few possible "narrow necks" are worth considering. The oldest view supposed Panama to be the narrow neck of the Book of Mormon, with South America, or some portion of it, the land southward. The dimensions of Book of Mormon lands alone rule out the whole continent, while any attempt to consider just a part of South America as the land southward runs afoul of a number of points in the text (for example, Alma 22:32, "nearly surrounded by water"). The idea sometimes suggested, that part of the South American continent could have been submerged beneath the sea, leaving a reduced land that the Nephites occupied, is without merit, as abundant geological and archaeological evidence shows. Moreover, for several reasons, Panama could not have been the narrow neck referred to in the Book of Mormon. For example, Limhi's exploring party could hardly have passed through it and returned without realizing that they had left the land of Zarahemla.

Another correlation has been suggested that calls the Yucatan peninsula of southeastern Mexico the land northward, the land southward being in Guatemala and Honduras. The most obvious weakness of this scheme is lack of an acceptable "neck." The base of the Yucatan peninsula will not do at all, while attempts to identify a bit of land here or there as a "narrow neck" in other than the literal sense of an isthmus with sea on either side directly contradict plain statements in the scripture itself. No more believable is the suggestion that the entire promised land was located in Nicaragua. The distances and a host of other impossibilities rule that scheme out completely.

The only "narrow neck" potentially acceptable in terms of the Book of Mormon requirements is the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in southern Mexico. All LDS students of Book of Mormon geography who have worked systematically with the problem in recent decades have come to agree on this. As we learned above, leading Church members in Joseph Smith's time apparently arrived at a similar view, and he likely did also. This would place the Book of Mormon events within Mesoamerica, the cultural region of central and southern Mexico and northern Central America, where the highest intensity of civilization occurred in ancient America. Here the physical requirements of the promised land are met, and here alone the major flaws of other correlations are avoided. For example, the Book of Mormon makes clear that its people kept extensive written records, and Mesoamerica was the only place in the entire New World where we know that genuine writing systems were long and regularly employed before the coming of the Europeans.

Students of the Book of Mormon who accept the Isthmus of Tehuantepec as the narrow neck still differ among themselves over how the surrounding territories are to be interpreted in terms of detailed Book of Mormon lands. In the course of 35 years of concern with the subject, I have studied all these views and at times have been attracted to several of them. Until recently the best-known correlation has taken the Usumacinta River, which forms the border between Mexico and Guatemala for part of its course, as the Sidon River. A number of fatal flaws mar that picture. For example, it fails totally to make plausible why Amalickiah would attack on the east coast (Alma 51; 52:1-14), for, should the Usumacinta River be the Sidon, the whole story would contradict sound military strategy. Moreover, the distances along the east coast that an Usumacinta correlation would require defy the dimensions for Nephite territory we have established.

It would be unprofitable to consider here each proposed geographical correlation, in turn pointing out discrepancies between them and the scriptural text. Suffice it to say that when the geographical and cultural requirements are exhaustively considered, only one correlation survives. It matches the scriptural statements at all significant points.

A few statements in the Book of Mormon cannot yet be squared with what we know today about the Mesoamerican area. (This remains the case with the Bible in its setting, too, for that matter.) More research is needed on those points. But none of the problems is, in my view, a serious one.

Most of the rest of this volume will be devoted to details of the successful correlation and its cultural implications. This correlation adds greatly to our understanding of the Book of Mormon, for it allows us to place most of the events and descriptions in the scriptural text in a specific geographical, historical, and archaeological setting. It creates a feeling of concreteness and deepened meaning comparable to what is now possible for the Bible in its Near Eastern setting.

It is premature to assert precise identification of all the Book of Mormon lands and cities. The general picture is sound and convincing. Naturally, the closer we get to exact spots, the more numerous the questions. A good reason is that while the Book of Mormon gives us considerable information overall, for such details as the route between Nephihah and Gideon we find only a few words or even hints. (This is like the problem of the weather forecaster who can tell you if it is going to rain on your state but not necessarily whether your part of town will get wet.) We do end up with a plausible case: our map identifications are believable. Evidence against placing the Book of Mormon events at the locations shown on our maps is not persuasive. Some specific identifications even seem highly probable. Still, we are not absolutely certain about any of them.

One point needs to be emphasized: the Book of Mormon account actually did take place somewhere. We who believe the book is authentically ancient are confident that there were indeed real places where real Nephis and Almas did the things the volume says they did. Someday we expect to identify those locations, to make the Book of Mormon setting concrete. Why could the time not be now? Central and southern Mesoamerica qualifies in such remarkable ways for the geographical and cultural setting for the Book of Mormon that I am convinced this was Lehi's land. For simplicity's sake, from here on I deal only with this one geographical correlation, as if the matter were settled.

The Shape of Mesoamerica

The saddle-shaped Isthmus of Tehuantepec [^18] was long considered a good site for the canal that was eventually built across Panama. The neck's Atlantic side is wet and heavily forested, sloping gradually up about a hundred miles to a grassy divide in a pass some 800 feet above sea level. On the Pacific side, the terrain drops in less than 20 miles from the crest to a series of broad lagoons connected to the sea. Frequent drying winds allow only vegetation of a somewhat arid sort around the lagoons. Total width from Atlantic shore to lagoon edge is 120 miles on a straight line. (See map inside front cover.)

The mountain systems on either side of the isthmus belong to different geographical and life zones. South-central Mexico, lying just west and north of the isthmus, marks the end of North America in terms of native plants and animals, since many of those normally found in the temperate, drier areas of Mexico do not appear below the isthmus. On the north and west the climate tends to be drier than to the south and east. On the Atlantic or Gulf side, the Coatzacoalcos River forms a distinct line separating gentle elevations rising toward the north from extensive, soggy plains on the south and east. Despite broad-scale differences on the two sides of the river, many botanical and climatic features are found all along the gulf coast plain. The effects of environment on human inhabitation were broadly similar throughout the lowlands or tierra caliente ("hot land"). Because it was so agriculturally productive, this zone supported a large population despite what may look to us like formidable obstacles.

Beyond the Coatzacoalcos River across the Mexican state of Tabasco stretches a poorly drained lowland that is extensively flooded each year. Heavy rains falling on the mountainous areas to the south run seaward during the wet season. The coast is lined with old sand dunes, sometimes miles wide. This strip permits travel, with some difficulty, parallel to the beach, but a tangle of lagoons and swamps right behind the band of dunes interrupts most routes toward and from the shore. Along major rivers, levees of silt deposited by floods are slightly elevated above the surrounding swamp. Much of the settlement is along these slight rises of good soil. Before modern transportation systems, virtually all land travel ceased on this Tabasco coast during the flooding, which peaks in June and again in September. Even in the "dry season," travelers can pass conveniently along only a few routes.

On the Pacific side of the isthmus the narrow plain is beset by winds caused by the southward push in winter months of large air masses that come out of the U.S. midlands and sweep across the Gulf of Mexico; the air sometimes pours through the gap in the isthmian mountains at high velocity. As a result the lagoon region is markedly drier than the upslope Atlantic side. The west coastal plain is narrow—five to ten miles—almost to the Guatemala border before it broadens out significantly.

Interestingly, the Toltecs of highland Guatemala called the eastern coastal strip of Tabasco the "border of the sea," [^19] and Guatemalans still refer to their south coast as las orillas del mar, [^20] with the same meaning, which reminds us of the Nephite term "borders by the seashore," as in Alma 56:31.

Southeast of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec lies the central depression of Chiapas. (See map inside front cover.) Through it runs the large river called the Rio Grande de Chiapas, the Mezcalapa, or the Grijalva, depending on who along its course is doing the naming. This large basin is bounded on the east by a plateau that is an extension of the Guatemalan highlands. [^21] The plateau drops down to the lowlands on its north and east side through a tangle of heavily forested hills and valleys. That whole elevated block intercepts much of the moisture from the Gulf that would otherwise reach the central depression. Since the interior is also shielded from moist Pacific Ocean air on the other side by a continuous range of mountains, the Sierra Madre of Chiapas, the upper Grijalva basin is relatively dry and very warm. In the upper portion heavy crops of corn and cotton could be grown near the streams, but few such areas favorable for cultivation occur. Most of the territory is arid or mountainous. Downstream the middle stretch of the Grijalva is wetter, but the country is too broken to sustain a sizable population. It was possible to use sections of the river for transportation or to follow trails through hills in this sector, but travel to northern Mesoamerica from the central depression of Chiapas was far easier via the open, dry Cintalapa Valley leading westward to the Pacific coast and so to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. The fact that the Inter-American Highway now follows the open, dry route emphasizes its reliability and easy terrain.

The valleys in the Guatemalan highlands to the south are so elevated that the temperatures are usually pleasantly cool. (Such intermediate elevations are classified as tierra templada—"temperate land"—rising in places to tierra fria—"cold land.") Along the Pacific edge of these highlands, a picturesque string of volcanic peaks looms over choice valley lands on the inland side and commands the coastal plain on the other. The north face of the Guatemalan upland mass lies in the path of moist winds blowing inland from the seas on either side of the Yucatan peninsula. Exceptionally high precipitation falls on this slope, discouraging human settlement and producing a gigantic wilderness of rain forest. A narrow, mid-highland depression stays quite dry; the deepest sections are actually arid due to the rain-shadow principle we saw at work in Chiapas across the border.

The temperate valleys of Guatemala are separated from Chiapas by a band of high mountains, including Volcan Tajumulco, Central America's highest peak at nearly 14,000 feet. Precipitous valleys carved by rivers provide difficult routes through the rough area. Travelers from Guatemala to Mexico were more likely to cross over the smoother, cooler elevation of the Cuchumatanes Mountains than through the gorges. The barrier formed by this mountainous band separating the two modern countries continues toward the Gulf coast as the drenched, forest-covered slope already described.

West and north of Tehuantepec on the Pacific coast, a narrow, dry strip rises rather abruptly to a mountain barrier. Inland from this range are rugged, arid highlands that include a few fertile valleys. This pattern stretches all the way across to the towering eastern Sierra Madre, whose impressive volcanoes reach as high as 18,000 feet. From there toward the sea the land drops to wide, flat plains—the border of the Gulf of Campeche already mentioned. Just north of the isthmus on the east coast are the Tuxtla Mountains, blessed with fertile soil because of their volcanic past and the moist winds off the Gulf.

A Comparison

With this brief survey of the physical features of Mesoamerica in mind, it is possible to make a comparison with the lands represented in the Book of Mormon. The general hourglass shape is evident in both. The dimensions are very similar—that is, if we ignore the northern and western extension of Mesoamerica, which we may do, since the Book of Mormon is silent about the corresponding area. We must also ignore the Yucatan Peninsula and adjacent lowlands, for we noted earlier that the Nephite-controlled portion of the coast along the east sea was short and that the entire area eastward from the city of Nephi is undescribed in the scripture. Thus the two areas of Mesoamerica that do not fit clearly with what the Nephite record tells us about geography are precisely the regions about which the scriptural account leaves us hazy. There are no contradictions. (See map 5.)

Map 5. Plausible Locations in Mesoamerica for Book of Mormon Places.

The river Sidon matches the Grijalva River, which comes out of the Guatemalan highlands, runs through a major basin of intermediate elevation, then continues to the sea across a substantial coastal plain. The length of the river, 300 miles, fits what is said about the Sidon, and no other major stream is found in this section of southern Mexico; the Book of Mormon mentions only the one river. The 120-mile-wide Isthmus of Tehuantepec is just within the range of plausibility we established for the width of the "narrow neck." The distance indicated by the Book of Mormon across the land from Ammonihah to Moroni on the east coast is just about the distance across most of Chiapas and Tabasco states, around 150 miles.

The topography also matches. The mountainous band of wilderness separating highland Guatemala from central Chiapas is in the right place to be the "narrow strip of wilderness" of the Nephites. Out of it flow the streams whose confluence forms the Grijalva or Sidon. The bounding coastal strips of wilderness, the presence of a hilly region in an area ideally placed to have been the final battleground, and other features also coincide.

More detail is not necessary at this point. The general agreement between Mesoamerican and Book of Mormon geography can be grasped directly by studying map 5 carefully. Anyone who wishes to pursue the subject systematically can check out each of the requirements listed earlier, marking the close parallels on the Mesoamerican scene.

Many features of south and central Mexico and Guatemala seem to match up decisively with the requirements for the Book of Mormon territory, except perhaps for one major anomaly. The Book of Mormon writers talk about their geography in terms of "north" or "northward" and "south" or "southward," while Mesoamerica seems skewed from those standard compass directions. How is this problem to be solved?

Directions in the Book of Mormon

Labeling directions has always presented linguistic and cultural challenges to the world's peoples. Like other customs the whole business is actually quite arbitrary rather than logical, as modern people would like to think. We in the European tradition say that "east" is "where the sun comes up"; but in the arctic, the sun unconcernedly rises in the south. Even in middle latitudes sunrise is precisely to the east only two days of the year. A knowledge of our own and other cultures can help disabuse us of the notion of one single "right" or "obvious" way to label directions.

Eastern Eskimo language groups distinguish direction primarily as either inland (literally "above") or seaward ("below"). From this we have the interesting contradiction that in Labrador a word meaning "seaward" translates as "east," because the sea happens to lie more or less in that direction, while the same word across the strait in nearby western Greenland corresponds to our "west," [^22] for there the sea is on the west. Polynesians use a similar pair of terms for basic directions, "inland" and "coastward," sometimes combined with a "fore" or "behind" distinction. [^23] Icelanders referred to directions in terms of where a traveler had come from, not the route by which he arrived. [^24] (This idea applied to us would mean we'd say a traveler arriving in New York from Miami had journeyed "east," as long as his trip had begun in California.) At Picuris Pueblo in New Mexico, five directions are distinguished and labeled, none of them equivalent to our own cardinal points. [^25]

The Israelites of Palestine, in their most common mental framework, derived directions as though standing with backs to the sea, facing the desert. Yam ("sea") then meant "west," for the Mediterranean lay in that direction, while qedem ("fore") stood for "east." Then yamin ("right hand") meant "south," while semol ("left hand") denoted "north." [^26] In Palestine, this model coincided nicely with nature (the coast runs nearly north-south) and also proved neatly translatable to our European uses of the terms east, west, north, and south. (This was not the only model of directions in use among the Israelites, but it was the most fundamental, being deeply embedded in the language.) Other Semitic languages than Hebrew followed similar logic, although their physical settings sometimes confused the model. For example, the Assyrians referred to the Persian Gulf as "the sea of the rising sun," when actually it was south-southeast from them. [^27]

Suppose, for a moment, that you were with Lehi's party as it arrived on the Pacific coast of Central America. By western civilization's general present-day terminology, the shore would be oriented approximately northwest-southeast. When you said yamah, intending "westward," the term would mean literally "seaward," although the water would actually be "behind your back" to our southwest. Further, the first step you took inland, away from the sea, would be "eastward" ("to the fore," literally) in Hebrew; we today would say the motion had been northeastward. In the absence of a conscious group decision to shift the sense of their Hebrew direction terms by 45 degrees or more, the little group of colonists would have fallen into a new directional language pattern as their Semitic-language model encountered the new setting.

In fact, we don't know what Laman, Lemuel, Sam, and Nephi did call their directions, since the first terms for directions appear in the Book of Mormon only hundreds of years after the first landing (Mosiah 7:5; 9:14). [^28] Still, it is interesting that in the Mayan languages of Mesoamerica, "south" meant "on the right hand" and north "on the left," [^29] in parallel to Hebrew. In addition to semol, the Hebrews called "north" sapon, meaning "hidden or dark region," recalling the widespread cultural pattern that links bad luck, evil, and darkness with the left. [^30] Of course the Nephites considered the land northward, on their left in the Hebrew system, to be "cursed" (3 Nephi 3:24). The ruins and bones of the destroyed Jaredites they discovered in the land northward reinforced that idea. The Quiche Maya of highland Guatemala, from whom we have an important pre-Columbian record, the Popol Vuh, connected south with the right hand and the color red; the north (left hand) was identified with the color black and such negative associations as stupidity, death, and hell. [^31] Similar associations, including the colors, prevailed in the ancient Near East. [^32]

The Toltec rulers of the Quiche, along with other pre-Spanish groups, called the lowland zone bounding the Gulf near the Isthmus of Tehuantepec "the East," forcing the translators of the Popol Vuh into the bizarre statement, "In the lands to the north, that is, 'in the East.' . . . " [^33] Furthermore, Professor Vogt has raised the possibility that ancient Maya directions were set 45 degrees off ours. [^34] Another recent discussion of ancient direction terminology in central Mesoamerica is especially interesting:

The Gulf of Mexico, however it is situated in relation to land—eastward in northern Mexico, northward in the southern Gulf coast area, or westward off the coast of Campeche—is the "East Sea," while in the same manner, the Pacific Ocean is the "West Sea." In the center of the land, then, around the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, west is on the pacific side and east is on the southern Gulf coast area. [^35]

We saw above that the Gulf of Mexico or Gulf of Campeche matches the "sea east" of the Nephites.

The examples we have reviewed from various peoples show that a simple compass-related north/south/east/west orientation isn't "natural" or universal and that other cultures have come up with direction-labeling systems that are difficult to translate clearly to the dominant system of language and thought in today's world. Thus we are not surprised that the Nephite and Mesoamerican terminologies could have differed conceptually from ours.

Besides, it turns out that Mesoamerican territory is just plain awkward to label directionally in terms of the European compass because it angles across our neat grid. The experience of the European conquerors illustrates the problem. For example, Father Thomas Gage's account of travel from Mexico City to highland Guatemala in the seventeenth century referred to his direction of travel as "south." [^36] Actually it is more east than south. He crossed the Isthmus of Tehuantepec about where the Inter-American Highway runs today and eventually arrived at Chiapa de Corzo on the Grijalva River. There his travel account mentions having passed through Macuilapa "northward" from Chiapa de Corzo. On a map it is actually south of west. Later on he spoke of Chiapa de Corzo itself as "northeast" of Guatemala's capital (it is actually west-northwest), while Pacific coastal Chiapas was "northwest" to him (in our terms it is south of west). There is a sensible explanation for these odd statements; overall he was headed toward a southerly destination, so naturally the points he had already passed through seemed "northward" to him, even though the map shows that none of his journey was straight to the south in our terms. Incidentally, one region he termed "eastward" from Guatemala's capital actually lies to the north by the compass; here he inadvertently fell into the same framework as the pre-Columbian Toltecs of Guatemala: cardinal north came out easterly. A 1982 statement by a prominent archaeologist stumbles into the same phrasing: "North of the Maya region . . . at Monte Alban in Oaxaca. . . . " [^37] The actual direction is west-southwest; literal north would lead to Cuba, not Oaxaca.

A semantic point from the Book of Mormon is important. The Book of Mormon usually refers to the "land northward" and "land southward," rarely to the "land north" or "land south." (The latter terms occur only seven times; -ward terms appear 47 times.) The suffix ward, of course, signifies"tending or leading toward." Gage correctly thought of Guatemala as "southward" from Mexico City, even though technically it was more nearly east. Similarly, if you board a plane in Los Angeles for Caracas, Venezuela, do you not mentally consider your direction southward? After all, your destination is South America; but actually you'll end up traveling more east than south. Still, southward is correct.

None of these considerations imply that the people involved did not understand directional realities. Ancient inhabitants of Guatemala knew as well as you or I or Thomas Gage where the sun rose. The problem was not one of ignorance but of difference in conceptual framework and language between their culture and ours.

If all this business sounds a little complicated, we can still be grateful for one thing. Mormon and Joseph Smith, who gave us the text of the Book of Mormon, could have made things worse by being "literal." Imagine reading over and over of the "land northwest by west," or perhaps the "sea which is southwest of Zarahemla but southeast of part of the land northwest"! That would have been literally accurate in our terms, but impossibly awkward.

What began as a direction "problem" has been plausibly resolved. We have discovered that the Nephite record makes sense when it is linked to Hebrew thought and language on the one hand and to Mesoamerican conditions on the other.

The Narrow Pass

Another geographical question that keeps coming up as one reads the Book of Mormon is the nature and location of the "narrow passage" referred to in Alma 50:34 and 52:9 and Mormon 2:29 and 3:5. It's apparent from these verses that the pass is not the same as the narrow neck itself. Rather, it is some kind of specific feature within that neck area. Alma 50 tells how Teancum intercepted Morianton's fleeing group just as they both arrived at a very specific point, "the narrow pass which led by the sea into the land northward, yea, by the sea, on the west and on the east." It is also clear that parties passed near the city Bountiful to gain access to this pass from the eastern seashore area (Alma 51:28-30; 52:9, 27; 53:3-4). Yet the city Bountiful goes unmentioned when the pass is approached from the direction of the west sea, as shown in Mormon 2:3-6, 16-17, and 29 to 4:23. (Perhaps the city was no longer inhabited by the fourth century A.D.)

A solution is found by looking at fine-grained geographical details of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec area. An irregular sandstone and gravel formation appears as a ridge averaging a couple of miles wide and rising 150 to 200 feet above the surrounding country running west from the lower Coatzacoalcos River. It provides the only reliable year-round route from the isthmian/east coast area "northward" into central Veracruz. [^38] A great deal of the land on either side of this ridge is flooded periodically, as much as 12 feet deep in the rainy season. [^39] At times during that season the ridge pass would indeed lead "by the sea, on the west and on the east" (Alma 50:34), for the water in the flooded basins would be on both sides of the ridge and would have barred travel as effectively as the sea, with which the floodwaters were continuous. Even in the dry season, the lower terrain is choked with thorny brush, laced with lagoons, and rendered impractical as a customary route. This formation runs from near Minatitlan, the modern city on the Coatzacoalcos, west about 20 miles to Acayucan. From there the normal route leads farther west to the river crossing at San Juan, a key junction. The modern highway runs partly along this elevation to escape the boggy conditions on either side. Where it does so, it essentially follows the pre-European way that had been in use as the road of preference for thousands of years. (See map 13.)

At the east end, the ridge begins at Paso Nuevo, the major ford over the Coatzacoalcos just below Minatitlan. East of the ford the standard route leads across plains and low hills into Tabasco. If, like Morianton (Alma 50:33-34), one came from the Tabascan plain, the ford and the ridge route would be viewed as the gateway to the land northward. Teancum's intercepting army barred the gate, probably right by the river crossing. And the city Bountiful, which must be nearby, should lie near the east (southward) bank of the river somewhere in the ten-mile stretch between the ford and the coast (compare Alma 50:32, 34; 51:28-30; 53:3-4; 3 Nephi 11:1; 19:10-12).

Two Cumorahs?

A question many readers will have been asking themselves is a sound and necessary one: how did Joseph Smith obtain the gold plates in upstate New York if the final battleground of the Nephites was in Mesoamerica?

Let's review where the final battle took place. The Book of Mormon makes clear that the demise of both Jaredites and Nephites took place near the narrow neck of land. Yet New York is thousands of miles away from any plausible configuration that could be described as this narrow neck. Thus the scripture itself rules out the idea that the Nephites perished near Palmyra.

Then how did the plates get from the battleground to New York? We have no definitive answer, but we can construct a plausible picture. Mormon reports that he buried all the records in his custody at the Hill Cumorah of the final battle except for certain key golden plates (Mormon 6:6). Those from which Joseph Smith translated, he entrusted to his son Moroni. As late as 35 years afterward, Moroni was still adding to those records (Moroni 10:1). He never does tell us where he intended to deposit them, nor where he was when he sealed them up (Moroni 10:34). The most obvious way to get the plates to New York state would have been for somebody to carry them there. Moroni could have done so himself during those final, lonely decades.

Would Moroni have been able to survive a trip of several thousand miles through strange peoples and lands, if he did transport the record? [^40] Such a journey would be no more surprising than the trip by Lehi's party over land and by sea halfway around the globe. As a matter of fact, we do have a striking case of a trip much like the one Moroni may have made. In the mid-sixteenth century, David Ingram, a shipwrecked English sailor, walked in 11 months through completely strange Indian territory from Tampico, Mexico, to the St. John River, at the present border between Maine and Canada. [^41] His remarkable journey would have been about the same distance as Moroni's and over essentially the same route. So Moroni's getting the plates to New York even under his own power seems feasible.

What About the Great Catastrophe?

The location of Cumorah is not the only question that will have come to the alert reader's mind. What if the physical conditions changed so much from ancient to modern times that the former locations no longer can be found? We learn from the Book of Mormon that "the face of the whole earth" was changed through terrible earthquakes and other destruction at the time of the Savior's crucifixion. Could it be that today there is no way to reconstruct the geography of pre-crucifixion times?

The answer to that is also in the book. Mormon and Moroni both lived and wrote after the catastrophic changes. They had no trouble identifying locations they personally knew in their lifetimes with places referred to by Alma or Helaman before the catastrophe. Nothing about the pre-crucifixion geography seems to have puzzled them. The volume itself says that the changes at the Savior's death were mainly to the surface. Bountiful was still in place, its temple still there, when the resurrected Savior appeared (3 Nephi 11:1). Zarahemla was rebuilt on the burned ruin of the former city (4 Nephi 1:8). The narrow pass was still in its key position during the final battles as it had been more than four centuries before. The River Sidon ran the same course, and Ramah/Cumorah, the landmark hill, presided unchanged over the annihilation of its second people. Thus the record itself gives no justification for supposing that the form or nature of the land changed in any essentials, despite the impressive destruction that signaled the Savior's death. Nor is there reliable evidence from the earth sciences to lead us to suppose major changes took place. Nothing we know prevents our placing most of the ancient places on today's map.

A General Book of Mormon Map

It is now possible to present a summary correlation between Book of Mormon places and features on the map of Mesoamerica. Enough has already been said to make clear that the equations are not all made with equal assurance, and none with absolute certainty—yet. The rest of the book will give many details on the points sketched here. (See map 5.)

The narrow neck of land is the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.

The east sea is the Gulf of Mexico or its component, the Gulf of Campeche.

The west sea is the Pacific Ocean to the west of Mexico and Guatemala.

The land southward comprises that portion of Mexico east and south of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, comprising mainly the states of Chiapas and Tabasco, together with highland and coastal Guatemala and possibly part of El Salvador.

The land northward consists of part of Mexico west and north of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, involving all or parts of the states of Veracruz, Oaxaca, Puebla, and Guerrero (and possibly more).

The river Sidon was the Grijalva River. The city of Zarahemla lay on the west bank of this river and could well have been the archaeological site of Santa Rosa (which is now inundated by waters backed up by Angostura Dam).

The Jaredite land of Moron likely was the Valley of Oaxaca.

The final battleground where both Jaredite and Nephite peoples met their end was around the Tuxtla Mountains of south-central Veracruz.

The city of Nephi was probably the archaeological site of Kaminaljuyu, which is now incorporated within suburban Guatemala City; the land of Nephi in the broader sense constituted the highlands of southern Guatemala.

Identification of these locations is not the end of study but the beginning. Once we know where events and peoples were, we are in a position to inquire about what happened and when. Our locations for Nephi, Zarahemla, or Bountiful should show evidence of the movements of some of the peoples whose story is sketched in the Book of Mormon, and necessarily the evidences must be of appropriate date or else we have made a serious mistake. Still, whatever else we investigate, the locations must remain a basic referent. We will come back time and time again to details and amplifications of the picture laid out so briefly above.

I have said often enough that these results are not conclusive. Yet hereafter I plan to assume that the geography question is settled, in broad terms. It is sensible to assume so in order to get on with other matters. I am personally assured that the Nephite map is now known with quite high probability. Furthermore, no other map correlation will do; all others known to me contain fatal flaws. On the contrary, the picture offered here is thoroughly plausible. That will become more apparent as we proceed with our discussion. So let us examine more detailed evidence about the match between the scripture and external sources.

Joseph Smith, or someone near him, wrote in 1842 that "It will not be a bad plan to compare Mr. [John Lloyd] Stephens' ruined cities with those in the Book of Mormon." Since then all attempts to carry out that project have been hamstrung by inability to specify the location, dates, and nature of landscapes and sites to be compared with the Book of Mormon. The Latter-day Saints have kept saying that someday, when we know a lot more, we should be able to do the job. Well, now the time has come when we do know a lot more. In fact, so much is known that thoughtful Latter-day Saints can no longer put off the task.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The specific lineage of Nephi (Jacob 1:13-14; Mosiah 25:12; Alma 3:17; probably 43:14). Robert M. Carmack, Quichean Civilization: The Ethnohistoric, Ethnographic, and Archaeological Sources (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973), pp. 16-18.
[^2] More narrowly, an elite ruling group consisting of the kings bearing the title "Nephi" and their relatives (likely the senior sub-lineage of category one) (Jacob 1:11; compare "the Nephites" in the interesting phrase "people of the Nephites" as in Alma 54:14; Helaman 1:1; Moroni 8:27). Robert M. Carmack, Toltec Influence on the Postclassic Culture History of Highland Guatemala, MARI 26 (1968), p. 86.
[^3] All those validly ruled by the "Nephis" (Jacob 1:10-14; Mosiah 25:13; Mormon 1:8-9). (The two Mosiahs and Benjamin continued the "charter" of kingship held by the "Nephis"; the "judges" or "governors" who succeeded the younger Mosiah were no doubt legitimized by Mosiah's passing on the same authority, if not the title.) Marie Kimball Freddolino, "An Investigation into the 'Pre-Tarascan' Cultures of Zacapu, Michoacan, Mexico" (Ph.D. diss., Yale University, 1973). William F. Albright points to the same manipulation of genealogies by the Israelites in the Old Testament in his Yahweh and the Gods of Canaan: A Historical Analysis of Two Contrasting Faiths (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1968), p. 82.
[^4] Believers in a particular set of religious practices and beliefs (Alma 48:9-10; 54:10; 4 Nephi 1:36-37). For example, John A. Tvedtnes, "Hebraisms in the Book of Mormon: A Preliminary Survey," BYU Studies 11 (Autumn 1970):50-60; Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1952), p. 33; M. Deloy Pack, "Possible Lexical Hebraisms in the Book of Mormon (Words of Mormon-Moroni)" (M.A. thesis, Brigham Young University, 1973), pp. 176-77.
[^5] Participants in a cultural tradition (2 Nephi 5:6, 9-17; Jacob 3; Enos 1:20-23; Jarom 1:4-10; Helaman 3:16). John W. Welch, "Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon," BYU Studies 10 (1969):69-84; idem, Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon," in Chiasmus in Antiquity: Structures, Analyses, Exegesis, ed. John W. Welch (Hildesheim, West Germany: Gerstenberg Verlag, 1981), pp. 198-210.
[^6] An ethnic or "racial" group (1 Nephi 12:19, 23; 2 Nephi 5:21-23; Jacob 3:5; Alma 55:4, 8). James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), p. 41.
[^7] Brigham H. Roberts, New Witnesses for God, vol. 2. The Book of Mormon, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1926), pp. 95-100; idem, A Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Century 1, vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), pp. 100-107.
[^8] "The Book of Mormon as a Mesoamerican Codex," Society for Early Historic Archaeology, Newsletter and Proceedings (Provo) 139 (1976):1-9, which in turn relies heavily upon my paper "The Significance of an Apparent Relationship Between the Ancient Near East and Mesoamerica," in Man Across the Sea: Problems of Pre-Columbian Contacts, ed. Carroll L. Riley et al. (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971), pp. 219-41.
[^9] "Mesoamerican Codex," appendix, middle column.
[^10] Julian H. Steward, Pueblo Material Culture in Western Utah, University of New Mexico, Bulletin 287, Anthropology Series 1 (Albuquerque, 1936), pp. 1-63.
[^11] E. Z. Vogt, Recurrent and Directional Processes in Zinacantan, 37a Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Buenos Aires, 1966, vol. 1 (Buenos Aires, 1968), p. 445. A convenient introduction to this people is Vogt's brief The Zinacantecos of Mexico: A Modern Maya Way of Life, Case Studies in Cultural Anthropology (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1970).
[^12] A. M. Tozzer, ed., Landa's Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, HUPM 18 (1941), is the most useful translation, but many others have been published. Fray Bernardino de Sahagun, Florentine Codex: General History of the Things of New Spain, Monographs of the School of American Research 14, ed. and trans. Charles E. Dibble and Arthur J. O. Anderson (Santa Fe, New Mexico: School of American Research and University of Utah Press, 1950-1963).
[^13] Jane W. Pires-Ferreira, "Obsidian Exchange in Formative Mesoamerica," in The Early Mesoamerican Village, ed. Kent V. Flannery (New York: Academic Press, 1976), pp. 301-6.
[^14] Elizabeth K. Easby and John F. Scott, Before Cortes: Sculpture of Middle America (New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1970), offers an interesting panorama of this art for the nonspecialist, combined with relatively accurate discussion.
[^15] Linton Satterthwaite, Calendrics of the Maya Lowlands, HMAI 3 (1965), pp. 603-31. Munro S. Edmonson, "The Mayan Calendar Reform of 11.16.0.0.0," Current Anthropology 17 (1976):713-17.
[^16] D. J. Schove and D. H. Kelley separately question this continuity, preferring calendar correlations on astronomical grounds that most archaeologists find impossible to accept. Things aren't quite settled yet, but nearly so, in favor of the "GMT" or 11.16.0.0.0 scheme. The richest (indigestibly so) confirmation of the 11.16. correlation is Gordon Brotherston's remarkable A Key to the Mesoamerican Reckoning of Time: The Chronology Recorded in Native Texts, British Museum Occasional Paper 38 (London: British Museum, 1982). For Schove's view, see his "On Maya Correlations and Calendar Reforms," Current Anthropology 18 (1977):749.
[^17] Gareth W. Lowe, "Algunos Resultados de la Temporada 1961 en Chiapa de Corzo, Chiapas," Estudios de Cultura Maya 2 (1962):185-96; Joyce Marcus, "The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing," Annual Review of Anthropology 5 (1976):49-51.
[^18] Tatiana Proskouriakoff, "Historical Implications of a Pattern of Dates at Piedras Negras, Guatemala, " American Antiquity 25 (1960):454-75; Robert L. Rands, "The Classic Collapse in the Southern Maya Lowlands: Chronology," in The Classic Maya Collapse, ed. T. Patrick Culbert (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1973), pp. 48-53, John P. Molloy and William L. Rathje, "Sexploitation among the Late Classic Maya," in Mesoamerican Archaeology, New Approaches, ed. Norman Hammond (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1974), pp. 431-44.
[^19] A general introduction: Willard F. Libby, "Radiocarbon Dating," Endeavour 13 (1954):5-16. Updates: Joseph W. Michels, Dating Methods in Archaeology (New York: Seminar Press, 1973); and E. K. Ralph, H. N. Michael, and M. C. Han, "Radiocarbon Dates and Reality," MASCA Newsletter (Philadelphia: University Museum, University of Pennsylvania) 9, no. 1 (August 1973):1-20.
[^20] Michels, Dating Methods.
[^21] Ralph et al., "Radiocarbon Dates," p. 1.
[^22] Michels, Dating Methods.
[^23] Ibid.; Daniel Wolfman, "A Re-evaluation of Mesoamerican Chronology: A.D. 1-1200" (Ph.D. diss., University of Colorado, 1973), chap. 5.
[^24] Lyle Campbell and Terrence Kaufman, "A Linguistic Look at the Olmecs," American Antiquity 41 (1976):80-9.
[^25] Morris Swadesh, "Lexicostatistic Classification," HMAI 5 (1960), pp. 79-115; idem, "Diffusional Cumulation and Archaic Residue as Historical Explanation," Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 7 (1951):1-21. The criticisms are summarized by Campbell in American Anthropologist 80 (1978):159-61, but he overplays the objections.
[^26] Data for this example were drawn from the book by my teachers, Ralph L. Beals and Harry Hoijer, An Introduction to Anthropology, 4th ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1971), pp. 490, 487.
[^27] Terrence Kaufman, Idiomas de Mesoamerica (Guatemala: Editorial Jose de Pineda Ibarra y Ministerio de Educacion, 1974). Much of the same information appears in English in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th ed., in Kaufman's article on "Languages: Mesoamerica."
[^28] Early figures in the argument were Hugh Nibley and Sidney Sperry. The former believes that the Nephite record was kept in the Egyptian language, a view supported by Robert F. Smith. See Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1952), pp. 13-19. Sperry held that Hebrew was used: Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1950), pp. 30-33. The latter view is more persuasive to me and most students of the subject today, although not without its difficulties.
[^29] Welch, "Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon (1981)"; Tvedtnes, "Hebraisms."
[^30] A. L. Kroeber, Anthropology, rev. ed. (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1948), p. 512. Kroeber's explanation of the Egyptian and related systems is unusually clear. See pp. 371-72 and 509-14.
[^31] C. F. and F. M. Voegelin, "Typological Classification of Systems with Included, Excluded and Self-sufficient Alphabets," Anthropological Linguistics 3 (1961):68-80. Also see Marshall Durbin, "Linguistics and Writing Systems," Estudios de Cultura Maya 7 (1968):49-57.
[^32] Voegelin and Voegelin, "Typological Classification," p. 75.
[^33] J. E. S. Thompson, Maya Hieroglyphic Writing, HMAI 3 (1965), p. 646.
[^34] Kroeber, Anthropology, p. 514.
[^35] John Tvedtnes, "Linguistic Implications of the Tel-Arad Ostraca," Society for Early Historical Archaeology, Newsletter and Proceedings 127 (1971):1-5; J. W. Crowfoot and C. M. Crowfoot, "The Ivories from Samaria," Palestine Exploration Quarterly, o.s. (January 1933):13. Compare Voegelin and Voegelin, "Typological Classification," p. 75.
[^36] Linda Miller Van Blerkom, "A Comparison of Maya and Egyptian Hieroglyphs," Katunob 11 (August 1978):1-8.
[^37] "Calendar Animals and Deities," Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 16 (1960):325-29; also H. A. Moran and David H. Kelley, The Alphabet and the Ancient Calendar Signs (Palo Alto: Pacific Books, 1967).
[^38] Never fully reported in print, but summarized in A. M. Reed, Ancient Past of Mexico (New York: Crown, 1966), p. 10; and SEHA Newsletter 112 (February 1969):4-5. R. F. Smith's unpublished work contains the widened version; a copy is in my possession. Brian Stubbs has produced a lengthy report, "Observations in Uto-Aztecan" (1983), on file in the archives of the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies in Provo, Utah. The report compares Semitic and Uto-Aztecan languages on a wide range of features.
[^39] Barry Fell, America B.C.: Ancient Settlers in the New World (New York: Quadrangle/The New York Times, Book Co., 1976). I reviewed it in BYU Studies (Summer 1977), too optimistically. The review by E. S. Rowlett in Archaeology 31 (March-April 1978):64-65 agrees generally with my current judgment.
[^40] Carmack, Toltec Influence, pp. 71-72.
[^41] Carleton S. Coon, The Living Races of Man (New York: Knopf, 1965), pp. 79-80; C. C. Seltzer, Contributions to the Racial Anthropology of the Near East, HUPM 16, no. 2 (1940), pp. 5-9, 11, 60, plates 1, 3.
