John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

2

Getting Some Things Clear

The heart of our task now is comparison. On the one hand, we must carefully study and clearly understand those aspects of the Book of Mormon we desire to compare. On the other, we must gather, sift critically, and compare with the scripture the results of research in natural science, archaeology, and related disciplines that inform us about ancient times. Some of these findings will expand our views about the Book of Mormon. However, the validity of the comparisons can be no better than the quality and relevance of the data used. We must especially ensure that we are dealing with the right place and the right time. The first chapter set us straight about the place. We still have to consider two other problems. We must be as sure as we can about what the Book of Mormon tells us of its peoples, as well as what it does not. Simultaneously, it will be essential to learn what the sciences have reliably found, and what they have not, that bears on Book of Mormon times and places.

The Book of Mormon Is . . .

The Book of Mormon's title page says the book is a "record of the people of Nephi." Can that be the same thing as "the history of the American Indian," as Latter-day Saints have sometimes labeled the book? Chapter I mustered scriptural statements to show that the account gives the history of only a limited territory. The events in America about which it tells directly were confined to a space perhaps 600 miles long and 200 wide. The time dimensions, too, are restricted, spanning 3,000 years or more from the Jaredite arrival to Moroni's last writing. However, lengthy periods are passed over in almost total silence. Sixty-two percent of the entire Book of Mormon deals with one particular 160-year period (130 B.C. - A.D. 30), while the following three centuries take up only four pages. The Jaredite account is even skimpier; some centuries get no more than a couple of lines. Surely we could not label such a concise volume "the story of the American Indian." Even for "the people of Nephi" it can barely be considered a history.

What most people mean by history is a sequential record of significant events affecting a people or nation, yet the Book of Mormon contains mainly sermons, letters, and other writings of religious intent. All this is strung together in a chronological scheme that many readers never really get straight. From the historian's point of view there are major chronological and other gaps. For example, in the Book of Ether—the Jaredite record—the major figure in the early portion is "the brother of Jared," yet throughout the rest of the account only a single one of his descendants is ever identified (Ether 12:18), and even he is represented as an interloper among the rulers. This is really an odd kind of history. Much the same situation is seen in the Nephite record, where, after we have been told that the people of Zarahemla were more numerous than were those Nephites descended from Lehi (Mosiah 25:2), nothing else substantial is said about that majority. What sort of history is that? The answer is, lineage history.

The Book of Mormon as Lineage History

Lineage as used here means a group of people recognizing descent from a common progenitor and using that shared descent as the basis for their social identity. Elite dominant groups organized on this basis occurred in pre-Hispanic America just as in Europe ("the house of" such and such) and throughout much of the world. An expert on native documents, Dr. Robert Carmack, has shown that for highland Guatemala each of the major "political-descent groups" of the Quichean peoples who dominated that area when the Spaniards arrived possessed its own written history. Specialist priest-scholars kept and interpreted the records. The books or codices themselves served as symbols of the power of the rulers, who publicly displayed them with pomp and reverence and had portions of them read to their subjects. These documents were consulted to settle questions of history and public policy, and they were used to foretell the future. They recited the formal origin story of the group while also conferring legitimacy and sanctity on the rulers. The books served as well to explain the existing social order, justifying that certain social or ethnic elements were dominant or subservient inside the society and telling why there was cooperation or conflict with surrounding peoples. [^1]

The Book of Mormon makes clear that it is such a lineage history, for statements abound in it showing that it served and was thought of in the ways mentioned. Nephi, the lineage founder, says in the first sentence of the whole book that it was a personal account "of the proceedings in my days," made of his own knowledge and "with mine own hand" (1 Nephi 1:3). As soon as he became ruler over a part of Lehi's descendants, Nephi's personal record in fact became the record of his rule over the people (2 Nephi 5:33; Jacob 7:26). Thereafter his successors, consisting of direct descendants from him, continued to make entries in the growing account (Jacob 1:2-3, 9-20; Onmi 1:11; Mosiah 17:2; 25:13; 28:10-11, 20; Alma 63:1; Helaman 3:37; 3 Nephi 1:2; 5:20; Mormon 1:1-5; 6:6). The record of this ruling lineage was kept on "the plates of Nephi" as the official account of notable events of their reign. Mormon finally abridged and consolidated the entire record of his, that is, of Nephi's lineage (Mormon 6:6; 8:13). (But the "small plates of Nephi," which were to be devoted to sacred materials, were given to and maintained by the lineage of Jacob, Nephi's brother, who was appointed by Nephi as the first high priest of the group—2 Nephi 5:26; Jacob 1:1-3, 7:27; Jarom 1:1, 14-15; Omni 1:3-4, 8-12, 23, 25, 30.)

Possessing sacred records was a source of prestige and a demonstration of authority to rule among Lehi's descendants (Omni 1:14, 17-19; Enos 1:14, 20; Mosiah 1:2, 6, 15-16; 10:15-16). The documents were periodically displayed and read to the subjects (Mosiah 6:3 was apparently such a public presentation, involving the records mentioned in Mosiah 1:16; compare 3 Nephi 23:8). The plates clearly justified the rulership of the lineage of Nephi rather than any other. Historical accounts about relationships between the Nephites and Lamanites—lengthy explanations of how each group got into the position it did historically—are a major concern of the Book of Mormon. Most of First Nephi in our present volume is devoted to the Nephite origin story. Thus we see that most characteristics of the lineage histories of Guatemala as described by Carmack are also true of this account of Nephi's lineage.

The record of the Jaredites is similar. Nothing makes that clearer than the genealogy we find in Ether 1:6-32. Some of the leaders listed were kings and some others claimants to the throne, but all of them were of the lineage of Jared. Jared's descendants carried the right to rule (Ether 6:22-25), as with Nephi's descendants—the ruling line—who kept the official account during the much later era. The brother of Jared, on the other hand, held the prophetic (priestly?) office and had even disapproved of the idea of kingship. Not surprisingly, his descendants are mostly ignored in the dynastic record we have through Ether. Thus, Ether 10:30-31 tells us that after one king named Hearthom had ruled 24 years, the kingdom "was taken away" from him—obviously by another lineage, since the name of the new king was not even recorded in the Jared line's account. Then Heth, Aaron, Amnigaddah, and Coriantum of the Jared-Ether line all lived out their days in captivity. During that time the rulership obviously remained with another lineage, either that of the brother of Jared or some other descent group (Ether 2:1).

The "history" kept by a lineage is not, of course, a comprehensive account of everything taking place in the area. Instead it is like Abraham's history in the Bible. That account was fundamentally concerned only with his family group's affairs, and he mentioned others only incidentally (for example, in Genesis 23). A comparison can also be made to a family history. Notable events of only certain sorts are recorded there, and most of those briefly. For example, if selected Mormon families had kept their own records of experiences in Missouri in the late 1830s, consider how impossible it would later be to construct a history of Missouri from those accounts. The keepers of Nephi's or Jared's records put down no more than a selective fraction of even what they were aware had happened. Obviously this is why the Nephite scripture is so silent about "the people of Zarahemla." They are mentioned when their presence occasionally touches upon the fortunes of Nephi's lineage headed by the "Nephis" or kings, but we would have to have the Zarahemlaites' own records to learn anything significant about their history.

Another thing is important about the nature of the Nephite record. All those who kept it were from the powerful and wealthy level of society. We must keep in mind that in archaic civilizations like those of Egypt or the Nephites in America, most people were not literate. The difficulty of becoming competent in the difficult writing system employed on the plates is emphasized. King Benjamin pointedly "caused that [his princely sons] should be taught in all the language of his fathers, that thereby they might become men of understanding" (Mosiah 1:3). It was clearly a notable, uncommon accomplishment to master the system of writing. Moroni confirmed that this mastery was difficult when he lamented that the Lord had not made the Nephites "mighty in writing" (Ether 12:23). Learning based upon writing was time-consuming and thus expensive: "some were ignorant because of their poverty, and others did receive great learning because of their riches" (3 Nephi 6:12). In other words, the top socioeconomic levels of society alone normally had that chance. Given who they were, we expect the writers of the history to be concerned about big, dynastic, capital-city or priestly matters. Only rarely do we find factual information about common people.

Having these qualifications in mind allows us to see more clearly through some puzzles in the Book of Mormon. Careful study of the term Nephites, for example, shows that this name is used with at least six meanings:

Sometimes the Nephites are said to be numerous in the sense of the third meaning; in other places the first meaning is intended, in which case the population involved would be understandably smaller (Alma 43:13?). The distinctions were no doubt perfectly clear to the keepers of the records when they wrote, and usually the context implies the intended meaning.

The same principle applies to "the Lamanites." When "the Zoramites became Lamanites" (Alma 43:4), for example, this does not mean that they took on new biological characteristics, only that they changed their political allegiance.

All this information boils down to the fact that the Book of Mormon is a partial record of events, emphasizing what happened to one group of people, put in their own ethnocentric terms, in the midst of other peoples each with its own version of events. In this way, it is much like other records from the ancient past. The Israelites from Joseph to Moses loomed large in their own account, which reached us through Moses, but in Egyptian records, Israel is apparently not so much as mentioned. Similarly the Popol Vuh, a lineage document from highland Guatemala, describes Nahua-speaking groups who entered the land around the thirteenth century and subdued the numerically superior Mayan locals. The native inhabitants are all but ignored in the account. Yet by Spanish times only the merest trace of the language and a handful of cultural traits of the intruders could be detected. At length they found themselves culturally swallowed up by the basic population whom they had conquered. [^2] In a similar case, M. K. Freddolino, comparing a traditional history in the Tarascan area of western Mexico with the archaeological record, found no evidence in the artifacts of any immigrant group such as the tradition reported. She could only conclude that while the story may have been accurate from the point of view of the intruding elite, the tradition they passed down did not reflect the broader flow of events in the geographical area they entered and certainly failed to have noticeable impact on the archaeological record. [^3] Of course, the end of the Nephite lineage at Cumorah, though involving large numbers of their subjects, was recorded as the termination of that group's history in a way far more earthshaking than would appear from the outside. Moroni noted laconically that there were plenty of Lamanites and robbers around, fighting each other, but that was no comfort when his people were gone, for, "My father hath been slain . . . and all my kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go" Mormon 8:5, 8-9). The record came to an end because the lineage did, not because an entire civilization ceased (see Moroni 9:20, 24). The difference is important if we are to relate the volume accurately to archaeological finds.

Cultural Format and Scripture

Any statement is phrased in some cultural context, involving standards of vocabulary, experience, symbols, and assumptions. These are essential in the same sense that one needs some sort of vessel in which to bring water to a thirsty man. When Christ taught the Jews during his lifetime, he spoke of sheep and sheepfolds, vineyards and the winepress, debts and prison, camels and goats. His meanings reached the minds of his hearers as freight riding on the linguistic and visual symbols he used. Nephi recognized the cultural uniqueness of the message coming through the Jewish prophets: "Behold, Isaiah spake many things which are hard for many of my people to understand; for they know not concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews. For I, Nephi, have not taught them many things concerning the manner of the Jews" (2 Nephi 25:1-2). But he himself "came out from Jerusalem, and mine eyes hath beheld the things of the Jews, and I know that the Jews do understand the things of the prophets, and there is none other people that understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews" (verse 5). He is telling us that gospel truth is best communicated in culture-specific terms, and we may not fully understand what is being conveyed without learning the meaning system bearing the message. The Book of Mormon has its own set of Nephite containers in which the "living water" is offered to us. We can drink in some of the word in generalized terms, but to drink deeply, we do best to use the original container.

Latter-day Saints have long assumed that the ancient American scripture was to be read as though it were the Bible. On that premise we have supposed, without taking much thought about the matter, that the Book of Mormon would show Hebrew (Israelite) characteristics of style and cultural background. Some of our scholars have indeed found instructive parallels between Israelite and Egyptian cultures and the book's style and content. [^4] Yet the Nephite story was set for the most part in America. The New World setting would surely have had at least as immediate and strong an impact on the scriptural text as anything from the Old World. Before we finally understand what the book is and is not, we must see how it was shaped in its American homeland, not only in the Near East.

When Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon text, he naturally phrased it along lines similar to the Bible. The phrasing Joseph had at his command that seemed "scriptural" to him and his contemporaries obviously stemmed from his familiarity with the Bible. Yet some stylistic features in the text definitely reveal ancient Near Eastern patterns, not simply Joseph's hand or mind. [^5] Someday, when we know more about ancient American styles of expression, we might be able to detect similarities between this scripture and other literature by the early peoples in this hemisphere, but so far that kind of comparison is impossible. Still, another sort of comparing is feasible. It deals with content, not style. Sets of ideas and symbols used in the Book of Mormon appear to be very similar both to those in the codices or books of ancient Mesoamerica and also to what occurred in early Near Eastern cultures. In short, the Book of Mormon can be viewed as a bridge between the two cultural areas it refers to—exactly as it suggests.

When Martin Harris was aiding Joseph Smith at the time of the translation of the Book of Mormon, Harris took a copy of part of the characters on the golden plates to Professor Charles Anthon at Columbia University to see if he would vouch that they were ancient. Harris's account of his dealings with the professor is well-known among Latter-day Saints. [^6] Some years later Anthon wrote to critics of Joseph Smith his own recollection of the incident. Concerning the characters on the paper Martin Harris brought, the professor said they were in columns "evidently copied after the Mexican zodiac." [^7]

There is evidence that the gold plates could be considered a form of Mesoamerican codex. A large number of concepts and images found in the Book of Mormon are similar to what are expectable in an ancient book from Mexico. The fact of such parallels is important enough for what it hints about the history of contacts between the Old and New Worlds. More important for our present purpose is that we learn that the Book of Mormon must still contain much that moderns have not grasped because it is presented in terms of a world view foreign to us. To show some of the flavor of Nephite thought, I give a summary below of what I have discussed at length elsewhere. [^8] The phenomena in the following statement were nearly all shared three ways—in the Book of Mormon (as shown in specific verses, cited in the original paper [^9]), in Mesoamerican beliefs, and in Near Eastern thought during Old Testament times.

A Shared Picture

The heavens and the earth are layered: multiple levels above, the earth's surface between, and underworlds below the surface. Natural or artificial elevations are contact points with the upper layers; caves and water holes connect with the lower world. The lion (jaguar in Mesoamerica), a deity of the night and underworld, represents the sun in its night aspect. The lion is feared, respected, and envied.

Beneath the surface is the region of death and darkness. Some of the dead enjoy a paradise that provides a painless postmortal existence. A hades provides punishment for others. Beneath the surface is an ocean of primal water that may issue forth on the surface from a cave or hole when an artificial mountain covering the spot is breached. Although subterranean water may connote evil, it can also be considered "pure" or "sacred." A monster (earth monster, dragon, crocodile, leviathan) inhabits these waters. It was subdued by divine power in mighty battle in ancient times. The symbol of an overflowing vase whose fluid divides into two or four streams is connected with idea of the waters issuing forth; this symbol is also linked with the Milky Way, which is conceived of as a stream. In legendary times a catastrophic flood took place that destroyed all people except a handful. The history of the world is divided into a series of ages, each bounded by a major catastrophe, of which the flood was one.

Mountains are holy places, the home of God, whose name often includes the term "mountain." This divinity controls the rain, clouds, and lightning. Dead ancestors and gods assemble at a sacred mountain, where they periodically decide the destiny of mankind. A haven on or in a mountain is provided for blessed spirits. Real mountains or their artificial representations being contact points, men there entreat deity, make offerings, receive visitations, erect shrines or temples, bury the dead, and so on. Climbing such a mountain or mound symbolizes ascent to the heavens. The mounds are periodically enlarged and refurbished.

Honoring the ancestors is extremely important. Descent from father to son is the central principle of kinship organization. Ancestors are honored by deferential burial, often in a tomb, which may be reused for interring other lineage members. Memorial stelae (large standing stones) are erected near elevations and tombs. The stones may be aligned for the purpose of making astronomical sightings. Seven lineages are considered primary in the origin story of the people. The number seven is itself of sacred significance.

Water holes, lakes, moist caves, and other sources of water are sacred largely because of their presumed connection with the waters beneath the earth. Serpents or other reptilian creatures are conceptually associated with these wet places. A beneficent symbol of divinity is a flying or elevated serpent. This being has power over rain and drought and thus over fertility or famine.

The world is conceived as divided into four quarters, and each major direction is tied to a symbolic color. Prime orientation is to the east, as though an observer faced that direction. South is then termed on "the right," while north is to "the left." The north sector is considered cursed, foreboding, unlucky. The sun's rising in the east, especially at solstices, has sacred significance. Ceremonial centers are termed "the navel of the world." Periodic ritual assemblies of worshipers take place at such sacred spots.

Illness is considered a product of sin; healing may result from removing the effects of the transgression through confession. A form of baptism is known and practiced, as is circumcision. An extensive sacrifice complex is known, including burnt offerings of animals. Human sacrifice is also known, and cannibalism is likewise an occasional ritual element. The taking of human trophies occurs. Other rites are the sacred meal and fasting.

Temples were constructed on the principles of progressively more sacred inner portions and alignment to sun, moon, planets, or stars. Altars include a stepped form, whose terraced layers are symbolic of the layers of the cosmos. Also used were incense burners with and without horns, idols and small figurines whose purpose is not precisely known. Composite human-animal sacred creatures, such as winged quadrupeds (cherubim), are part of the symbol system. Also important is the tree, particularly as the tree of life with its valued fruit. Various peoples are considered to have derived from or to be symbolized by trees.

This list is already impressive, although it could be greatly lengthened. These ideas were part of the system of thought or picture of the world held by the Nephites, much of which was seemingly close to both Mesoamerican and ancient western Asian thought. The fact that these ways of thinking and expression, many of which strike us as strange, are common to the Book of Mormon and to the areas with which it is linked does not mean that the world views match at every point. Differences exist. After all, prophets like Ezekiel in the Old Testament used much of this symbolism, yet we know that Israelite beliefs and practices were also different in important ways from patterns common in the Near East. The Nephite volume, too, has its unique language and ideas. We wouldn't expect the Book of Mormon to be completely Mesoamerican or completely Near Eastern; nevertheless, the degree to which it does fit between those cultural traditions is remarkable and consistent with what it says of itself.

Summarizing, we can say that the Book of Mormon is a translation of the history of a long-lived lineage that originated in Bible lands out of Israelite roots. Its representatives crossed the ocean to Mesoamerica, where they had a career of around a thousand years before becoming extinct as a social and cultural entity. As a lineage history, the book does not purport to tell all that took place among all peoples in touch with the record-keeping group, nor does it report on many mundane aspects of life. The power and glory of the line, which the historians credited to either divine favor and assistance, and their problems, said to be due to the people's sins, are the central concerns. The account is expressed in terms of a language, set of concepts and world view that share many characteristics with the Near East, where the line originated, and with Mesoamerica, the lineage's New World setting.

With these points in mind we are better able to appreciate what the record talks about and what it is silent on. We are also better able to compare it with the findings of external scholarship. However, there are two sides to any comparison, so next we must consider the nature of the information on the other side of the historical equation. Let us see how scientific and scholarly study gets results and how reliable those results are.

Learning About Ancient Life

The ideal way to learn about a past people would be to find a group still living that had continued the ways of those ancestors unchanged. Of course, that is impossible, but the thought is enticing because there is such a tremendous gap between what we are able to learn from living people and what little we can glean from the remains left to us from former times. Anthropologist Julian Steward years ago studied Paiute Indians of Nevada in the two contrasting ways. First, he gathered as much information as he could from the survivors through questioning and observation. Then he compared his results with what archaeology revealed by digging up Paiute sites. His work with the living identified some 1,400 features (and this is one of the simplest of all societies extending into our day); archaeological research revealed only 40 of those. [^10]

Most native societies descended from the Book of Mormon peoples were changed in important ways by events between the time the Nephites disappeared (fourth century A.D.) and arrival of the Spanish conquerors. Following the year 1519, when Cortez began the destruction of the Aztec empire in Mexico, revolutionary change became commonplace. As Nephi had foreseen millennia before, the "many multitudes" of his father's descendants were "scattered before the Gentiles and were smitten" (1 Nephi 13:14), mainly by Spaniards, with the Yankees helping later. Nevertheless, in remote areas European influence remained limited, and important parts of the pre-Hispanic pattern of life were maintained.

An enlightening example is the people of Zinacantan, a community in southern Mexico within the area identified in chapter 1 as the greater land of Zarahemla. Harvard anthropologist Evon Z. Vogt and many of his colleagues have for years studied this Mayan-speaking people who dwell in a mountain valley in Chiapas. The researchers discovered a cultural pattern that had remained orderly and comprehensive despite a certain amount of intrusion of Spanish colonial and Mexican lifeways. Many pre-Spanish ideas had continued. Even the few features brought by the Spaniards that have become fairly important—metal tools, sugarcane rum, chickens, wooden crosses, the baptismal rite, Catholic saints—have been integrated so fully into the native ways that their European origin has been forgotten. [^11] Of course, this does not mean these people live exactly as their ancestors did, but many of the elements in the mosaic of their lives have been preserved. Some of their beliefs appear to relate to what we already knew about the ancient Maya.

A second vital source of information is the accounts left to us by early Spanish writers and Indians whom they taught to read and write. These sources tell us of many aspects of Mesoamerican life not preserved among any surviving group today. Good examples of key Spanish records are Bishop Diego de Landa's account of Yucatan and Father Bernardino de Sahagun's superb books about central Mexico. [^12] A few traditional accounts were transmitted to us through descendants of the pre-conquest nobility; and a handful of actual pre-Columbian manuscripts, too, have survived, even though Spanish priests burned others in huge numbers.

The largest store of information about life in the past has been built up by the archaeologists. They frequently unearth unmistakable physical evidence of foods, tools, and techniques used in the past. For example, actual specimens of corn, beans, and squash have been found so often that we know they were staples in the diet long ago as much as in recent times. Consistent absences also turn into probable fact. For example, nowhere in America has any evidence turned up that flour was used in the form of baked loaves. Quite surely these ancients did not use the risen bread familiar to us but flat, unleavened cakes.

Scientists have been able to trace trade relations among the early societies through studying obsidian or volcanic glass. The razor-like edges of this material made it highly prized for cutting and scraping. Because each outcrop of the mineral has a unique chemical composition, the origin of an obsidian object found anywhere in Mesoamerica can usually be identified, even though it had been traded from hundreds of miles away. Inferences from such data tell us much. For instance, during one period, the obsidian tools used at sites of the Olmec civilization in south-central Veracruz nearly all came from one large volcanic flow on the north. Later on, more distant places to the northwest furnished much of the supply. The difference probably coincided with new political arrangements that made the closer source inaccessible. [^13] Such analysis sheds light on changing economic and political conditions affecting access to resources. Then there are data on cooking vessels, workshop areas, weapons, burials, temples and fortifications—from direct findings and from the study of surviving groups and the early documents. We benefit from all such information.

Art representations add further details. We are able to see costumes, rituals, warfare, and other aspects of ancient life as artists chose to picture them. But most of Mesoamerican art was complex and full of exotic symbols rather than everyday scenes. [^14] Little clay figurines by the thousands (we don't know exactly what they were for) sometimes model other aspects of life.

Archaeological Methods

Digging up these material remains of man's past—the work of archaeology—sounds like a direct and simple matter, but it is not. The results can be invaluable, but serious limitations exist, too. To appreciate the strengths and problems of the process, we'll need to review a few key principles. The most useful tool for establishing time-space relationships is "stratigraphy." To illustrate the principle, pile up three books, one at a time. Can there be any question which you put down first? The bottom one, of course. Someone finding the pile later would surely conclude the same thing. This principle, stratigraphy, is illustrated in the strata of the Grand Canyon. It is equally clear in an archaeologist's trench. Exceptions to the principle are very rare; one might think an earthquake could overturn the layers, but that does not happen.

Earlier features can be distinguished from the later ones by another means too. On a pond of water the ripple farthest from the spot where a rock was tossed in will be the first ripple formed. So the distribution on a map of some feature of culture may tell us something about history. Usually a custom or artifact would have originated near the center of its later distribution area, and since in that core area it will have had more time to become elaborated, more variant forms will occur thereabouts. On such geographical principles archaeologists are able to infer some things about the origin and spread of styles of pottery, architecture, and cultivated plants.

A third tool for determining time and space relations is "typology." Every cultural activity or object displays characteristics different in detail from features shown by equivalent activities or objects of earlier or later date. Popular dances, forms of etiquette, clothing, or glass bottles all vary continuously over time in crucial stylistic details. For instance, some young people are able to identify without hesitation any motorcycle or automobile they see, naming the brand, the model, the year of manufacture, and other facts at a glance. The trick is to note the give-away indicators of fashion trends or new technology that vary from year to year—for example, the profile of the machine, placement of the lights, paint, and sound of the engine. Artifacts preserve a culture's changes as indelible history.

The archaeologist's most useful source for dating events is pottery vessels. Since they were easily broken, everyday dishes, pots and cups were manufactured in a steady stream. Potters would make small changes in their art often without realizing it. Some of the trends would become fashionable and spread to other places. At times an entirely new idea or technique would be invented, borrowed, or perhaps imposed by conquerors. These style modifications, especially when taken together with stratigraphic and distributional data, allow us to construct detailed and generally reliable pictures of where and when certain people and ideas existed and moved from place to place in the past.

Dating in Years

So far the when of our discussion has signified only "earlier than" or "later than." These broad methods do not tell us how many years ago. What we wish to do is pin events down to dates on our calendar.

At first glance historical writings appear ideal for this purpose. If we could find documents preserved from the past that specifically described events, named peoples, and identified buildings or artifacts in terms of calendar dates, we would solve the problem of chronology. Unfortunately, the number of historical documents from anywhere in the Americas that contain such information is tiny, and interpreting them is difficult. We do have carved stone monuments and a few codices (native books) from Mesoamerica. The Mayan-speaking inhabitants of lowland Guatemala and nearby areas possessed a superb knowledge of calendrical arithmetic, and they left many stelae (stone monuments) and other objects on which dates were inscribed in the native system. Two problems have plagued scholars hoping to use these dating sources. The first has been that different interpretations exist of how the Mayan calendar system should be tied to European dates. The second is connecting the information on the carved or painted pieces to surrounding events. For example, does a date on a monument refer to when it was put in place, to some earlier event, or to something expected to take place in the future? And what connections, if any, might it have with nearby buildings? More often than not we do not know.

Fortunately, the first difficulty is now practically resolved. Several lines of evidence in recent years have increasingly shown it very likely that A.D. 1539 included the Maya date written as 11.16.0.0.0. [^15] Assuming that the calendrical system in use at the Spanish conquest had been used continuously [^16] for millennia, that puts what could be the earliest dated inscription in Mesoamerica in 35 B.C. [^17] The period from around A.D. 300 to 900 has produced hundreds of monuments with dates on them. Furthermore, linking the dated objects to their surroundings gets surer the longer research goes on, although problems remain. Studies over the last 15 years have shown, for example, that many of the monuments carved by the Maya commemorated births, marriages, or deaths of local rulers, and these events can sometimes be connected directly to new buildings constructed to mark these events. [^18]

Radiocarbon Dating

As valuable as the native calendar is to our studies, there are too few of the dated pieces in too few spots and covering too little time to permit us to depend on these as the main means for absolute dating. Fortunately the physical sciences have developed ingenious new techniques in recent decades to use on the problem. The most widely applied technical method uses a common radioactive element (carbon 14 or C-14). Here is how it works. Each radioactive element breaks down or decays at its own constant rate. In the case of carbon 14, it has been calculated that it takes around 5,800 years for one-half the original radioactive material to decay. Every living thing maintains a stable level of C-14, drawing it from the atmosphere. Upon the organism's death, the radioactive carbon it contained decays at the fixed rate, being no longer replaced. If a test instrument shows that the C-14 in an organic specimen—say a bit of wood—is radiating at half the rate of living things, then the item under test is known to have died 5,800 years ago. This technique can date the charcoal in a fire pit and so determine when the firewood was cut, or we can calculate the age of a bit of corn stored in a pot and thus obtain a general date of the pot's manufacture. [^19]

Like all technical processes, this one runs into some problems. Certain types of materials tested have yielded odd results. Occasionally laboratory instruments or techniques are at fault. And sometimes the sample tested was not clearly related to any other objects, so we can't be sure what the date signifies. Yet the tens of thousands of C-14 dates made on archaeological objects over the last 35 years have allowed archaeologists to develop a time scale for the ancient cultures that is generally consistent with what we know by other methods, yet much more detailed. In fact, among the objects first measured by the method were pieces of wood from Egyptian tombs whose historical dates were already known from documents; that is how the process was originally calibrated in our calendar.

Continuing research on the carbon-14 dating process in recent years has improved its accuracy. A major breakthrough came when the technique was combined with tree-ring dating or "dendrochronology." Over 50 years ago, Dr. A. E. Douglass noted something about tree rings that most of us do not think about when we look at a newly cut stump. We all know that trees usually add a ring for each year of growth, and we can count those easily. Douglass noted that in some species certain rings were much wider or narrower than others and that over a period of time these formed patterns. The sequence of wide and narrow rings over a particular 20-year period, say, would never be duplicated precisely in any other 20 years. Trees grown in the same region showed the same pattern of rings, because variations in ring width resulted from annual variations in rainfall, creating a unique "fingerprint" for that area and period of time. Douglass next discovered that he could overlap time segments. Rings from a tree known to have been cut in 1910 might extend back 100 years, but then another tree's rings could be found to match precisely the early 30 years of that century while also extending back an additional 50 years or so. By such overlaps, a sequence of distinctive ring patterns was built up that extended back well over a thousand years. [^20] This knowledge allows extremely accurate dating of the Pueblo ruins by establishing when house beams were cut.

In recent years, other workers have used tree-ring dating to establish a sequence of ring patterns for the bristlecone pine, which grows in western Nevada. These trees are among the oldest of all living things; in some cases an individual tree lived thousands of years. Rings from these pines have been used to construct a sequence extending back many thousands of years. Actual samples of wood have been taken from particular ring segments of these pines. The hundreds of samples of exactly known age were then processed by the C-14 method. A piece of wood positively dated by counting rings might, for instance, be 2,675 years old. By the C-14 method, however, the time calculation might come out as only 2,400 years. Clearly the chemical method was off, for the tree-ring count could not be mistaken. Now, after many hundreds of such tests, corrections have been worked out telling how far off any C-14 date is. As a result, these tests are now almost as accurate as if any new material from an archaeological dig had actually been dated by direct tree-ring count. [^21]

Incidentally, radioactive carbon readings have been taken on wooden beams from buildings built by the Mayas and quite clearly dated in their calendar system by inscriptions carved on beams. The carbon-14 dates and the calendrically dated beams (using the GMT correlation) agree reasonably well.

Other technically ingenious ways have been developed to provide dates in terms of our calendar. One of these takes advantage of the hydration or weathering that occurs on obsidian left exposed to the atmosphere. Microscopic measurements are made of the thickness of the weathered layer on an obsidian artifact. The longer the time since the obsidian material was freshly chipped and so exposed to air in manufacturing the tool, the thicker the dark patina on its surface; and this can be converted to years in our calendar. [^22] Another method, archaeomagnetism, depends on measuring changes in the orientation of the magnetic field surrounding the earth. The heat of a fire permanently aligns the molecules in the scorched soil beneath the fire at the angle of the magnetic lines of force prevailing at that point on the earth's surface at that moment. Earth scientists can calculate rates of change in the magnetic orientation over the years, so when a burned building or a cooking hearth is discovered, the unintended record of its "frozen" magnetic angle can be compared with the angle of today's field. How many years have elapsed since the fire burned can then be figured. [^23] These methods are mentioned only to suggest the array of tools science has made available to help establish dates. All of them produce results that generally agree with one another. Naturally our confidence in their accuracy increases as agreement builds.

Using these methods, the experts have established rather stable dates for most ancient remains. For Mesoamerica, the most carefully studied cultures—those since the time of Christ—are now dated with no more than 50 to 100 years potential variation. For the next 2,000 years into B.C. times, dates are probably accurate to within a couple of hundred years at worst. Still, interesting refinements will yet be made.

Language History

The methods discussed so far deal mainly with physical objects, but it is not only material remains which illuminate ancient life. Language history adds valuable data to the picture. Let's see how with an example from western European languages.

Large numbers of words in English, Swedish, and German are obviously related to each other:

English Swedish German

brother broder bruder

foot fot fuss

door dÃ¶rr tÃ¼r

day dag tag

heart hjarta herz

Not only are certain spelling similarities clear, but many of the differences form regular patterns. For instance, words beginning with d in English and Swedish have t in German. Looking at many more examples we discover the large number and systematic nature of these relationships. From them we can tell that the three languages had a common origin. At some spot in the past, the speech of speakers of the ancestral language changed bit by bit as groups of speakers moved apart. Over a very long time, each group developed unique language characteristics as local conditions and customs varied. Increasing distances would have prevented them from sharing the fashions among their former neighbors. Eventually, change would reach the point where the two would no longer be able to understand each other.

Although this sketch of the separation of a once-unified language is oversimplified, the general principle has been historically documented over and over. Careful comparison allows us to reconstruct splits and movements of language groups with considerable confidence.

It is also possible to reconstruct a partial picture of the culture of the speakers of the ancestral tongue. When the daughter languages are compared, cultural items can be identified for which every one has a word relatable to the others. Other items may have no word in half the late languages, so we could tell that that particular thing had not been present at the time before the ancestors began to split up geographically and linguistically. On such a basis we know, for example, that in Mesoamerica, Proto-Mixe-Zoquean speakers, probably around 1500 B.C., possessed these cultivated plants: cacao, gourd, squash, calabash, tomato, bean, sweet potato, plantain, maize, guava, papaya, zapote, manioc, and cotton. By this clever method, we learn important facts that archaeology probably could never recover for us. Still more valuable is to learn that the same early population had words for dance, incense, metal, festival, tobacco, to play music, to buy something, and to plane wood, for example. [^24]

Another kind of language study gives us an idea of when language splittings took place. This analysis is known today as "glottochronology." More than a generation ago, Professor Morris Swadesh and others constructed 100- and 200-word lists of "basic" vocabulary (words like arm, foot, head, water, eat) for languages where historical records allowed examining how fast change had proceeded. They discovered that a fairly fixed rate of change could be documented: around 81 percent of these words were still recognizable after a thousand years; then 81 percent of that 81 percent remained at the end of a second thousand years, and so on. [^25] So if two languages share recognizable roots for 66 percent of the basic list, they would have separated a thousand years earlier (81 percent retention for each one gives the combined 66 percent figure). Some critics object to relying heavily on dates calculated in this way, but at the least the method establishes the correct order of the successive splitting off of daughter languages. It also gives us at least a rough idea of the time in years when splittings took place, against which we can compare findings by other methods.

Consider an example of how this method sheds light on ancient movements. The Navaho and Apache languages are related to nearly 50 other languages in North America, most of them far to the north of where these Indians of the southwestern states are now found. The overall language "stock," including all 50 descendant tongues of what at one time was a single language, is termed Athabaskan. If we compare Navaho with Kutchin, an Athabaskan language spoken in Alaska, we find they differ from each other about as much as English and German. Checking basic vocabulary shows that they share about 70 percent of the "basic" items (for example, Navaho "-tsin" and Kutchin "-tsan," both meaning "tree"). That converts to around 850 years, using the normal glottochronological rate, so around A.D. 1100 Kutchin and Navaho would have begun to separate. [^26] Other evidence suggests that the first Navahos reached the New Mexico area a couple of hundred years later; this supports the results from the language comparison.

A Combined Method

We have learned to exercise care in reading the Book of Mormon for clues to the characteristics of its peoples, lest we substitute our presuppositions and inferences for fact. We have also noted some of the ways in which scholarly and scientific studies tell us about ancient life despite certain limitations on their value. Taking note of these points, we aim from here on to sketch a geographical, cultural and historical setting in Mesoamerica into which the events, people and statements in the Book of Mormon plausibly fit. We will be doing three things as we move on: (1) analyzing what the text says, (2) comparing the information from the text with the findings of expert study that relate, and (3) deepening the meaning of both bodies of data by comparing one with the other, sharpening our awareness of each as we see how they may be reconciled.

Later on we'll get down to fine detail; in fact, we will consider local geography and archaeological sequences at particular sites. But initially, let us proceed at a more general level. Three big questions immediately spring to the minds of many people when the Book of Mormon and scientific findings are considered together. These three questions illustrate our general method. One question has to do with language: What is the meaning of the scriptural statements about use of "Hebrew" and "Egyptian" among the Nephites? Second, how can we explain the racial characteristics of American native peoples, who usually are labeled "Mongoloid" (East Asian), when the Jaredites and Nephites came from the Near East according to the record? Third, in light of the first two questions, did the Book of Mormon peoples find other populations when they arrived?

Hebrew and Egyptian

About 200 languages were spoken in Mesoamerica alone, and seven times that many were used throughout the Americas at the time the European discoverers reached America. [^27] Some of the languages were as distinct from each other as Chinese and English. The Hebrew and Egyptian tongues were not found among them. These facts warn us that we had better read with extreme care the few Book of Mormon statements about language, particularly those that might refer to Hebrew or Egyptian.

Lower portion of Stela 10 from Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala, showing the earliest writing system known from highland Guatemala, of perhaps the second century B.C. (After Girard, 1962.)

Nephi begins his record by stating, "I make a record in the language of my father, which consists of the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians" (1 Nephi 1:2). LDS scholars have interpreted this statement in conflicting ways, [^28] but the meaning seems to be quite clear in the light of other statements. The "learning" Nephi referred to must be essentially Jewish culture prior to the Babylonian captivity (586 B.C.). That becomes evident in 2 Nephi 25:5 where Nephi refers to the "words of Isaiah," the "things of the Jews" and "the manner of the things of the Jews." He makes clear that he knew of those matters from his Jerusalem days. For him to convey clearly any major portion of that cultural knowledge to his descendants, who knew nothing of Jewish life from experience, would seem to require using the Hebrew tongue, which he and they must have used. Nobody who is informed about the Near East would question that the day-by-day conversation, arguments, and decisions of Lehi's family were carried on in Hebrew in their homeland, then day after day during their flight through Arabia and as they journeyed to America. There is little reason to doubt that they kept their records in the same tongue. If Nephi normally spoke and wrote in Hebrew and thought in the conceptual framework of Israelite/Jewish culture, what would he have meant by his statement concerning "the language of the Egyptians"? Moroni makes it clear: "We have written this record according to our knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech" (Mormon 9:32, my emphasis). Nephi was merely saying that he used Egyptian signs to write his Jewish/Hebrew materials. His phrase "the language of the Egyptians" surely uses the word language in the dictionary sense of "a systematic means of communicating ideas or feelings by the use of conventionalized signs." Nephi's statement tells us that the Book of Mormon, at least his portion of it, was phrased in the Hebrew tongue, connoted much of Jewish culture, and was written in a system of modified Egyptian characters. That assessment seems reasonable, although we can't yet be sure of all those statements.

In the first centuries after Nephi's landing, no indication is given that the Hebrew speech of his group changed to any other tongue, but then little is said about anything for that period, so the possibility remains. When Mosiah's party of refugee Nephites left the first homeland around the city of Nephi and came among the people of Zarahemla sometime not long before 200 B.C., the two groups spoke distinct languages (Omni 1:17-18), though neither language is named. Under Benjamin, the next king, the non-Nephite masses understood whichever language the Nephite king chose to use for his speech (recorded in Mosiah 2 through 5; see Mosiah 2:6 in particular). That the more numerous "Mulekite" subjects had all learned the language Mosiah brought among them a generation earlier seems highly unlikely. Judging by the history of most contacts of this sort, the less numerous nobility would have made the change, at least in the long run. Later, even when Nephites and Lamanites conversed (as in Alma 17:20-24:30), there is little indication of a language problem or of the use of translators. Perhaps some lingua franca is implied. The scripture says nothing definite on the entire subject, or at least Mormon, abridger of the record, considered it unnecessary to explain. A knowledge of spoken Hebrew possibly continued among the Nephite rulers for a time, but that such special elite knowledge lasted down to the time of Cumorah is harder to believe. Still, the record's silence prevents settling the matter. LDS scholars have found that distinct elements of Hebrew style and phrasing show through the English translation by Joseph Smith, including the portion written by Mormon. [^29] But can Hebrew speech have been expressed in the Egyptian writing system? We need to examine that point.

The Egyptian system was not an alphabet. Most single Egyptian hieroglyphs stood for whole concepts. Signs representing sounds—syllables and individual sounds comparable to our letters—were also used. "After [the Egyptians] had evolved a set of letter signs for the principal sounds of their language, they might perfectly well have discarded all the rest of their hundreds of characters. . . . But for three thousand years they clung to these multiple characters, and wrote pictographic and phonetic characters jumbled together" because of the force of tradition. [^30] This type of writing has been labeled the Alphabet-included Logographic System. Not only Egyptian but the Chinese and Mayan scripts fit into this category. [^31] In order to read these systems, a person had the tough task of learning meanings for many hundreds of characters. This is what made mastering the system such a challenge and also an achievement. It also prevented widespread literacy. Moreover, the system made ambiguity inevitable; since the number of characters could never match the number of words or concepts to be represented, any one character could mean several things. For example, the Egyptian sign that resembled a lotus flower was code for both the lotus plant and for "thousand." [^32] Hints in the context and in adjacent signs ("determinative" modifiers) had to be interpreted in a particular text. Perhaps this is why Moroni complained about Nephite writing: "When we write, we behold our weakness and stumble because of the placing of our words" (Ether 12:23, 25). Mayan writing lacked precision for this same reason, so that "the reader had to have a good background of mythology and folklore to comprehend the texts," [^33] Mayan expert Sir Eric Thompson informs us. (What he calls "mythology and folklore" are roughly what Nephi, in 2 Nephi 25:1-2 and 5, said one needed to know in order to understand Isaiah as recorded on the brass plates.)

The type of writing we are talking about communicated mainly ideas as such, not sounds; hence it was not tied to one tongue. Thus the same characters are used in many cases by Chinese, Japanese, and Vietnamese, yet these tongues are unrelated. In Mesopotamia, the Akkadian-speaking Babylonians took over and then heavily modified earlier Sumerian writing, and later the Hittites borrowed the system, yet none of those three spoken languages resembled each other. [^34] The later cuneiform writing could have been called "reformed Sumerian." We even see the principle at work today, where "Reformed Arabic" numerals—1, 2, 3, 4, and so on—are characters known all over the world. To people using thousands of different tongues, each character carries the same meaning. In principle precisely the same process of representing concepts by characters without regard to tongue could have been true of Egyptian hieroglyphics. In fact, a number of examples have been found in Palestine demonstrating that Egyptian characters were used in Old Testament times to write the Hebrew language. [^35]

We understand in this light how it was possible for the subjects of Zarahemla, for Mosiah's Nephites, and even for Lamanites to use the same glyphic writing system, termed "the language of Nephi" (Mosiah 24:4), even though they may have spoken different tongues. In parallel fashion, glyphs in the "Mayan" system of writing were used by speakers of several languages—Chol, Yucatec, Tzeltal, and Quiche in the Mayan family, plus others in no way connected.

Since nothing said or implied in the Book of Mormon about the "reformed Egyptian" writing characters hints that the Egyptian tongue was spoken in the Nephite promised land, we have no reason to expect scholars to find traces of Egyptian speech in the New World. Certainly little trace of it has been brought to light by linguists working in Mesoamerica. But as we have seen, the glyphic writing widespread in central-southern Mesoamerica is identical in principle to Egyptian writing, [^36] and that may be all the scripture requires by its statements about Egyptian. However, Hebrew speech must have been used, at least by the earliest Nephites, so we might find indications of at least some words preserved in other languages of the area.

Identifying such borrowed words is tricky business. Isolated word similarities appear by chance in some completely unrelated languages. Only if we discover a pattern of linguistic parallels would we be justified in thinking similarities are significant. David H. Kelley of the University of Calgary believes that three names of days in the Mayan calendar are probably related to Hebrew. The Mayan day names and associated symbols follow a definite sequence, whose order matches that of the Semitic alphabet of western Asia; that alphabetic sequence order also carried calendrical significance. The Maya name manik was represented by a glyph in hand shape, probably pronounced as ke(h). Manik fits in the day sequence corresponding to Hebrew "k," which was represented by a letter whose shape represented a hand and was pronounced kaph (in Hebrew kaph means "hand"; in Yucatec Mayan kab means "hand"). The next letter in sequence in the Hebrew alphabet was lamed, while the next Mayan day was lamat. Third in sequence came Hebrew letter mem ("waters"; compare Greek mu in the same sequential position, which may relate to Assyrian mu, "water"), while the next Mayan day name is mulu(c), whose equivalent among the Aztecs stands for "water." Neither Professor Kelley nor anyone else knows quite what to make of all this, but he certainly has the impression that western Asiatic hands, or tongues, played a part in shaping this segment of the Mayan calendar. [^37]

Other provocative information about Hebrew could be cited; let us note but one study of interest. Word lists of the language family from just north of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, which included Zapotec and Mixtec, were compared with Hebrew some years ago. A certain degree of similarity in the basic vocabulary of the two groups was discovered. The comparison was not done with rigor or depth, but the results did hint at a systematic relationship. Later another researcher expanded the comparison beyond Hebrew to include other Semitic languages of the Near East, finding even more suggestive results. [^38] What this research has done is point to the need for much more work to be invested. So far, lack of competent, interested scholars and money has prevented follow-up.

Then there is Barry Fell's book America B.C., which came out in 1976. He claims to have identified in inscriptions in America and around the Pacific basin no fewer than 11 scripts, representing at least five languages, including Egyptian. Fell makes serious errors in his work, but the inscriptions he has collected do constitute a challenge yet to be examined carefully and explained adequately by conventional scholars. [^39]

As to the language of the Jaredites, little can be said. The small list of proper names and untranslated words appearing in the Book of Ether, together with the Jaredites' connection to northern Mesopotamia (Ether 1:33, 43; 2:1), suggests that they spoke a northern Semitic language, one distantly related to later Hebrew. The Zapotec and Mixtec peoples referred to above lived in the area I identify as the Jaredite heartland—Moron and thereabouts. Should further work confirm some relationship between ancestral Zapotec and Mixtec and Near Eastern languages, possibly it would be attributable to the Semitic speech of the Jaredite group.

What may have happened to the Old World tongues of the Book of Mormon lineages is clarified by the case of the much later rulers over the Quichean-speaking people of highland Guatemala. The Popol Vuh and other native histories of the area tell us how these foreign elites, small in numbers, entered the highlands, already containing hundreds of thousands of native speakers of the Mayan family. The intruders spoke a Nahua tongue (related to the languages of the Aztecs, and distantly to the Ute languages of the Great Basin). The newcomers gained power over the locals and dominated them for several centuries. After the Spanish conquest, the only traces of Nahua speech detectable consisted of a few words intrusive into the Quiche-Mayan vocabulary. [^40] Likely the fate of the Hebrew spoken by early Nephites was the same.

Clearly the hundreds of languages in Mesoamerica are only slightly, if at all, linked with western Asiatic tongues that Book of Mormon migrating groups might have brought. The large majority of the languages and the peoples speaking them simply have to be accounted for in another way. But let's consider the next question, then return to the language matter.

Strange Faces

The Book of Mormon tells us nothing—literally nothing—about the biological characteristics of its peoples when they left Asia. We do not know from the text whether Nephi was under five feet tall or over six and one-half feet. We know nothing of Laman's hair color, nor of the skeletal frame of Lehi's wife, Sariah. Nor is information of this sort given to us about the Jaredites or the people of Zarahemla. So in a strict sense there is nothing specific for us to compare between scripture and the external sources. Because all we have to go on are inferences, we'll want to be cautious, especially about any biases we might bring to the subject from modern conditions.

We can probably safely infer that Lehi and his party showed physical features in the normal range for people in Palestine in his day. (People of that area haven't changed much right up to modern times, for that matter.) We have skeletons and art representations from early times plus data on living descendants to guide us. All this information together creates a picture like this. Men stood approximately five feet six inches tall, the women an even five feet. More of them weighed less than 130 pounds than weighed more. Their build was slender and gracile, unburdened by heavy muscles. (This information was not known to the artist who prepared the illustrations used in the Book of Mormon in recent years.) Hair was shaded black to fully brown. Eyes, too, were most often brown, although they could also range into gray, blue, and hazel. Light reddish-brown or copper-colored (untanned) skin was normal, with olive or yellowish-white tints also present in some. A moderate beard appeared on some males. People with these features have predominated at the lower elevations of eastern Mediterranean and Near Eastern lands for thousands of years. Mountainous regions just north of the Near Eastern centers could have furnished genes producing a slightly more rugged build and a more prominent, beaked nose. [^41]

Figures from the Bonampak murals (A.D. 800), illustrating some of the variety of physical characteristics among Mesoamerican peoples. (Photo by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

A small party—a couple of families in Lehi's case—drawn out of the Iron Age population pool of Israel might, of course, have emphasized certain nontypical characteristics that by chance occurred to an unusual degree in the parents. Still, any of those special emphases would not likely shift the appearance of their descendants very far from the picture just presented.

Suppose such a party was transplanted to tropical America, where their descendants then lived for over 2,500 years. What would they look like now, assuming that they did not mix with others? There is simply no way to tell. Nobody today has enough scientific knowledge of the factors involved to know just how much and in what directions those immigrants might change under the impact of their new environment. Change they would, of course. New diet, new tasks, new climate, and new diseases and stresses would all favor certain potentialities in their biology and disfavor others. The plasticity due to environmental changes could be compounded by their mixing with other groups.

What other groups? Were there other people around? We have already seen, from the information in the Book of Mormon concerning the dimensions of the lands, that it discusses a territory only hundreds of miles long. That leaves lots of space in the Americas that could have held millions of people—those referred to by father Lehi when he assured his sons that even in their day other peoples were waiting in the wings, so to speak: "many nations would overrun the land" if they only knew of it (2 Nephi 1:8). Divine power would restrain those people as long as the immigrants kept God's commandments (verse 9), but later, Lehi prophesied, the Lord would "bring other nations unto them." That would occur when Lehi's descendants had rebelled and had come to "dwindle in unbelief" (verse 11).

The Lamanites were rebellious almost from the day of the first landing; the Nephites were not faithful for long (see the books of Jarom and Omni). As for the people who accompanied Mulek, they were hardly better than the Lamanites (Omni 1:16-17). Would not divine justice have brought "other nations unto them" even in those early centuries? Most Latter-day Saint readers have supposed that the "other nations" were the European "Gentiles" (1 Nephi 13:1-3) who overran the land after Columbus's discovery, but does it make sense that the fate prophesied by Lehi would be delayed until 1,100 years after Cumorah? "Many nations" nearby in the Americas could have entered the lands of the American Israelite groups on short notice. Linguistic reconstruction tells us about one of the later groups—the Nahua speakers, which included the Aztecs. None of them came into Mesoamerica until after the Book of Mormon account had been sealed up, yet soon they came to dominate much of the area. [^42]

Within the very territory first occupied by Nephites and Lamanites, other peoples may have been living when Lehi's party arrived. Considerable indirect evidence exists within the Book of Mormon that survivors from the time of the Jaredites lived on down into Nephite times and strongly influenced the latter group. Hugh Nibley has drawn attention to some of the evidence. [^43] But wouldn't the Nephite historians have said so explicitly? Consider for a moment those historians' position as they tell us about the early Lamanites. They wrote from the narrow perspective of their besieged little colony (2 Nephi 5:14; Jacob 7:26). Their understandable frame of mind would have seen all people with whom they came in contact "out there" as "Lamanites," for in the Nephite scheme of thought at that time, who else could those dark-skinned lurkers in the forest have been? We can be assured that they did not chat with them about their ancestry. Whoever they saw were in any case enemies, no doubt soon to be dominated by aggressive descendants of Nephi's elder brothers.

The archaeological information on coastal Guatemala or El Salvador at the time of the Nephite landing (ca. 575 B.C.) is particularly vague. Evidence is lacking of structures dating before this time in the Valley of Guatemala, probably the early land of Nephi. Deposits of earlier ceramics and other artifacts representative of a scattered rural population (of the vaguely defined "Las Charcas" and "Arevalo" periods) have been found. [^44] It is consistent with the known data to suppose that only a few scattered farming hamlets occupied the Valley of Guatemala in the earlier half of the sixth century B.C., when we suppose Nephi and his party arrived there. Meanwhile, the clearest archaeological sequence on the coast during this period is near the Mexican-Guatemalan border, where a gap in occupation appears around 600 B.C., although inland at nearby Izapa a degree of continuity may be manifest in the confused archaeological materials. [^45] Whatever peoples, if any, were occupying the region where Lehi's party landed, they seem not to have amounted to much in population or power at that precise time. It is reasonable that immigrants could find a niche among them and even dominate them.

Another question is what impact a tiny group of colonists from overseas would have on the archaeological culture of an area. David H. Kelley has pointed out the weakness in archaeologists' emphasis on the apparent continuity of culture at local settlements in the face of a major invasion. He noted that in rural Aztec village sites, even the Spanish conquest ("the most drastic invasion Mexico is known to have suffered") shows up only belatedly and faintly. [^46] So for Lehi's initial landing spot, we don't have an idea what archaeologists might find that would demonstrate the arrival of the score or so persons in the one-ship colonizing party. Possibly the two Egyptian ushabti figurines in a San Salvador museum (reportedly dug up near the beach in western El Salvador), if they could be authenticated, would be as direct a trace of Near Eastern intruders as could ever be located. [^47]

A strong evidence in our text for the presence of indigenous peoples is the constant reference by the early Nephite historians to the large numbers of Lamanites they faced. People living under the conditions the Nephites attribute to the early Lamanites—nomadic, hunting, savage—do not develop populations to compare with people such as the ambitious Nephite cultivators portrayed in Enos 1:21. Then how did "the Lamanites" become so overwhelmingly numerous? About the only believable answer is that the immigrant Lamanites incorporated under their rule native peoples already living in the region.

The picture is further complicated by the "people of Zarahemla." Mosiah quickly found out when he located them that their chief claimed to be descended from the Jews (Omni 1:14-15, 18), but nothing is said about the ancestry of the people this Zarahemla ruled over. They could well have been a mixed bunch, including many descendants of Jaredite-period ancestors. On philological grounds, Nibley detected "Jaredite influence reaching the Nephites through Mulekite channels." [^48] The people at the city of Zarahemla considered the destroyed Jaredites "our brothers" (Alma 46:22), after all. Yet "Mulekites" and "Jaredites" as we Latter-day Saints usually think of them cannot account for all who were present. It is impossible to explain the presence of 200 Mesoamerican languages on the basis of Book of Mormon groups alone. As for the scriptural text, Nibley cautions, "There is not a word in the Book of Mormon to prevent the coming to this hemisphere of any number of people from any part of the world at any time, provided only that they come with the direction of the Lord; and even this requirement must not be too strictly interpreted." [^49]

The findings of science provide positive evidence that pre-Nephite peoples were culturally, linguistically and biologically continuous with those found in Mesoamerica after the date for the Nephite arrival. We have seen that in coastal El Salvador and Guatemala, where Lehi's group probably reached shore, data about peoples who might have been present right around 600 B.C. is ambiguous. Drastic changes were then being completed as a result of the death of the civilizational tradition of which the Jaredites had been part. Those final throes affected life all the way south to the Nephite "land of first inheritance," so the archaeological evidence indicates. It seems possible that the population present in the immediate vicinity where the Israelites landed was small and weak enough to be no serious hindrance to the colonizers. Indeed, like the relationship of the Indians of Massachusetts to the Pilgrims, the indigenes may well have passed on the skills and crops necessary to the success of the new colony. (Diseases brought by Lehi's group, to which they had built up immunity, might soon have affected the locals, further weakening them, but would not have eliminated their genetic and cultural contribution to the subsequent population.) In the south-central Mexico and isthmus area, localized cultures are shown by archaeology to have persisted across the Jaredite-Nephite time boundary despite the spectacular collapse of the main "Olmec" civilization. The people of Zarahemla must have been involved in one of those bridging groups (making Omni 1:17 understandable). They would have combined genetic and cultural elements of the earlier civilization with whatever the Mulek group of voyagers from the Mediterranean had introduced. The scientific information is unmistakable; there was definite continuity of population from earlier times into the days of the Nephites. The Book of Mormon account neither contradicts nor confirms it, but neither does such continuity pose any particular problems for the scripture, as I read it.

What about the "Mongoloid" racial characteristics that physical anthropologists see in the pre-Columbian inhabitants of the western hemisphere? Some facts are clear enough. Such Asiatic features as the characteristic eyefold, the pigmented spot at the base of the spine of infants, and a special shape of incisor are found in varying proportions among every Amerindian group studied. [^50] On the basis of these traits some biological linkage to Asia is safely assumed by every researcher who knows the materials. What is unclear is the extent and historical meaning of these facts. It is apparent that a major part of the native Americans' characteristics is a result of adaptation to New World environmental conditions. [^51] Significant variation is found in the distribution of various bodily traits; that is, some groups are much less Mongoloid than others. That raises the question whether at some time in the past, certain peoples in America might have been totally non-Mongoloid. Some art representations clearly show persons of several non-Indian racial groups—"Semitic," Chinese, black [^52]—although certain Mesoamerican people anciently indeed looked like recent natives inhabiting the same areas. Beyond art, scientific data also point to the presence of Mediterranean and Near Eastern groups within Mesoamerica.

Dr. Juan Comas, Mexico's most eminent physical anthropologist, asked the question, "Are the Amerindians a biologically homogeneous group?" then answered it with a solid "no." [^53] A substantial bloc of other experts agree with him. G. Albin Matson, a leading researcher on blood grouping, took "a sensible position" that "the American Indians are not completely Mongoloid." [^54] Harvard Professor Earnest Hooton reached a similar conclusion, as explained in the hilarious book Men out of Asia, by maverick archaeologist Harold S. Gladwin. Hooton saw bodily features in the New World that would have been quite at home in Palestine. [^55]

Most recently, Polish anthropologist Andrzej Wiercinski analyzed a large series of skulls excavated at dated sites in Mesoamerica. He found evidence not only of north and central Asian physical types, but in addition specifically Chinese and also Caucasoid features, including the Near Eastern "Armenoid" subtype whose large nose and beard resemble the classic Yankee figure of Uncle Sam. Wiercinski asserts that "the ancient Mexican series are shifted more towards the white variety of pattern of facial traits than to the classic Mongoloids." Thus, he judged, "ancient Mexico was inhabited by a chain of interrelated populations which cannot be regarded as typical Mongoloids." In fact, he believed that superimposed upon his three "primary Amerindian stocks" were features "introduced by foreign bands of sporadic migrants from the western Mediterranean area." [^56] Archaeologist Robert Chadwick, who posits the presence of ancient European "prospectors" in the New World, agrees with this position. [^57]

Keep in mind, too, the bodily characteristics of the Israelites sketched earlier. Their typical copper-olive skins, dark hair, brown eyes, and slight build would mean that the party of Lehi would not stand out sharply in physical appearance from many Indian groups. The features they brought could fit comfortably in, and possibly disappear into, the biological milieu in Middle America.

So could the Nephites have fitted biologically into the picture we now have of Mesoamerican populations? The answer is yes, when we understand the physical makeup that characterized them and when we see them as a relatively small group living among surrounding peoples who ultimately mixed with and absorbed their descendants. This scenario fits what we have already described in social and political terms—that the Book of Mormon is a record by an elite group who dominated a folk population of undisclosed characteristics whom they found resident on the land. But Latter-day Saints who insist that millions of Nephites looked like Northern Europeans cannot justify that position.

What about the "dark skin" of the Lamanites and the "fair skin" of the Nephites? In the first place, the terms are relative. How dark is dark? How white is fair? An early Spaniard, Tomas Medel, noted around A.D. 1560 that the Indians in the Pacific coastal areas of Guatemala, where I place the earliest Lamanites, were darker than those in the cooler, higher areas, where the first Nephites lived. The highlanders, Medel said, "appeared but little different from the Spaniards." [^58] That observation is underlined by a historical incident that took place at the other end of Mesoamerica during Cortez's conquest of the Aztecs. Faced by a rebellion at his base on the Gulf of Mexico, the commander sent spies from Central Mexico to assess the situation. Among a party of his Indian allies he sent along two Spaniards of relatively dark complexion, clothed like the natives. They succeeded in being in the camp of the rebel Spaniards for a lengthy period, then returned to report the state of affairs, their own Spanish identity never being detected by their countrymen. [^59] Padre Thomas Gage called the Indian people of central Chiapas "fair of complexion" and the natives of Nicaragua "indifferent white." [^60] On the other hand, the color of other Indians approached what could be called "a skin of blackness" (2 Nephi 5:21; this metaphor was used only once in the text—all other references are only to "darkness"). [^61]

The skin shades of surviving peoples in Book of Mormon lands include a substantial range, from dark brown to virtual white. These colors cover nearly the same range as were found anciently around the Mediterranean coast and in the Near East. It is likely that the objective distinction in skin hue between Nephites and Lamanites was less marked than the subjective difference. The scripture is clear that the Nephites were prejudiced against the Lamanites (Jacob 3:5; Mosiah 9:1-2; Alma 26:23-25). That must have influenced how they perceived their enemies. The Nephite description of the Lamanites falls into a pattern known in the Near East. The Sumerian city dwellers in Mesopotamia of the third millennium B.C. viewed the Amorites, Abraham's desert-dwelling relatives, as "dark" savages who lived in tents, ate their food raw, left the dead unburied, and cultivated no crops. [^62] Urban Syrians still call the Bedouin nomads "the wild beasts." The Nephite picture of their relatives, in Jarom 1:6 and Enos 1:20, sounds so similar to the Near Eastern epithets that this language probably should be considered a literary formula rather than an objective description, labeling applied to any feared, despised, "backward" people. [^63] But all this does not exclude a cultural and biological difference between the two groups. The question is how great the difference was; we may doubt that it was as dramatic as the Nephite recordkeepers made out.

We have seen that on the entire question of human biology or "race," the Book of Mormon says little. In reviewing what the people looked like who lived in the Near East, we discovered that, in the eyes of a casual observer, they would not have differed all that much from some Mesoamerican groups. In Mesoamerica we have evidence that groups bearing Near Eastern characteristics could have been present anciently, along with the more prevalent Amerindian population. These facts seem to indicate that the statements in the scriptural text can be sufficiently reconciled with the scientific data. No major problems remain on this point.

Small Land, Big Hemisphere

Both the linguistic and the biological information demonstrate that the cultural and ethnic history of the lands we have identified with the Book of Mormon account—central-southern Mesoamerica—has been complex. That is not surprising. The lands of the Bible prove to be equally complex, historically. A single account, particularly one prepared with religious emphasis, can do no more than sketch a few scenes of either history. What we learn about peoples and the flow of events in the scriptures is not sufficient to lay out for us the big historical picture, of which the religious volume relates but one small part. The law and the prophets of the Israelites touch only briefly upon the history of Egypt or Persia or Greece, and certainly no country farther away in each direction. No more could the Book of Mormon hope to make clear what happened in the entire New World, even had the writers known those facts. But when we grasp the larger historical picture, the scriptural account finds a sensible place within it. In Atlantic-centered lands we can see the unfolding of an orderly scheme of development involving the Reformation, the Magna Charta, and the American Revolution, plus a thousand other events, all culminating in the restoration of the gospel. Or we see the risky path taken by tiny prophet-led Israel among the power giants—Egypt, Assyria, and Babylon. Happenings of sacred significance have a secular context as much as do merely profane events.

Might not the position of the Nephites follow the general pattern for Old World Israel? The Mesoamerican "promised land" in the New World was in the middle of the civilizing action. Just as Palestine proved to be the cockpit of the ancient world, where everything the Israelites did and said could have their effects magnified abroad, so Mesoamerica was the cultural nexus in this hemisphere. Here was the one place where an archaic civilization (one on the order of Egypt or Babylon in the Old World) could either make it big or be ground up in the intense competition among peoples. If we were to rate the complexity of civilization at any given moment in the pre-Hispanic western hemisphere on a scale of 100, Mesoamerica through several millennia would tend to be top ranked, often near the 100 mark. The Pueblos of New Mexico might get a 20, and the Mississippian culture of the central United States seven or eight hundred years ago a 30. The Paiute gatherers of Nevada would be around 2, the Eskimos a mite higher. Give anything in Nicaragua a 35 at best and most of the people of Brazil from 10 to 25. Peru would score from 80 to near the 100 mark. These comparative levels mark out two zeniths of cultural development—the Mesoamerican and the Andean zones. Only for the former is there evidence of written records. Everything else was substantially less complex and less interesting from the point of view of hemispheric culture history. It would be understandable that the Nephites be sited in the middle of things in the New World.

All the local American histories—the expansion of populations, the creation of monuments, the rise and fall of chiefs, the spread of cults, and the skirmishes among the little bands—are about as varied as is the history of Asia. Hundreds of tribes and kingdoms, thousands of communities with their own cultural uniqueness, filled up the hemisphere over a long time. How many of them had anything directly to do with the Nephites or the Jaredites? Perhaps about as many, or as few, as were directly related to the Israelites among the peoples of Eurasia. We know that certain cultural features spread out from Mesoamerica at different periods, so few areas of the hemisphere exist that were not somehow affected by influences from Lehi's new homeland. Probably some people—some genes—went with the culture. Overall it appears these diffused effects usually were minor, culturally or biologically, but in certain places powerful results ensued. We know that significant movements of Mesoamerican people and ideas penetrated northern Mexico and the Arizona-New Mexico area. [^64] The lower and mid-Mississippi Valley and the southeastern states felt strong influence at several periods. [^65] Ecuador in the time of the Jaredites, and Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia at several later times, [^66] also felt the impress of Mesoamerican life and probably of the genes of its peoples. Groups in the receiving areas also sent cultural gifts back to the Nephite area.

The entire subject has too many ramifications to treat fully here. The question uppermost in the minds of Latter-day Saints readers is likely to be this: If all those people are actually not described in the Book of Mormon, then should we consider their descendants to be "Lamanites"? Latter-day Saints speak of them as Lamanites today. Is this true in a direct biological sense?

First of all, Lehi's prophecy about the future of his descendants teaches us that "there shall none come into this land save they shall be brought by the hand of the Lord" (2 Nephi 1:6). And whomever the Lord did bring, "this land is consecrated unto him" (verse 7). The meaning becomes clearer still in the Savior's discourse recorded in the twentieth and twenty-first chapters of 3 Nephi. Those who have been brought here and desire to take advantage of Lehi's promised blessing are to do so by being "numbered among this the remnant of Jacob" to whom the land has been given as an inheritance (3 Nephi 21:22). This is as true of the "Gentiles" of recent centuries as of the earlier "native" peoples. In short, the blessings of the land were to be available to all arrivals, if they are willing to connect themselves "by adoption" to Lehi, to whom the land was given. The terms of the Savior's statements, if not Lehi's, make clear that the entire hemisphere, not just the immediate land mentioned in the historical record of the Nephites, was to be Lehi's inheritance (3 Nephi 20:13, 20, 22; 21:4, 12, 23-25, 29; D&C 54:8). Thus any people in the western hemisphere could receive the blessings of identification with the American Israelites, either under the label "Lamanite," if descended from pre-Columbian ancestors, or as "Gentiles" (immigrants in the Christian tradition, mainly from Europe), under the terms of 3 Nephi 21:22. All native peoples of the New World may thus be appropriately classified "Lamanites." This says nothing, one way or the other, about "literal" descent, which the Lord considers of no particular significance in regard to receiving blessings (1 Nephi 17:32-35).

Should some investigator find new methods to pursue research on the "blood lines" of a particular individual, family, or people, he or she might find that some native Americans are directly descended from Nephites of ancient times, that some are descended in part from others in Lehi's or Mulek's parties, that some are of Jaredite origin, and that still others have no discernible connection to any of those. Scientific, genealogical, or historical methods to resolve such questions are not available; but, more important, the scriptures indicate that the results would not matter as far as the Church and the gospel are concerned.

In this section we have looked at three questions about the Book of Mormon in relation to the findings of science. Careful reconsiderations of the scriptural text, examination of research findings sometimes neglected, and an active attempt to bring all these materials into agreement have reduced the "problems" to near insignificance. We find the two bodies of fact largely accommodate each other. There is no particular problem for the scripture, but neither does the information about the ancient inhabitants from outside sources show that the scriptural account is erroneous. Some of us may indeed have to revise our previous ideas about both the Book of Mormon and the findings of science, but that would only be a manifestation of our healthy correction of former error. Future work might teach us more about these topics, but for now we seem to have "cleared the decks" so we can get down to some new questions.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Michael D. Coe, America's First Civilization: Discovering the Olmec (New York: American Heritage Publishing Co. in association with The Smithsonian Institution, 1968), p. 12.
[^2] Robert S. Harris, "The Indigenous Plants of Latin America," International Review of Vitamin Research 23 (1952):404-14.
[^3] Opinions differ on "the gods." Ignacio Bernal maintains that many of what he considers the recognizable gods of later Mesoamerica "were really invented in the valley of Oaxaca" (my proposed land of Moron), yet Tatiana Proskouriakoff takes a different line regarding the Maya: "There probably were many small local gods, but the notion that the Maya civilization had a great many gods, I think, is completely wrong. We never have gods represented before the Post-Classic period, by which time there is a great proliferation of idols. In neither the Teotihuacan culture nor that of the Classic Maya, nor in any of the earlier cultures, was there really what you might call an idol or god that we could identify. But they do have these . . . symbols which are combined and recombined in various ways, I think to represent cosmic entities." Elizabeth P. Benson, ed., Dumbarton Oaks Conference on the Olmec (Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, 1968), pp. 142, 176. Noted Mayanist J. E. S. Thompson said: "I have come to believe that the Mayas of the Classic epoch were close to having a monotheistic cult; they had a supreme god, with his assistants who were lesser gods; but the idea of a single god was very advanced." (Interview in El Heraldo, Mexico City, January 27, 1972).
[^4] George C. Vaillant, The Aztecs of Mexico (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1950), p. 200. This is one of the best-written sources for the beginning student, although substantially out of date on details.
[^5] Edward E. Calnek, "The Internal Structure of Cities in America; Pre-Columbian Cities: The Case of Tenochtitlan," Actas y Memorias, 34a Congreso, Internacional de Americanistas, Lima, 1970, vol. 2 (Lima, 1972), pp. 347-58.
[^6] William T. Sanders and Barbara J. Price, Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization (New York: Random House, 1968), pp. 151, 189-93, 209.
[^7] Henry F. Dobyns, "Estimating Aboriginal Population: An Appraisal of Techniques with a New Hemispheric Estimate," Current Anthropology 7 (1966):395-416.
[^8] A sound, brief introduction to Inca life is in Luis G. Lumbreras, The Peoples and Cultures of Ancient Peru (Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1976).
[^9] A short, fairly typical introduction to hemispheric prehistory is Thomas C. Patterson, America's Past (Glenview, Illinois: Scott Foresman, 1973).
[^10] Coe, America's First Civilization, pp. 73-89.
[^11] David C. Grove, "The Highland Olmec Manifestation: A Consideration of What It Is and Isn't, " in Mesoamerican Archaeology: New Approaches, ed. Norman Hammond (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1974), pp. 109-28; Gareth W. Lowe, The Early Preclassic Barra Phase of Altamira, Chiapas, NWAF 38 (1975); Norman Hammond, "The Earliest Maya," Scientific American 236 (March 1977):116-17.
[^12] Much of the current professional literature uses outdated, or at least inexact, chronology. The most detailed published source at the moment is R. E. Taylor and C. W. Meighan, eds., Chronologies in the New World (New York: Academic Press, 1978), which includes a paper by Gareth Lowe on "Eastern Mesoamerica." More complete and internally consistent than anything else at the moment, despite some problems, is my "A Mesoamerican Chronology: April 1977," based on an earlier working paper, "Mesoamerican C-14 Dates Revised." Both were published, without my permission, in Katunob: A Newsletter-Bulletin on Mesoamerican Anthropology 9, no. 4 (February 1977). This is one in a long series of updatings of my A Chronological Ordering of the Mesoamerican Pre-Classic, MARI 18 (1955), pp. 41-70. A new monograph-length treatment is in preparation.
[^13] "The Transpacific Origin of Mesoamerican Civilization: A Preliminary Review of the Evidence and Its Theoretical Implications," American Anthropologist 77 (1975), pp. 1-27.
[^14] Betty J. Meggers, "Cultural Development in Latin America: An Interpretative Overview," in Aboriginal Cultural Development in Latin America: An Interpretative Review, ed. Betty J. Meggers and Clifford Evans, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 146, no. 1 (1963), pp. 132, 139, compare 79-80.
[^15] C. Evans and B. J. Meggers. "Transpacific Origin of Valdivia Phase Pottery of Coastal Ecuador," Actas, 36a Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Sevilla, 1964, vol. 1 (Sevilla, 1966), pp. 63-67. Critics of their view claim that the ceramic similarities are coincidences.
[^16] Carl L. Hubbs and Gunnar I. Roden, Oceanography and Marine Life along the Pacific Coast of Middle America, HMAI 1 (1964), pp. 148, 154-55.
[^17] Paul Tolstoy, "Mesoamerica," in Prehispanic America, ed. Shirley Gorenstein (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1974), p. 38.
[^18] See articles and bibliographical references to their work in Carroll Riley et al., eds., Man Across the Sea: Problems of Pre-Columbian Contacts (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971). Also see references in article cited in next note ("Prehistoric Transpacific Contact and the Theory of Culture Change," American Anthropologist 79 (1977):9-25.
[^19] "Prehistoric Transpacific Contact and the Theory of Culture Change," American Anthropologist 79 (1977):9-25.
[^20] "The Significance of an Apparent Relationship between the Ancient Near East and Mesoamerica," in Riley et al., Man Across the Sea, pp. 219-41, which is dealt with by Schneider on his page 19. The same material was compressed somewhat, with documentation omitted, in "Ancient America and the Book of Mormon Revisited," Dialogue 4 (1969):80-94.
[^21] Most of the literature assumes this point, but suitable documentation of it is rare. Good examples are Richard S. MacNeish, "Ancient Mesoamerican Civilization," Science 143 (February 7, 1964):531-45, and Peter T. Furst, "Morning Glory and Mother Goddess at Tepantitla, Teotihuacan: Iconography and Analogy in Pre-Columbian Art," in Norman Hammond, ed., Mesoamerican Archaeology: New Approaches (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1974), pp. 187-91.
[^22] Henri Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East (New York: Doubleday, Anchor Books, 1956), pp. vii and appendix.
[^23] Coe, America's First Civilization, idem, "San Lorenzo and the Olmec Civilization," in Benson, Dumbarton Oaks Conference, pp. 41-78.
[^24] Ignacio Bernal, The Olmec World (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969), p. 195.
[^25] Benson, Dumbarton Oaks Conference, p. 39.
[^26] Gareth W. Lowe, "The Mixe-Zoque as Competing Neighbors of the Early Lowland Maya," in The Origins of Maya Civilization, ed. R. E. W. Adams (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1977), pp. 230-39.
[^27] G. C. Vaillant, Excavations at Ticoman, American Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Papers 32, part 2 (New York, 1931).
[^28] Harold W. McBride, "The Extent of the Chupicuaro Tradition," in The Natalie Wood Collection of Pre-Columbian Ceramics from Chupicuaro, Guanajuato, Mexico, at UCLA, ed. J. D. Frierman (Los Angeles: University of California, Los Angeles, Museum and Laboratories of Ethnic Arts and Technology, 1969), pp. 33-49; J. A. Bennyhoff, "Chronology and Periodization," Teotihuacan: Onceava Mesa Redonda (Mexico: Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia, 1966), pp. 23-24.
[^29] Bernal, The Olmec World, p. 112.
[^30] Joyce Marcus, "The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing," Annual Review of Anthropology 5 (1976):35-67. The thesis of an Olmec origin for writing and the calendar is not as well established as Marcus' enthusiasm makes out, but it is likely. See especially Vincent Malmstrom, "A Reconstruction of the Chronology of Mesoamerican Calendrical Systems," Journal for the History of Astronomy 9 (1978):105-16.
[^31] For a generation the scholars agreed on a date in the vicinity of 3100 B.C. for the first appearance of the ziggurat, but radiocarbon dating has now pushed the first occurrence back a bit more. James Mellaart, "Egyptian and Near Eastern Chronology: A Dilemma?" Antiquity 53 (1979):6-18; 54 (1980):225-27.
[^32] All Jaredite dates are from my paper "The Years of the Jaredites," read at a conference on the Book of Mormon at BYU in 1972 but unpublished until made available as a Preliminary Report in 1984 by the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, Provo, Utah.
[^33] Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1952), pp. 238-47.
[^34] The putative ancestor of Zarahemla, Mulek, was held to be a son of Zedekiah, king over Judah until taken captive by the Babylonians in 586 B.C., while he was still in his early thirties. "Mulek" would have been a child at most. We do not know how long his party took to arrive in the New World, but the implication of Omni 1:15-16 is that they did not delay long.
[^35] Only in recent years has the early occurrence of war in Mesoamerica been recognized, and its scope is still not appreciated even among most Mesoamerican experts. See particularly David L. Webster, Defensive Earthworks at Becan, Campeche, Mexico: Implications for Maya Warfare, MARI 41 (1976), pp. 103-13.
[^36] Theirs may not have been the only transatlantic voyage about that time. See Constance Irwin, Fair Gods and Stone Faces (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1963).
[^37] Gareth W. Lowe and J. Alden Mason, Archaeological Survey of the Chiapas Coast, Highlands, and Upper Grijalva Basin, HMAI 2 (1965), pp. 217-18. Also see an unpublished paper by Bruce W. Warren, "The Central Depression of Chiapas: Its Role within the Evolution of Mesoamerican Civilization," pp. 20-21, in my possession.
[^38] On Tlapacoya and Tikal, Bruce W. Warren, personal communications; on Altar de Sacrificios, R. E. W. Adams, The Ceramics of Altar de Sacrificios, HUPM 63, no. 1 (1971), p. 147. Also the paper by Warren mentioned in note 37.
[^39] Edwin M. Shook and Alfred V. Kidder, Mound E-III-3, Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala, CIWP 53 (1952), p. 45 and figure 56.
[^40] Some continuity in concept is exhibited from latest Olmec-period centers (for example, Izapa and Tzutzuculi) to ceremonial centers of later times, as Andrew J. McDonald has shown in an unpublished paper. No capable Mesoamericanist would question this point in general. But a very different concept of "ceremonial precinct" may be seen at Kaminaljuyu in the "Majadas-Providencia" phase, from 550-125 B.C., involving conical burial mounds arranged along a "street-like plaza" functioning as "a ritual center for the funeral of an elite element in the population." William T. Sanders and Joseph W. Michels, Kaminaljuyu Project-1968 Season. Part 1. The Excavations, PSUO 2 (1969), pp. 165-66. However, Shook and Proskouriakoff think that Sanders and Michels did not see things straight and that the early arrangement at Kaminaljuyu is not notably different. Tatiana Proskouriakoff, "Early Architecture and Sculpture in Mesoamerica," in Observations on the Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica, ed. Robert F. Heizer and John A. Graham, UCAR 11 (1971), p. 145.
[^41] William T. Sanders, Ceramic Stratigraphy at Santa Cruz, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 13 (1961), p. 53; Lowe and Mason, Archaeological Survey, pp. 217-18.
[^42] Agustin Delgado, Excavations at Santa Rosa, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 17 (1965), pp. 77-78.
[^43] On volcanism near San Salvador and also the Chalchuapa zone, Payson D. Sheets, "An Ancient Natural Disaster," Expedition 14 (Fall 1971):24-31; R. J. Trotter, "Unravelling a Mayan Mystery," Science News 111 (20 January 1977):74-78; Stanley H. Boggs, Pottery Jars from the Loma del Tacuazin, El Salvador, MARI 28 (1967); Payson D. Sheets, "Preliminary Results of Research in the Zapotitan Basin, El Salvador," Mexicon 1, no. 2 (May 15, 1979):15-17. Sheets' chronology of the eruption is not consistent in various reports, apparently being based on too little absolute dating information to be conclusive yet, despite his sometimes sounding certain. On Tres Zapotes' volcanic indicators, Michael D. Coe, Archaeological Synthesis of Southern Vera Cruz and Tabasco, HMAI 3 (1965), p. 695. For the valley of Mexico, Rene Millon and James A. Bennyhoff, "A Long Architectural Sequence at Teotihuacan," American Antiquity 26 (1961):518-19; and "Noticias de los Museos, Pieza del Mes," Boletin INAH (Marzo 1968):51.
[^44] The argument is presented in my "A Chronological Ordering," pp. 53, 57, with citations to the literature.
[^45] Laurette Sejourne, "El Simbolismo de los Rituales Funerarios en Monte Alban," Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropologicos 16 (1960):85-90. See also note 163.
[^46] Example: Ignacio Bernal, Archaeological Synthesis of Oaxaca, HMAI, vol. 3 (1965), p. 801.
[^47] Millon and Bennyhoff, "Sequence at Teotihuacan."
[^48] Rene Millon, The Teotihuacan Map, vol. 1 (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1973), p. 56; Daniel Wolfman, "A Re-evaluation of Mesoamerican Chronology, A.D. 1-1200" (Ph.D. diss., University of Colorado, 1973), p. 30.
[^49] George Kubler, The Iconography of the Art of Teotihuacan, Dumbarton Oaks Studies in Pre-Columbian Art and Archaeology 4 (1967), pp. 12-13.
[^50] My treatment-rather "historical" in its concern with the sequence of specific events-is not the most popular right now. A good deal of current writing on Mesoamerica adopts a cultural ecological position. See, for instance, William T. Sanders' and Barbara J. Price's very popular volume Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization (New York: Random House, 1968). A valuable critique of the ecological position is the review of that book by Paul Tolstoy in American Anthropologist 71 (1969):554-58. Their approach essentially ignores historical details to lump data into broad stages arranged in chronological order to show increasing scale ("evolution") in society. A parallel would be if physicians were to tabulate records on the height, weight, and caloric intake of a person from infancy to death and then say that they had produced a biography. The evolutionary, ecological, determinist approach usually ignores chronological niceties of the kind that those interested in history consider vital. On the latter point, see the review in American Antiquity 43 (January 1978):127 by Warwick Bray of a volume on the valley of Mexico influenced by Sanders and Price. It is said to suffer from the same inadequacies, from the historical point of view, as their book. These comments should not, however, be taken to mean that I think there is no value in that approach. It supplements, but does not replace, a detailed treatment of events with careful specification of places, peoples, and forces in complex, chronological interplay.
[^51] The sharp peak occurs in Early Tlamimilolpa (A.D. 200-300). W. T. Levey, "Early Teotihuacan, An Achieving Society," University of the Americas, Mesoamerican Notes 7-8 (1966), p. 52. Compare what is said of Periods II and Transicion at Monte Alban, which together occupy the third century: "The intense power and individuality of Epoch II naturally flowed into the First Epoch of Transition, which succeeded it." And there is "an astonishing monumentality in the design of the urns" and "great force and sensitivity" in this "apogee of Oaxacan art." F. H. Boos, The Ceramic Sculptures of Ancient Oaxaca (South Brunswick, New Jersey: A. S. Barnes and Co., 1966), p. 23.
[^52] Enrique Fiorescano, "La Serpiente Emplumada, Tlaloc y Quetzalcoatl," Cuadernos Americanos 133 (no. 2, March-April 1964):121-66.
[^53] Furst, "Morning Glory and Mother Goddess," pp. 196-201.
[^54] Ignacio Bernal, "Discurso Pronunciado durante la Visita del Sr. Presidente de la Republica a la Zona Arqueologica de San Juan Teotihuacan," Boletin INAH 17 (September 1964):4. Arguments by Millon and others that the carbon dates on which Bernal's statement was based are not to be accepted were examined by Daniel Wolfman in "A Re-evaluation of Mesoamerican Chronology: A.D. 1-1200" (Ph.D. diss., University of Colorado, 1973), pp. 35-38, and countered on persuasive grounds. Also, an attempted enlargement of the Pyramid of the Sun after A.D. 400 resulted only in some incomplete foundations. Rene Milton, "The Teotihuacan Map," Urbanization at Teotihuacan, Mexico, vol. 1 (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1973), caption to figure 17a.
[^55] William T. Sanders, The Cultural Ecology of the Teotihuacan Valley: A Preliminary Report of the Results of the Teotihuacan Valley Project (State College, Pennsylvania: Department of Sociology and Anthropology, 1965), pp. 179, 183. The date was around A.D. 450.
[^56] Samuel K. Lothrop, Treasures of Ancient America (Geneva: Editions d'Art Albert Skira, 1964), p. 107.
[^57] Webster, Defensive Earthworks, p. 6.
[^58] Pierre Agrinier, Mounds 9 and 10 at Mirador, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 39 (1975), p. 9.
[^59] Ray T. Matheny, "Teotihuacan Influence in the Chenes and Rio Bec Areas of the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico," in Las Fronteras de Mesoamerica: Las Memorias de la 14a Mesa Redonda, vol. 2 (Mexico: Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia, 1976).
[^60] Joseph W. Ball, The Archaeological Ceramics of Becan, Campeche, Mexico MARI 43 (1977), p. 170.
[^61] See appendix and chart to my "A Mesoamerican Chronology, April 1977."
[^62] Gordon R. Willey, "The Classic Maya Hiatus: A Rehearsal for the Collapse?" in Mesoamerican Archaeology: New Approaches, ed. Norman Hammond (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1974), pp. 417-30.
[^63] Lothrop, Treasures of Ancient America, pp. 96-107; J. E. S. Thompson, Archaeological Synthesis of the Southern Maya Lowlands, HMAI 3 (1965), p. 343.
[^64] 64. C. C. Di Peso, Casas Grandes: A Fallen Trading Center of the Gran Chichimeca, vols. 1-3, Amerind Foundation Series 9 (Flagstaff, Arizona: Northland Press, 1974); J. C. Kelley, Mesoamerica and the Southwestern United States, HMAI 4 (1964), pp. 95-110; B. C. Hedrick et al., The Mesoamerican Southwest (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1974).
[^65] 65. C. H. Webb, "The Extent and Content of Poverty Point Culture," American Antiquity 33 (1968), pp. 297-321; C. R. Wicke, "Pyramids and Temple Mounds: Mesoamerican Ceremonial Architecture in Eastern North America," American Antiquity 30 (1965):409-20; James B. Griffin, Mesoamerica and the Eastern United States in Prehistoric Times, HMAI 4 (1964), pp. 111-32.
[^66] 66. For example, Betty J. Meggers, "Cultural Development in Latin America: An Interpretative Overview," in Aboriginal Cultural Development in Latin America: An Interpretative Review, ed. Betty J. Meggers and Clifford Evans, Smithsonian Institution Miscellaneous Collections 146, no. 1 (Washington, 1963), pp. 131-40.
