John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

4

The Early Nephites in Their Setting

Supposing the geographical and cultural setting laid out in our previous chapters is sound, we can now put events into the setting. From here on, with the exception of chapter 7, we will more or less follow the order of the Book of Mormon account, putting actors and events in their places to see how a knowledge of geography and culture sheds new light on the old book.

Lehi and his party launched their vessel into the Indian Ocean from the south coast of the Arabian peninsula. [^1] The winds no doubt bore them on the same sea lanes that Arab, Chinese and Portuguese ships used later, touching India and ultimately the Malayan peninsula. From that point Nephi's ship likely threaded through the islands of the western Pacific, then across the open reaches north of the equator to landfall around 14 degrees north latitude. Nephi left us no information in the Book of Mormon about the route, nor did he tell us in modern terms where they landed. But when we analyze Book of Mormon statements about geography and events, the "land of first inheritance" can lie only on the west (Pacific) coast of Central America (1 Nephi 18:23; Alma 22:28; see chapter 1).

By 75 B.C. the Nephites distinguished three sectors along the west edge of the land southward, all "bordering along by the seashore." From south to north these were (1) "on the west, in the land of Nephi, in the place of their fathers' first inheritance," (2) "on the west, in the land of Nephi," and (3) "on the west of the land of Zarahemla" (Alma 22:28). When Nephi's party fled the first of these zones in fear of his elder brothers, they traveled "many days," ending up at a site where they named their settlement for their leader, Nephi. They were still not far from the coast (2 Nephi 5:7-8). That suggests that the city Nephi was not directly inland from the first landing spot (had they traveled "many days" straight inland they would have ended up far from the sea; so I infer they must have moved northward along the coastal strip and then went inland). The only geographical alignment that will accommodate both 2 Nephi 5 and Alma 22 is something close to what is shown on map 5.glf1 Chapter 1 presented reasons why the Valley of Guatemala probably contained the city of Nephi; the southernmost portion of Guatemala's Pacific coast or adjacent El Salvador is most likely where Lehi's party landed and first settled.

While in that first, coastal land, the immigrant colony planted seeds they had brought from Jerusalem. These flourished, Nephi reported (1 Nephi 18:24), but what happened to them later? The experience of pioneers suggests that first success for an imported crop does not necessarily mean continued vigor for it. Flourishing plants don't always yield good seed in turn. Bishop Diego de Landa in sixteenth century Yucatan used language very similar to Nephi's: "We have set them [the Indians] to raising [European] millet and it grows marvelously well and is a good kind of sustenance." [^2] Yet nearly four centuries later, when Carnegie Institution botanists researched the plant inventory in that area, they failed to find a trace of the millet about which Landa had been so enthusiastic. [^3]

What happened later to those plants from the seeds the Lehi party carried across the ocean is not stated, but at least by 130 B.C. "corn" (that is, maize)—a native plant of America—had become the leading crop in the land of Nephi. Mosiah 7:22 and 9:9 both list this crop first in the Zeniffite food supply, and the neighboring Lamanites wanted mainly maize (verse 14). Corn is a plant so completely dependent on man that it does not grow in the wild. Ever since it was first cultivated thousands of years before the Nephites arrived, it had had to be tended by human hands and passed on from generation to generation. We are given no hint of who taught Lehi's descendants to grow corn, nor of who gave them the seed. Of course, the people of Zeniff—the corn growers of Mosiah 9—had come from Zarahemla, but where would they have got it? The obvious source in Book of Mormon terms would be Jaredite survivors.

What can we tell about living conditions in the land of first inheritance? The coastal plain where the landing of Lehi would have occurred was uncomfortably hot and humid. That climate favored rapid crop growth, but the weather would be unpleasant for colonizers. The Nephites soon fled up to the land of Nephi, where the elevation permitted living in greater comfort. As Nephi tells the story, the Lamanites down in the hot lowlands were nomadic hunters, bloodthirsty, near naked, and lazy (2 Nephi 5:24; Enos 1:20). The circumstances of life in that environment could account for some of those characteristics. Many centuries later the Spaniards spoke in like terms of natives in the same area. The Tomas Medel manuscript, dating about A.D. 1550, just a generation after the first Spaniards arrived in the area, reported that the Indian men on the Pacific coast of Guatemala "spent their entire lives as naked as when they were born." [^4] That practice may have seemed a sensible response to the oppressive climate. In the late seventeenth century Catholic priest Fuentes y Guzman contrasted the "lassitude and laziness" of the same lowlanders with the energy of the highland inhabitants. [^5] As for getting a living, the tangle of forest and swamp along the coast itself may have been too hard for the Lamanite newcomers to farm effectively, since they wouldn't immediately get the knack of cultivation in that locale. (They, or their fathers, might not even have been farmers in Palestine.) It may have been economically smart for them to hunt and gather the abundant natural food from the estuaries, while again the damp heat would make their lack of energy understandable.

The Land of Nephi

Map 6. Proposed Details in the Land of Nephi (Valley of Guatemala).

Where the party of Nephi settled was quite surely the Valley of Guatemala, or, as they named it, the land of Nephi. The continental divide runs right through the valley, present-day Guatemala City, and the ancient city of Nephi (Kaminaljuyu) at an elevation of about 5,000 feet. Water on one side of the city flows eastward to the Caribbean, that on the other to the Pacific. This is the largest and most productive valley in highland Guatemala. The climate is famous: spring-like and temperate, with only infrequent cold rains and squalls—a marvelous spot in which to settle. [^6] The river that drains the valley southwestward provides a pass between the mountains that would all but invite Nephi's party to "come up" as they moved along the lowlands in their flight.

Two strong reasons stand out why the Valley of Guatemala should be considered the original land of Nephi. The first is that the site of Kaminaljuyu was for many centuries the dominant cultural center for all highland Guatemala, the most important spot for several hundred miles around. The great size (at least a mile square) and impressive constructions of Kaminaljuyu underline its key importance and that of the valley. The land of Nephi is portrayed in the Book of Mormon as dominant among its neighbors to the same degree. A second big reason for considering Nephi to have been here is that customs, details of terrain, and the dating of the archaeological remains correlate closely with what is reported in the Book of Mormon. We'll look later at some of those features.

Established in this setting, Nephi's group set about to reproduce some aspects of civilization as they recalled it from the land of Jerusalem. Nephi credits divine inspiration for helping him tackle the problems facing the colony. Certain aspects of Israelite life he was happy enough to let die out because he considered them evil (2 Nephi 25:1-2, 6). He passed on as much practical knowledge as he was able. Metallurgy and animal care are mentioned as part of that technological legacy (both will receive separate discussion in chapter 7). But since a number of statements are made about the temple built under Nephi's direction, let us see what nonscriptural sources can tell us about its probable nature.

Their first temple was constructed "after the manner of the temple of Solomon" (2 Nephi 5:16), a structure Nephi himself had seen many times in Jerusalem, for the old building was still standing when Lehi and his family left the land of Judah. How was this American temple built? Differently in details from its Old World models, Nephi assures us (2 Nephi 5:16). The Nephites used different materials, so the techniques of construction could not be the same as in the Palestinian model. So when Nephi said that the "manner of construction" was the same as in Jerusalem, he could only have meant that the general pattern was similar. What was that pattern, and what was its function?

The temple of Solomon was built on a platform, so people literally went "up" to it. Inside were distinct rooms of differing sacredness. Outside the building itself was a courtyard or plaza surrounded by a wall. Sacrifices were made in that space, atop altars of stepped or terraced form. The levels of the altar structure represented the layered universe as Israelites and other Near Eastern peoples conceived of it. [^7] The temple building was oriented so that the rising of the sun on equinoctial day (either March 21 or September 21) sent the earliest rays—considered "the glory of the Lord"—to shine through the temple doors, which were opened for the occasion, directly into the holiest part. [^8] The same features generally characterized Mesoamerican temple complexes. The holy building that was the temple proper was of modest size, while the courtyard area received greater attention. Torquemada, an early Spanish priest in the New World, compared the plan of Mexican temples with that of the temple of Solomon, and a modern scholar agrees. [^9]

The area of Guatemala City suggested as the immediate land of Nephi. (Courtesy Richard Jones.)

Part of Kaminaljuyu, the largest site within Guatemala City that qualifies as the city of Nephi. (Courtesy Richard Jones.)

The site of Nephi's city is today so covered with buildings and despoiled by the growth of Guatemala City that we likely will never learn much more about the ancient city than the glimpse of it that limited archaeological excavation has already provided. There is no hope to recover hard evidence of Nephi's original temple itself, but we would expect the pattern he followed to set a precedent that might be repeated long afterward. The Solomonic features that struck Torquemada could stem from what Nephi and his people introduced over 2,500 years ago.

The centuries after Nephi and his brother Jacob died are barely described in the Book of Mormon. Neither the scriptural record nor archaeology tells us much about how life went on at that time, but Pennsylvania State University in the late 1960s investigated some remains of the occupation of Kaminaljuyu dating from the third to sixth centuries B.C., the period the books of Enos and Omni represent so briefly. The settlement then was already good sized. The excavators interpret it as having been occupied by several kin groups or lineages (notice Jacob 1:13), each living in a certain sector of the site. [^10] The central sacred area at that time seems to have consisted of rows of large burial mounds. These were probably where the elders of the kin groups were buried and honored. [^11] This custom basically agrees with the treatment of honored leaders of Israelite kin groups in Palestine when they died. [^12] Perhaps during the centuries of warfare and "stiff-neckedness" after Nephi and Jacob died (Enos 1:22-24), the original temple fell into disuse as a center for religious practices, while burial rites for the group's patriarchs were emphasized. At least we hear nothing about the temple between Jacob's day and the time when the Zeniffites reoccupied the land, over 400 years later (Jacob 1:17; Mosiah 11:10, 12; compare Alma 10:2).

By around 275 B.C. the "more wicked part of the Nephites" had been destroyed, apparently in wars against the Lamanites (Omni 1:5-7), while the Lamanites had apparently flourished, at least in numbers. Why the Lamanites should have come to be "exceeding more numerous than" the Nephites (Jarom 1:6) was touched on in chapter 2. The Nephites picture themselves as thoroughly civilized (Jarom 1:8) and so would logically outnumber the Lamanites. Almost invariably, settled cultivators—the Nephites—would reach a far higher population level than a people characterized as hunters. Then where did all those Lamanites come from?

The answer may be that the Lamanites in the original immigrant group became dominant over a native population of folk already scattered on the land when Lehi arrived. As far as the Nephites were concerned, those subject folk would have been treated the same as the original Lamanites, even if some physical or cultural differences between them were apparent. "Cursed shall be the seed of him that mixeth with their seed; for they shall be cursed even with the same cursing. And the Lord spake it, and it was done" (2 Nephi 5:23). That sounds like historical fact already accomplished more than a mere warning to future Nephites. The fervid ambition of Laman and Lemuel to be rulers would have driven them to try to dominate not only the Nephites (2 Nephi 5:3, 14) but anybody else who happened to be around.

Latter-day Saints are not used to the idea that other people than Lehi's immediate descendants were on the Book of Mormon scene. Abundant evidence from archaeological and linguistic studies assures us that such people were indeed present, so we need to understand how the Book of Mormon account accommodates that fact. We saw earlier the nature of the Book of Mormon as a lineage history of Nephi's descendants. It does not claim to be, and clearly is not, a history in our modern sense of that term; it never purports to give a systematic picture of "what happened" throughout its geographical area. Native Mesoamerican lineage records of later date did the same thing—interpreting peoples and events from the viewpoint of the elite record keepers of each lineage. [^13] Some ambitious noble lineages moved from place to place seeking local people to subjugate. That was true of groups of Teotihuacanos, "Toltecs," Cuicatecs, Mixtecs, and others. If fortune favored them and power came within their grasp, then the subject people often found it expedient to "get on the bandwagon" by doctoring their own genealogies, subordinating their original traditions, and rewriting their history to make it conform where possible to the official version of the rulers. (In some circles in the United States this understandable tendency is seen in the "Mayflower ancestor" phenomenon.) A study cited earlier showed that a traditional history from western Mexico that claimed to give the origin of the Tarascan people could not be squared with archaeological facts; the basic population had been there long before the arrival of the group whose tradition claimed that history began with their arrival. [^14] Similarly, the famous Maori tradition claiming first settlement of New Zealand centuries ago by the arrival of a particular set of canoes is now known to be oversimplified; other people were already there. Seemingly inconsequential to the more powerful newcomers, the natives were ignored in the traditions. [^15] And now the schoolboy's familiar date of 753 B.C. for the founding of Rome has fallen victim to the same phenomenon. "The latest archaeological evidence suggests that there was a thriving confederation of Latin-speaking cities, of which Rome was a member, for at least 200 years before this," we are told. Classical archaeologist John Ward Perkins put his finger directly on the problem in dealing with this sort of "history": "The old theories were too simple." [^16] And so, it appears, is the theory held by many Latter-day Saints that Indian cultures started from scratch in a virgin land about 600 B.C. Descendant rulers, but not necessarily all their subjects, considered Lehi's landing as a key date.

Language and archaeological studies assure us that there were inhabitants in coastal Guatemala soon after 600 B.C., but the number could have been low. The fact that the Olmec (Jaredite-related) tradition was then in the final stage of disintegration meant that the remnants living in the area of Lehi's landing would have been disorganized, not about to challenge mysterious newcomers. Laman's and Lemuel's ambition (we might compare them to Cortez) could well have thrust the immigrants into dominance and led the locals to recast their views to agree with the story told by the immigrant rulers, effectively making the newcomers into a replacement for the former Olmec chiefs they had been serving. The rapid expansion in numbers of Lamanites, suggested in the Nephite record, had to owe more to a scenario like this than to an unlikely dramatic biological expansion and ecological florescence by Laman, Lemuel and company.

From Nephi to Zarahemla

Internal troubles and Lamanite attacks eventually forced the prophetic tradition among the Nephites to seek a new home. Just as Nephi earlier had had to escape from enemies in that first coastal settlement, around 210 B.C. Mosiah, "being warned of the Lord that he should flee out of the land of Nephi . . . departed out of the land into the wilderness." He and his people were then divinely led "down into the land which is called the land of Zarahemla" (Omni 1:12-13). In terms of the geography that was laid out in chapter 1, Mosiah descended from highland Guatemala into the drainage basin of the Sidon river. "And they discovered a people, who were called the people of Zarahemla. . . . At the time that Mosiah discovered them, they had become exceeding numerous" (Omni 1:14, 17)—at least in comparison to Mosiah's band.

"The people of Zarahemla" seem to have been named after their leader, who reported to Mosiah that his ancestors had arrived from the Mediterranean area by boat and that he was a descendant of "Mulek," a son of Zedekiah, the last of the Jewish kings before the Exile. The voyage arrived first in the land northward, then moved south. [^17] Probably they first settled at the east-coast site known later as "the city of Mulek" (note Alma 8:7). "And they came from there up into the south wilderness" (Alma 22:31), where Mosiah later encountered them. Factions had warred among themselves; Zarahemla was now chief over one group (Omni 1:17). If the city of Zarahemla was named after him (or his father), then his group would not have been in that spot for very long, although they might have lived in the general locale for some time.

Those Mediterranean voyagers probably did what the Lamanites did, that is, use superior skills and knowledge they had brought with them to gain dominance over local remnants of the previous civilization. By the time Mosiah got to them, they must have represented a mixture of characteristics in which American features overshadowed the Israelite culture they retained, as Omni 1:17 implies. Stela 3 from La Venta, which qualifies as the city of Mulek, portrays a meeting between a local leader and an immigrant chief with facial characteristics at home in the Holy Land. At least prominent archaeologists have interpreted the scene in that way. [^18] Could Mulek be represented in a ceremonial greeting to the natives? The date of Stela 3 is uncertain, but the best archaeological judgment places it in the sixth century B.C., the time when the party of Mulek would have landed. [^19] Other data support the possibility that voyagers from the eastern Mediterranean ("Phoenicians") reached La Venta. [^20]

What Mosiah found is made clearer by a close look at the geographical setting of the city and immediate land of Zarahemla. To do that we jump ahead in time to examine a revealing event among the Nephites approximately 110 years after Mosiah came to Zarahemla. One Amlici was then trying to subvert the Nephite political structure of "the judges" in order to get himself made monarch (Alma 2:1-8). A battle ensued on the east side of the river Sidon. (See map 7.)

Map 7. Proposed Details around Zarahemla (Upper Grijalva Valley).

Amlici and his followers were driven by the Nephite majority from the initial battlefield south and east to the upland valley of Gideon. During the night the Amlicites secretly broke camp, descended to the river farther upstream, and crossed it. There they rendezvoused with a big Lamanite army coming down from the land of Nephi by prearrangement to attack Zarahemla. Informed by spies of this turn of events, the Nephite forces hastily left Gideon for the river to intercept the invaders before, as the Nephites feared, "they [would] obtain possession of our city" (Alma 2:25). We can imagine their dashing along the most direct route toward the last feasible river ford where they could stop the enemy. Just as they were crossing the stream, the Lamanite-Amlicite force, "as numerous almost, as it were, as the sands of the sea" (verse 27), collided with them on the west bank. In a surge of vigor, the Nephites won the day, scattering their opponents and killing many of them.

From this story we get valuable information about local geography. The city of Zarahemla was on the west side of the river and probably adjacent to it (Alma 2:15, 25-27). Alma later baptized the people of the land of Zarahemla in the river Sidon (Alma 4:4; 6:1-2, 7), which confirms that the city and its nearby settlement area stretched along the river and was quite close to it. Strong reinforcement for this idea comes from what happened the year after the Amlicite affair. A food shortage in the land of Zarahemla was blamed on the "loss of their fields of grain, which were trodden under foot and destroyed by the Lamanites" during the battle and flight (Alma 4:2). Apparently the most productive agricultural lands were concentrated immediately next to the river, upstream a bit from the city.

The battle account underlines how small the immediate land of Zarahemla was in both territory and population at the beginning of the first century B.C. An extensive land would hardly have suffered from famine as a result of the smallish acreage that could be trodden down by the feet of men in battle and flight. Over a century earlier the scale was even more limited.

What Mosiah's group had come upon was evidently a small sociopolitical unit centered on a sizable town, with outlying villages dependent on it for trade, administration, and worship. The people there were not only small in numbers but also politically unsophisticated, for Zarahemla did not even claim the title of king. (The actual tasks of rulership were then light, for, years later after further growth, King Benjamin had time personally to support himself by farming while carrying out the tasks of governance [Mosiah 2:14]. Clearly, the essence of kingship in that early time consisted of symbolic presence rather than extensive functions.) The local residents quickly agreed that Mosiah, a total stranger who had dropped in on them, should become their king (Omni 1:14, 19). How could this man and his intruding party find such a hearty welcome and then fit so neatly into a dominant political niche in the society? One piece of the answer must lie in the superior qualifications of Mosiah to be king. Ancient peoples wanted their kings to have valid credentials. The approval of a subject population was one kind of credential, of course, but the ruler's position would be suspect without another consideration. A king ought really to derive his authority from some royal line whose legitimacy was unquestioned. It would appear that Zarahemla had only a weak connection to royalty.

True, Mulek, a distant ancestor, had been a son of Zedekiah (Helaman 6:10; 8:21), but Zedekiah had at best been a puppet king placed on the throne of Judah by the Babylonians (2 Kings 24:17) and soon deposed by them for rebellion (2 Kings 25:6-7). In Jewish memory, furthermore, he was responsible for, if not the cause of, the national disaster of the Babylonian Exile. [^21] Meanwhile, there had been squabbling among Zarahemla's ancestors after their landing, and claims to kingship by his line may have been tarnished. Mosiah, on the other hand, descended from an acknowledged line of more immediate kings, the "Nephis" (Jacob 1:11; Mosiah 25:13). The level of civilization was apparently higher in Nephi, from which Mosiah came, and the higher degree of sophistication probably showed. Specifically, he was literate and possessed impressive volumes of records. Both these characteristics would empower him in the eyes of the naive Zarahemlans. The mysterious sacred artifacts he possessed—the sword of Laban and the Liahona (Mosiah 1:16)—must further have reinforced his position. And finally, I suspect on the basis of what was beginning to happen economically and culturally, as subsequent events showed, that the local people had entered a period of growth where they welcomed the idea of having a genuine king, just about when Mosiah appeared.

Evidence was presented earlier supporting identification of the central depression of the present state of Chiapas, Mexico, as the land of Zarahemla. The Grijalva River (Rio de Chiapas), which flows through this broad valley, is the only plausible candidate for the river Sidon. Along the west bank of the river must lie the former city of Zarahemla. As we just saw, the Book of Mormon strongly implies that the settlement region immediately dependent on the city of Zarahemla was located up and down the river and concentrated on the west bank. In just the indicated manner the best-watered and most fertile land along the upper Grijalva was limited to a narrow strip, less than a half-mile wide, on either side of the stream but mostly on the westerly or south side. The headwaters of the river begin across the Guatemala border in rugged mountains. With Zarahemla located in the upper river valley, it would be close enough to this band of mountainous wilderness that invaders from the south could appear near the city with little warning, as the first chapter of Helaman leads us to expect.

Laguna Francesa, a site near Santa Rosa which is proposed as Zarahemla. The view is northeasterly, toward Gideon in the distant upland area. (Photo by James C. Christiansen used by permission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

The largest archaeological site on the upper Grijalva in an appropriate position to qualify as Zarahemla is Santa Rosa. The BYU-New World Archaeological Foundation did a modest amount of digging at Santa Rosa in 1956 and 1958. (Nobody involved had in mind any possible connection of the ruins with any Book of Mormon location. In fact, almost all the work was done by non-Mormon archaeologists.) By 1974 the site had been inundated by waters backed up nearly 70 miles behind Angostura Dam. Some of the specific findings at the site will be considered shortly, but first let us examine the general position of the Santa Rosa area.

Linguistic research tells us that the upper Grijalva lay at the juncture of two major areas where long-established peoples and their languages existed. A couple of thousand years ago the Mayan languages probably extended throughout much of Guatemala to about the mountainous wilderness strip that separates the highlands of that nation from the Grijalva River valley. [^22] Downstream, from near Chiapa de Corzo and extending north and westward, were speakers of Zoque dialects; in the isthmus proper was the closely related Mixe language. Both blocs, the Mayan speakers on the Guatemalan and groups using tongues of the Mixe-Zoquean family on the isthmian side of Santa Rosa, had been there a long time. Ancestral Mixe-Zoquean has been shown to be the probable language of the Olmecs of the Gulf Coast, while Mayan speakers likely had been in the Cuchumatanes Mountains of Guatemala since well before 1000 B.C. [^23] (Evidence is uncertain, however, whether Mayan languages were spoken until post-Book of Mormon times in the actual areas of the southern Guatemalan highlands where the Nephite and Lamanite settlements are best placed. [^24]) But neither major language group seems to have been established on the upper Grijalva, at least not until well into A.D. times. That intermediate zone seems to have been a linguistic frontier. Zarahemla's people had moved into the area from the Gulf Coast through lands occupied by Zoque speakers for centuries. His local followers in Mosiah's day likely spoke a language like Zoquean. Mosiah and his party, coming from the opposite direction, were among the first of a long series of groups who drifted down out of Guatemala into this valley over the next thousand years.

The archaeological sequence at Santa Rosa is interesting in terms of the Book of Mormon, although the findings will always remain incomplete because the site is now underwater. Major public construction in the form of what seem to have been "temple" or "palace" foundation mounds started on a modest scale at approximately 300 B.C. [^25] That coincided with growth in population, which produced the "city" of Zarahemla that Mosiah's party encountered a couple of generations later. The place remained no larger than a modest town, as we think of size, during the time when Mosiah, Benjamin his son, and Mosiah II reigned. Around 100 B.C. a spurt in the city's prosperity is evident, and a large number of major public structures were erected. That condition continued for around a century. [^26] Except for the site of Chiapa de Corzo far downstream, Santa Rosa became the largest, most significant "city" in the Grijalva basin just at the time when Zarahemla is reported by the Book of Mormon as becoming a regional center.

A unique fact about the pattern of this settlement came to light in the excavations by the New World Archaeological Foundation. Archaeologist Donald Brockington, who helped excavate part of the largest pyramid mound in the center of Santa Rosa, found that in this structure, constructed in the first century B. C., a layer of gravel had been laid which was then stuccoed over as a footing on which the mound was further built. The base gravel was of two completely different kinds, clearly brought there from two sources. The line separating the gravel areas was meticulously straight and was oriented approximately east and west, dividing the structure exactly in half. Furthermore, the site's inhabitants lived in two oval-shaped zones separated from each other by a ceremonial zone oriented along this same line. Brockington concluded that the gravel had been laid down by two distinct social (perhaps linguistic) groups that occupied the site and that seem to have related to each other by formal ritual and political arrangements. [^27] Could these two groups have been the people of Zarahemla and the people of Nephi? Mosiah 25:4 supports the possibility: "And now all of the people of Nephi were assembled together, and also all the people of Zarahemla, and they were gathered together in two bodies." Also the "churches" Alma organized (Alma 25:19-21) were probably based on ethnic/residential units. If two distinct peoples did live in separate sections within the city, the arrangement would agree with later Mesoamerican practice. [^28]

Further light on the scale and settling of Zarahemla derives from the story of the ceremonial meeting of the populace called by Benjamin, Mosiah's son. Benjamin sent word to his people on one day to come to the temple the following day (Mosiah 1:10, 18; compare 3 Nephi 17:3; 19:1-3). Estimating how long it would take to send messengers and assemble the crowd, it is unlikely that any came from much farther than 20 miles away. (That was still about the size of the immediate land of Zarahemla later, at the time of the Amlicite battle.) The number who attended Benjamin's assembly was somewhat greater than could be accommodated "within the walls of the temple"—likely the plaza or sacred courtyard area (Mosiah 2:7). Initially the king had supposed that the crowd could fit into the area so that he might speak to them directly, but the group proved too big to hear the aged ruler. (John Wesley, at age 70, was able to preach to 20,000 people in the open in England, which suggests that the size of the assembly in Zarahemla was perhaps a little larger.) The extent of the land plus the number of people assembled suggest that the population centered on Zarahemla at the time of Benjamin, near 125 B.C., was on the order of 25,000, many of whom lived in villages near the settlement, especially along the river.

Could such a small settlement reasonably be called a city? Because we now think of urban areas with millions of inhabitants as cities, we may expect ancient centers to be larger than in fact they were. The term city appears to have had a definite, formal meaning among the Nephites and not tied directly to the number of a settlement's inhabitants. The story of Alma and his group clarifies it for us. There were only about 450 of them (Mosiah 18:35) when they fled into the wilderness to escape King Noah. They came upon a valley evidently not settled at the time; they stopped there, naming it Helam. The newcomers "began to till the ground, and began to build buildings" (verse 5). Then, after the basic pioneering had been completed, "they built a city, which they called the city of Helam" (verses 19-20). Here is the conscious founding of an instant city. Creating it was a different thing from merely settling the valley. No more than a decade could have passed between their arrival and the establishment of what was called the city, so their numbers were still only in the hundreds. Moreover, the population was not added to in the act of founding the city; the only inhabitants were the ones present before. Since a large population could not have been the basis for designating the place a city, what did the term mean?

This question of what constitutes a city plagues the experts, too. A recent controversy between two anthropologists sees Dr. Smith challenge Dr. Crumley's definition of city. Using it, he complains, we would have to call the site of San Jose Mogote, in the state of Oaxaca, Mexico, a city as far back as the period from 1300 to 800 B.C., which Smith thinks will not do. Crumley responds that by her definition, San Jose Mogote would indeed have been a city, comparable in function to ancient Greek cities whose populations were also unimpressive but which many agree should be termed cities. (Incidentally, San Jose Mogote happens to be the most impressive archaeological site at that period in the Valley of Oaxaca, which I identify as the probable land of Moron of the Jaredites. The Jaredite account nowhere refers to a city of Moron, so either Smith's or Crumley's views would fit the Book of Mormon case.)

The Hebrew word translated as "city" had the fundamental meaning of "temple center." Recent studies have shown that ancient American centers were carefully laid out so that structures and stone monuments were aligned with points where the sun and moon rose and set at the solstices and equinoxes, and they were also oriented to prominent features of the landscape. [^29] This was a long-established Old World practice as well (see note 8 for this chapter [F. J. Hollis, The Sun Cult . . .]). It is clear at this point that a formal temple center had to be consciously planned, not just established by whim (casual choice or historical accident). Certainly religion or world view was at the heart of "city" founding. Alma's group came into existence by reason of their religious beliefs. Alma had earlier been a priest under King Noah and then served his own band as priest (see Mosiah 17:1-2). As one of Noah's priests he likely helped plan the "towers" or pyramidal temple mounds that the king had erected (Mosiah 11:12-13). When the city of Helam was built under Alma's own direction, the fundamentals of Nephite religious practice must have guided the builders. We can be reasonably confident that their city—and every other Nephite city—qualified for the title in part by possessing a ceremonial precinct centering on a formally dedicated temple that proclaimed the status of the community as a political entity of consequence. A city in Book of Mormon terminology had to have a certain authoritative status, but it didn't have to be metropolis-sized or even contain any given number of people.

We also learn something about settlement form from the history of Helam. A Lamanite armed party pursued Limhi's people when they fled from the land of Nephi, about eleven years after Alma's group left. The pursuers got lost and blundered into Helam. Alma's people, "in the land of Helam, yea in the city of Helam, while tilling the land round about," beheld the Lamanite force coming into their valley. "The brethren of Alma fled from their fields, and gathered themselves together in the city of Helam" (Mosiah 23:25-26). Note the strange phrasing; it seems to confound the difference between "land" and "city." It implies that fields were in the city, so the city would not have been compactly settled. Then when alarmed, the people ran to join their religious leader "in the city," which must now refer to the ceremonial precinct. It would have been in the sacred center where he spoke to them, because as their high priest he immediately both gave them spiritual counsel and formally prayed on their behalf (verses 27-28).

The pattern of settlement exhibited in Helam is similar to what we know characterized many ceremonial centers in southern Mesoamerica, especially including the Guatemalan highlands where Helam was located. The Mesoamerican settlement unit that logically fits what the Book of Mormon calls a "land" (centered on a single city) consisted of that area inhabited by all the people who gathered to a central temple center for worship, trade, and civil administration. In lowland Maya country we know that a journey of one day to or from the center was the usual radius of a local land, and the scale was probably much the same elsewhere. (That single-day radius agrees with what we saw in the case of Benjamin's assembly at Zarahemla.) Fields were often interspersed with homes, and a considerable number of the permanent residents in the very center were religious functionaries. [^30] The settlement pattern of Helam clearly makes sense in terms of this Mesoamerican pattern.

What we have seen concerning the population of Benjamin's Zarahemla warns us that the place was not a huge population center, although for the times it was sizable. It was the key politico-religious center for a region containing some tens of thousands, however, there is no indication at all in the time of Mosiah I or his son Benjamin (about 225-125 B.C.) that it was an administrative center controlling subsidiary cities. Santa Rosa at that period had the same characteristics.

Since we have touched on King Benjamin's big gathering, this may be an appropriate place to raise a special cultural question. The people who assembled to hear Benjamin "pitched their tents round about the temple, every man having his tent with the door thereof towards the temple, that thereby they might remain in their tents and hear the words which King Benjamin should speak unto them" (Mosiah 2:6). What was a Nephite "tent"? Would the crowd have been seated in sprawling shelters like Arabs? The term tent is used some 64 times in the Book of Mormon, so the question may deserve attention.

Biblical translators have usually rendered the Hebrew root 'hl to English as "tent"; however, it has a rather wide range of possible meanings. Sometimes it referred to full-fledged tents on the pattern of those used by desert nomads of southwestern Asia; but to semi-nomads like Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob the term could also mean "hut" as well as "tent." [^31] In later usage, as the Israelites became sedentary village or city dwellers, its meanings were extended further. For example, in Psalm 132:3 and Proverbs 7:17 the related word 'ohel means "canopy (over a bed)," while in the New Testament, John 1:14 says literally "he pitched his tent among us" to communicate the thought "he lived among us." A Hittite account has the god Elkunirsha living in a "tent" made of wood. [^32] In writings from South Arabia in Lehi's day and also in classical Arabic, languages closely related to Hebrew, the root stood for "family" or "tribe" as well as tent. In the related Semitic language of the Babylonians, a word from the same root meant "city," "village," "estate," or "social unit," and even formed part of the word for bed. An Egyptian equivalent could be read as "hut, camel's hair tent, camp." [^33] Furthermore, Dr. Hugh Nibley reminds us that "throughout the ancient world . . . the people must spend the time of the great national festival of the New Year living in tents." [^34] But for this occasion Israelites came to use makeshift booths made of branches, as fewer and fewer of their town-dwelling numbers owned genuine tents. The Nephites, of course, routinely lived in permanent buildings (see, for example, Mosiah 6:3). Alma's people "pitched their tents" after fleeing to Helam, but then they "began to build buildings" (Mosiah 23:5). Military forces on the move are said to have used tents (Alma 51:32, 34; 58:25), but it is nearly unbelievable that the entire Lamanite army referred to in Alma 51 lugged collapsible tents on their backs through tropical country hundreds of miles from the land of Nephi. Far more likely they erected shelters of brush or whatever other materials could be found in the vicinity, referring to those or any other temporary shelters by the traditional word for tent. Farmers in parts of Mesoamerica still throw together simple brush shelters when they stay overnight at their fields in the busiest work season, and at the time of the Spanish conquest, Bernal Diaz reported that the soldiers of their Indian allies "erect their huts" as they move on campaign. [^35] So when we read that Benjamin's subjects sat in their tents listening to his sermon, we should understand that they might have been under shelter a good deal different from what comes to mind when we hear "tent."

Dissenters

Starting in Benjamin's day we read of "contention" and "dissensions away" (Words of Mormon 1:16) among the Nephites. This social unrest continued at a high level over the next century and a half. We are never clearly told the causes, but the results are evident: the disaffected people either tried to rearrange Nephite society in a fundamental way (see, for example, Alma 2:2-4; 3 Nephi 7:2, 6-7), or they moved away to try to bring about their purposes elsewhere (as in Alma 46:4-6, 10, 29; 3 Nephi 7:12-13). Two probable causes of the troubles stand out. One was the lack of adequate cultivable land. In one case we read, "There was a large number who were desirous to possess the land of their [father's one-time] inheritance," which was the land of Nephi (Omni 1:27). That could be understood as stemming from a shortage of desirable land in Zarahemla. A later incident is clearer. In the coastal lands of Morianton and Lehi, a "warm contention" arose over disputed land, to the point that one group headed to the land northward, where they thought land was more plentiful (Alma 50:25-26, 29). The large-scale migrations that came a bit later, when the population had risen even higher, were clearly motivated by desire for new lands for settlement (Alma 63:4; Helaman 3:3-12).

The desire for power caused even more dissension than did land. Alma 51 tells the familiar story we read in many other places: "Now those who were in favor of kings were those of high birth, and they sought to be kings; and they were supported by those who sought power and authority over the people" (verse 8). Later, Giddianhi, head of the " secret band" of troublemakers, revealed in a letter to the Nephite leader Lachoneus what his dissenters were after: "I hope that ye will deliver up your lands and your possessions, without the shedding of blood, that this my people may recover their rights and government, who have dissented away from you because of your wickedness in retaining from them their rights of government" (3 Nephi 3:10). The dispute here is not over lands merely "wherewith to subsist upon" (3 Nephi 6:3) or even over material possessions alone, but over power. "Rights" get involved because they are considered means to get power. Over and over this theme emerges in this part of the Book of Mormon. [^36] Some of the dissenters were no doubt mere adventurers like "King" Jacob—3 Nephi 7:9-10), but others could have been legitimate descendants of old chief Zarahemla, whose lineage lost out in the power shuffle when Mosiah became king. Then in the days of the judges, after the monarchy had been abolished altogether, various descendants of the former kings, Mosiah, Benjamin, and the younger Mosiah, likely felt that their noble ancestry gave them the right to special privileges.

The right to rule was the chief bone of contention in Nephite affairs. Giddianhi the robber exemplified the concern, shown in his brash insistence to Lachoneus, the Nephite governor, that the "rights of government" had been unjustly taken from those loyal to him (3 Nephi 3:10). The theme is repeated again and again: Ammoron the dissenter complained that Nephi robbed his brothers of "their right to the government when it rightly belonged unto them" (Alma 54:17); war by the dissenters from among the Nephites and the Lamanites was "to the subjecting the Nephites to our authority" (Alma 54:20); Amalickiah "was desirous to be a king," and he and his associates "were seeking for power" (Alma 46:4); the Gadianton band desired "that they should be placed in power and authority among the people" (Helaman 2:5); Moroni was bitterly angry at rebels "who have desires to usurp power and authority" (Alma 60:27); the secret society "did obtain the sole management of the government" (Helaman 6:39).

These dominators were supposed to hold authority by virtue of their position as heads of leading lineages. The pattern was ultimately from the Old World, of course, but the original Nephi was the first to follow the practice in the American promised land, when he agreed to his people's request to be their king (2 Nephi 5:18). Before his death he anointed his successor. Thereafter each king bore the title "Nephi" (Jacob 1:11). The lineage founded by the original Nephi continued to hold the charter and sacred emblems of rulership over all Lehi's descendants, which is precisely why rivals tried to kill off the line. The Nephi lineage continued powerful until the fourth century A.D., when Mormon became its (final) leader (Mormon 1:5; 2:1-2). In all likelihood he was the senior male in the senior branch of the line, or he would not have been installed so easily in the crucial leadership position over his group's armies at age 15, no matter what charismatic qualities he brought to the task.

The ambitious did not seek power for its sake alone. It was a means to earthier satisfactions: Giddianhi was at least as concerned with "possessions" and "all our substance" as he was with "rights" and rulership (3 Nephi 3:2-12); the secret group under Gadianton and successors were "robbers" and "plunderers" (Helaman 2:10; 6:18) who "set their hearts upon their riches" (Helaman 6:17); the accusation that priests were "glutting on the labors" of the people (Alma 30:27-28, 31-32) had substance to it, we have seen; moreover, that the elite levels of society "possessed" cities, lands, flocks, and people (Alma 8:7; 52:13ff.; compare 51:8, 20; 53:2); and so on. All this is congruent, on point after point, with our picture of Mesoamerican rulership, for example, that of the Cuicatec caciques or local rulers of central Mexico. [^37]

Mesoamerican peoples mingled inextricably what we sort out as two separate aspects of life: "religion" and "politics." Religion was intimately connected with all of life, including "contention" among Book of Mormon groups. The younger Alma in his own time was not merely an unbeliever but a glib, learned, "idolatrous" man (Mosiah 27:8). He did not just lure people away from the church of his father into unbelief, but into a competing cult. Other religious figures also opposed the prophets, notably Sherem, Korihor, and Amulon and his priests. Characteristically they used religious issues to get a following that would make them powerful, whether or not they sincerely differed in their religious ideas. We are told at particular length of one dissenter group of unreported origin, the Amalekites, who lived among the Lamanites in the land of Nephi. They believed in God, had "synagogues," adhered to "the (priestly) order of Nehor," and were learned men (Alma, chapters 21-24). Only a single one of this group was ever converted by the Nephite missionaries. Obviously, strong and fundamental belief differences separated them from the orthodox Nephites, although they seem to have had their own orthodoxy (Alma 21:5-6). Still other groups rebelled against the straightforward gospel and ceremonial order taught by Benjamin (Words of Mormon 1:17) and the equally stringent requirements laid down by Alma (Mosiah 26:1-6), including the notorious Zoramites (Alma 31:8-25).

Limited as our data on the organization of Mesoamerican religion are, we still are able to see there the same issues brought out in the Book of Mormon. When a Mesoamerican people was conquered, it usually meant two things: that the taxes were to be paid to new collectors, and that a new set of religious practices would be imposed on the subject population (compare Alma 24:11; Moroni 1:3). As long as the new ritual requirements were followed, old ways could be continued. Rulers could be extremely harsh against opposing religious views, not so much over issues of doctrine or practice, but over the political power that was validated by religion. The fact that faces and symbols on the stone monuments of the ancient cultures were so often smashed shows the connection. One scholar has said, "How do we know that [Mesoamerican religion] did not have branches similar to, let us say, Catholicism, Protestantism, or other Christian religions? In that case, it wouldn't be at all extraordinary that monuments with religious connotations were destroyed." [^38] The linkage of religious and political issues is illustrated in the Book of Mormon in Alma 43:47, 44:7, 46:7-24, and Mormon 8:7-10, for example. So we see that dissension over beliefs, as well as conflict about the right to rule, with devastating wars a result, was a pattern shared by Mesoamerican cultures [^39] and the peoples of the Book of Mormon.

Our consideration of the sources of dissidence leads us back to the geographical details of a major story in the Book of Mormon. A party led by Zeniff approached the land of Nephi to "inherit the land" (Mosiah 9:3). The route they followed was used by many other parties before and after. From Zarahemla it led as quickly as possible out of the muggy depression along the Sidon River to Gideon, a mountain valley. This preferred route led through Gideon (Alma 17:1) southward past Manti. (But there is no statement that travelers went through the actual city of Manti.) Then it rose again to cross over the mountains of the wilderness strip. But there was more than one way to go, and some routes were more arduous than others (Alma 17:7-9, then 5; Mosiah 7:4). Beyond the worst band of wilderness through the highlands of Nephi to the city Lehi-Nephi, the way was still rugged, and groups could become lost (Mosiah 23:30).

When we examine Mesoamerican geography between central Chiapas and the Valley of Guatemala, a parallel picture emerges. Movement upstream and downstream near the big river has always been limited by difficult terrain, particularly the presence of streams flowing into the Grijalva, which have cut ravines difficult to traverse. Bluffs near the river and small hills on the valley floor further complicate the route. By far the most common way around these obstacles has been to climb up and travel through the Chiapas highlands. Travelers move faster along those smooth, cooler valleys, where the Inter-American Highway now runs. There are good reasons to see movements by Book of Mormon groups through Gideon as duplicating this route. The Nephite way went from the valley of Gideon and dropped down again to the land of Manti along the river (Alma 17:1), as does today's highway and as did the colonial Spanish camino real. Both routes passed through the Comitan Valley (likely Gideon) and down the valley at the head of the Grijalva River, corresponding to the Manti area. From that point the traditional way went up over the most easily traversed portion of the Cuchumatanes massif or plateau. The surface there was again relatively smooth and the climate and water supply far more desirable than on the alternate routes through the arid, narrow river gorges (where the missionaries might have gone—Alma 17:5). Once in the Guatemalan interior, experienced travelers stuck to a couple of established routes where reliable watering points were to be found. Journeys in those uplands were especially tricky because the streams cut precipitous chasms. McBryde vividly describes the problem: "The immensely deep canyons are often so sharp that the unwary traveler is likely to come upon them most unexpectedly. The white buildings of a village, gleaming in the bright sunlight beyond the pines, may appear to be only a mile or two away, seemingly just ahead. Yet, another hundred yards will reveal that the nearer trees stand upon the brink of a narrow abyss." [^40] Consequently, movements in highland Guatemala/ Nephi must be limited to a few sure routes or the traveler gets in trouble (Mosiah 23:30, 35). Throughout the area, trails tend to stay at the less eroded, high, rolling elevations; the main route still goes near the continental divide.

More Details about Nephi

Just northwest of the valley of Guatemala lies a prominent but gently sloping hill elevated a few hundred yards above the pass adjacent to it. This elevation sits in such a position that anyone coming from the northwest would immediately seek it out in order to overlook the entire valley. On the top of that hill are the remains of an archaeological site, including a pyramid structure, named Alux by archaeologist Edwin Shook, who first reported it. [^41] No study of the ruin has been made, so a date for its construction cannot be given; but if it is like many other sites in the area it will prove to have been used over a long time, probably beginning in the Late Pre-Classic period (late centuries B.C.), which is when King Noah "caused a great tower to be built on the hill north of the land Shilom" (Mosiah 11:13). The construction found by Shook is in the proper spot to have been that very tower. Ammon and his party also paused at this place for a look before they went down to the city Lehi-Nephi (Mosiah 7:5, 16).

In the Valley of Guatemala distances and topography fit markedly with the geographical statements in the Book of Mormon. The land of Nephi in the narrow sense of the term would have consisted of the upper floor of the valley occupied today by Guatemala City and its suburbs (see map 8). It centered upon the sprawling ancient city that archaeologists have labeled Kaminaljuyu ("hills of the dead"). The upper valley's six square miles lie at an elevation between 4,800 and 5,500 feet. The land of Shilom, the lower level of the valley, would have lain between the curving Rio Villalobos and the north side of Lake Amatitlan. San Antonio Frutal, second largest site in the Valley, sits in this flattish zone, near 4,300 feet elevation. "Enormous mounds" found there date in part from B.C. times, although its most important remains are of Early Classic date, near the end of Book of Mormon times. [^42] It occupies a position in relation to the city of Nephi, about seven or eight miles away, which neatly fits the Book of Mormon statements involving the two. This Shilom area is about half as extensive as the Nephi portion of the valley. The hill spoken of earlier lies about northwest (by our directions today) from San Antonio Frutal; the Book of Mormon (Mosiah 7:16) calls the direction "north."

Map 8. Further Details in the Land of Nephi (Valley of Guatemala).

Quite a different local land was Shemlon. Fitting the requirements for this place is the Amatitlan region, around the modern town of that name and the adjacent south shore of Lake Amatitlan. It is a full 1,600 feet lower than Nephi and well below our land Shilom. The Shilom area terminates in a sharp bluff at whose foot lies the big lake, Amatitlan, about six miles long. Its south shore has been well settled for millennia. At least three sites extend back into Zeniffite/Lamanite times, and there are probably others in the vicinity. Geographically and culturally the Amatitlan area was closely tied to the piedmont (foothill) area a dozen miles away down toward the coast. There, a number of sites dating to the first centuries B.C. attest to a substantial population of probable "Lamanites," whose remains suggest on style grounds that they descended from Olmec survivors. That would be quite expectable in light of our earlier discussion of Lamanites on the coast, whom Nephi and his group had left behind. Later, the Lamanite rulers followed the Nephites up to higher terrain, too, where Shemlon became their stronghold, but that land was geographically and culturally tied to the older lowland haunts.

Shemlon was clearly the Lamanite base in the times of Zeniff, Noah, and Limhi; attacks on the Zeniffites ruled by those men always came from or through Shemlon. When the Lamanite king first welcomed Zeniff and his people, who had come up from Zarahemla, the ruler was willing to pull his own settlers out of Nephi and Shilom back to Shemlon in hopes of exploiting the Nephite returnees (Mosiah 9:6-7, 10, 12); but conflict proved inevitable. The first skirmish between the two groups came when Lamanites attacked some of Zeniff's people "watering and feeding their flocks, and tilling their lands . . . on the south of the land of Shilom" (verse 14). The Lamanite attack came "up" (Mosiah 10:6) from Shemlon. Thereafter Zeniff put a watch on the Shemlon-Shilom frontier, anticipating a renewed attack. In time the Lamanites did return, but this time they did not try to cut through Shilom on their way toward Nephi. Instead they came from Shemlon "up upon the north of the land of Shilom" (verse 8), hoping to bypass Shilom on the west and attempting to outflank the Zeniffite watch and hit Nephi without warning. Zeniff and his men knew something was brewing, having been alerted by the lookouts they had posted overlooking Shemlon. When they located the advancing enemy, they "went up" onto the hills and fought the Lamanites north of Shilom before the attackers could come around and down into Nephi proper (Mosiah 10:10).

Supposing that the city of Lehi-Nephi was Kaminaljuyu, at present-day Guatemala City, the physical details of this entire event fit perfectly. Shemlon would be the lake-side gateway to the Valley of Guatemala through which forces from the lush piedmont area would approach the city. Shemlon's attractiveness to the Lamanite elite would have included its climate, significantly warmer than at Kaminaljuyu (1,600 feet higher), yet not so oppressively hot as the adjacent lowlands, the old Lamanite base. The border between Shilom and Shemlon would obviously be the sharp bluff overlooking the lake and the curving Villalobos River. Near the river the Lamanite poachers could conveniently have got at the Nephite flocks, while the bluff would have been an ideal spot for Zeniff's watchmen. The hilly terrain on "the north of Shilom," where the Lamanite force tried to outflank the Nephite defenders, is exactly what the story calls for. The consistency of the geography can be checked on map 8.glf1

We can also see with this geographical setting how King Noah was able to stand on the pyramid tower he had constructed at the city Nephi and look out over Shilom, Shemlon, and surrounding areas (Mosiah 11:12). Shemlon would have been dimly in sight downhill less than twenty miles away. So when angry Gideon chased Noah to the top of that tower, they both could glimpse a Lamanite army coming up at them from the direction of Shemlon (Mosiah 19:5-9).

Mention of Noah's tower calls for an explanation, for, as with the word tent, the term might mislead readers with a European cultural background. A tower, both in Mesoamerica and according to the Book of Mormon, was much more than a vertical structure from which one could see a long distance. The concepts involved went back to Mesopotamia, dating to perhaps before 3200 B.C. The "great tower" mentioned in the first chapter of the book of Ether was the same structure whose destruction is told in Genesis 11 and is popularly called "the tower of Babel," although nobody knows which ruined structure would have been the one referred to by the Jaredites. It was a giant platform with stepped, sloping sides, called in the Babylonian (Akkadian) language ziqquratu (ziggurat in English). They were thought of as artificial mountains on whose tops deity could dwell, or come down to visit men, in sacred privacy. [^43] A ziggurat also modeled the relationships between heavens, earth and underworld, for the topmost layer stood for the highest level of creation above the earth, with other layers representing supposed multiple heavens. By around 2,000 B.C. the sacred tower in the south Mesopotamian city of Ur measured 80 feet high. Fourteen centuries later, when Lehi left Jerusalem, the famous ziggurat of Nebuchadnezzar at Babylon rose to over 270 feet. [^44]

These massive edifices had both religious and political significance, as can be seen in Alma 46:36, 48:1, and 51:20. Regarding the religious dimension, for example, Professor A. Wiercinski has recently shown that the largest Babylonian ziggurat, the Egyptian pyramids, and the two pyramids at Teotihuacan in Mexico all contain unexpected information in their dimensions. They turn out to be a kind of coded, numerical representation of time and space relations of sun, moon, and stars and their motions. These "cosmic mountains" of the ancients appear to have been sort of mathematical models of the dimensions of the universe. [^45]

In political and civic terms, a pyramid tower displayed the size and prominence of a community. In fact, the presence of such a structure may have been the most essential feature of any "city," as discussed earlier. The famous Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan was erected to a height of more than 210 feet in the second century A.D., [^46] a spectacular advertisement, as it were, of the city's status as the greatest Mesoamerican center of its time. So Noah's towers must have had great political significance to him, his priests, his people, and the Lamanites, alongside their doubtless sacred meanings.

Mesoamerica's largest (in bulk) artificial mountain, topped by a Christian church, against a real mountain at Cholula, central Mexico. (Photo by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for early Historic Archaeology.)

In Old Testament times Israelites and surrounding nations built and used such holy elevations. The Canaanite "high places" (bamoth) to which the backsliding Israelites resorted were strongly condemned by the prophets (for example, in Ezekiel 43:7). Archaeologists now know that those structures were earthen platforms quite like those found by the thousands in Mesoamerica. In Israelite thought, they stood for mountains or hills just as elsewhere in the Near East. On them, it was felt, heavenly powers were especially accessible; this was a divine contact point, "the navel of the earth." [^47] The underworld (not necessarily conceived as hell) was thought accessible at the same "world axis." The Baal worshippers of Canaan believed that El, progenitor of the gods, dwelt at Aphaca, a spot on the coast where a mountain rises immediately above a huge cave. So this great deity of theirs was connected not only with the mountain but also lived in "aqueous and subterranean environs." [^48]That sounds perfectly Mesoamerican. Teotihuacan's Pyramid of the Sun, it was recently discovered, was built over a cavern and spring of obvious sacred significance. [^49]

This business may all sound thoroughly pagan, but worship upon elevations was orthodox in Israel if done right. Moses' experience in Sinai comes to mind, as well as Nephi's vision on a mountain (1 Nephi 11:1). The temple seen in vision by Ezekiel was "upon a very high mountain" (Ezekiel 40:2-5). One of the Hebrew names of God was Sur, "Mountain" (for example, 1 Samuel 2:2 literally reads, "There is no Mountain like our God"). Chapter 32 of Deuteronomy uses this name for deity eight times. [^50] Among the Nephites we find expectable sacred significance for mountains. Nehor was carried to "the top of the hill Manti . . . between the heavens and the earth" to be executed (Alma 1:15). The prophet Nephi got upon his private tower in his garden that, he said, "I might pour out my soul unto my God" (Helaman 7:10, 14); to him a tower was a special place to pray, and like the natural hilltop, it was considered "between heaven and earth." The Zoramites also worshipped at "a place built up in the center of their synagogue, a place for standing, which was high above the head" (Alma 31:13). Alma preached to the Zoramite poor "on the hill Onidah" (Alma 32:4). Both natural and artificial mountains clearly were significant in similar ways in the Book of Mormon, in the Near East, and in Mesoamerica.

It may seem strange to modern readers, used to considering narrow, soaring castle and cathedral spires as "towers," that bulky mounds or ziggurats would be termed "towers" by the Book of Mormon scribes. But when the Spanish invaders saw the Mesoamerican temple platforms, they immediately called them torres, "towers," [^51] so height, not shape, must be the main criterion.

Our look at the setting for the Zeniffites reveals that not only did they occupy a restricted territory, they also were few in numbers. After all, had Zeniff's original group been very large, the Lamanite king would never have allowed them into his territory (see Omni 1:28-29). Trouble began once their numbers grew enough to make him become uneasy about the threat they posed (Mosiah 9:11). We get hints about the absolutely small size of the population from the casualty reports. The number of victims the Zeniffites reported in their first battle against the Lamanites (279 against 3,043 enemy dead—Mosiah 9:18-19) suggests that no more than a couple of thousand Zeniffites were involved, though obviously their opponents were much more numerous. In Noah's day similar disparity was indicated, or worse; they boasted that "their fifty could [must?] stand against thousands of the Lamanites" (Mosiah 11:19). When Alma's 450 souls fled into the wilderness, their departure depleted Noah's armed force, leaving it "small, having been reduced" (Mosiah 19:2). Subsequent defeats by the Lamanites cut the number of armed men still further (Mosiah 21:8-9, 17), so that by the time Ammon and his party arrived from Zarahemla to search out the colony, the smallish group was tensely huddled together in the main city, Lehi-Nephi, hardly daring to go out (verses 18, 23). When the people did finally flee, the account again makes them sound like a few rather than many thousands (Mosiah 22:11).

The description of the escape route that Gideon outlined to Limhi ("back pass," "back wall," "round about the land of Shilom"—see Mosiah 22:6) remains too vague to allow fitting it surely to a specific trail, but map 8 shows a route that makes sense.

The Waters of Mormon

Alma had been part of King Noah's ruling establishment, but he rebelled when he was touched by the preaching of the martyr Abinadi. Privately carrying on the teaching begun by Abinadi, Alma assembled his own band of believers. Noah would not countenance any challenge to his state-supported priests, so Alma's dissidents had to stay under cover. The waters of Mormon "in the borders of the land" of Nephi (Mosiah 18:4, 31) was their rendezvous. This spot had to be far enough from the city of Nephi that reports of what they were up to would not readily get back to Noah's court. Events demonstrated that Mormon was located on the Zarahemla side of Nephi. We know this because when the time came that Alma's group had to flee, they got on their way to Zarahemla from Mormon with a significant head start over Noah's army, which pursued them. Alma at Mormon got word about the approaching force after they were en route, yet the people still had time to pack up and make an unhindered escape in the direction of Zarahemla (Mosiah 18:34). Approximately two days of routine travel, or one and a half under pressure, seems satisfactory for the distance from Nephi to Mormon.

The relationship of Nephi and Mormon becomes clearer when we look at the geography of highland Guatemala. With the city of Nephi at Kaminaljuyu (Guatemala City), the only body of water in the direction of Zarahemla that could serve as the waters of Mormon was Lake Atitlan. It is about nine by four miles in dimension. Only a sizable lake would do as the Book of Mormon "waters," for two reasons: (1) the same body of water, it appears, later rose enough to submerge the city of Jerusalem (3 Nephi 9:7), a Lamanite center built after Alma's departure, and (2) it was "away joining the borders of Mormon" (Alma 21:1), implying that the two spots were some little distance apart. The distances and directions relating Nephi, Mormon and Jerusalem are appropriate if the latter two were on Lake Atitlan. Nephi at Kaminaljuyu would be approximately 40 air miles from Lake Atitlan.

The coast of Lake Atitlan seen from the Panajachel delta, suggested scene of the Forest of Mormon. (Courtesy Kirk Magleby.)

Panajachel delta on Lake Atitlan, suggested scene of the Forest of Mormon. (Courtesy Richard Jones.)

Recollect that Mormon was praised lyrically for its "pure water" (Mosiah 18:30). The next settlement Alma chose was again notable for "pure water" (Mosiah 23:4). There may be more in that expression than meets the unalert eye. In Mesoamerica water was an exceedingly powerful symbol. That which came from inside the earth was particularly sacred. For ceremonial purposes men made trips down into caverns to gather containers of this fluid, which they considered unpolluted. [^52] The practice was related to the concept of a vast freshwater sea beneath the earth's surface. At certain points, such as at an artificial mountain/pyramid where both the upper world and underworld were particularly accessible, this water had the potential of bursting forth.

At the bulkiest of all Mesoamerican pyramids, at Cholula in the Mexican state of Puebla, native priests facing imminent defeat by Cortez's men made an opening in the structure's side, expecting water to flood out of the structure, as their beliefs led them to expect. [^53] The temple at Jerusalem was also considered to sit over a watery abyss, confining the contents from bursting forth as a flood. Ezekiel saw in vision a time when life-giving waters poured as a river from beneath the temple to green a millennial Zion (Ezekiel 47:1, 7-9, 12). [^54] Where it flowed, trees would flourish in the barren lands near Jerusalem (think here of the symbolism of the "forest" adjacent to the "waters of Mormon" in Alma's lyric formula).

The idea of the subterranean waters occurs frequently in other places in the Old Testament and of course throughout the ancient Near East. The priests of Noah—Alma had been one of them—were highly interested in the interpretation of the Old Testament with special reference to mountains; they questioned Abinadi on the subject (Mosiah 12:19-25). They had built at least two artificial mountains. [^55] Then later they were influential in seeing that Jerusalem, named after the holy city in the Old World, was built adjacent to an impressive "fountain" of waters (Alma 21:1-2). Obviously Alma had grown up immersed in this version of sacred symbolism. There was nothing inherently unorthodox about it, for the Old Testament was already full of these ideas. But he insisted that it had to be interpreted correctly, so when his group came upon Helam, a "very beautiful and pleasant land, a land of pure water" (Mosiah 23:4), he likely saw this characteristic as a manifestation from the hand of God. Mesoamerican peoples would have agreed fully, for they shared this same complex of ideas about the sacredness of water from beneath the earth.

The Land of Helam

Scenes in the suggested land of Helam, "a very beautiful and pleasant land, a land of pure water," around Chalchitan, Guatemala. (Photos by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

The area to which Alma's people fled from Mormon has to be located on a route in the general direction of Zarahemla, but a parallel trail must go in roughly the same direction as well. We know that because of what happened when King Limhi's people got away from the Lamanite domination some eleven years after Alma's escape. Limhi traveled a different way than Alma's people, reaching Zarahemla without ever encountering them in Helam. The Lamanites pursuing Limhi, however, made a wrong turn somewhere and lost Limhi's track (Mosiah 22:16). The Lamanites encountered the newly settled Amulonites (the former priests of Noah who had settled in the wilderness), but even they weren't clear where the city Lehi-Nephi lay! Later the pursuers stumbled onto the people of Alma, but eventually the latter escaped again, moving in the direction of Zarahemla. One day's flight put them into a valley, which they named after Alma. Warned by the Lord to hasten on, they departed "out of the valley" heading for Zarahemla. The Lamanites gave up the chase when they got to that point, no doubt because they could see they were getting into territory completely outside their ken (Mosiah 24:20-24).

Map 9. From Nephi to Zarahemla: Alma's Escape.

Map 9 shows a plausible arrangement of Helam in relation to the other places mentioned in the account. The ups and downs, the "waters," the well-traveled routes, and even the presence—or absence—of archaeological remains in the right spots at the correct times all fit. The geographical arrangement that seems the most logical puts Helam in the well-watered Rio Blanco Valley, and the Valley of Alma around Huehuetenango. Beyond that point, travelers bound northward and westward, like the Lamanite army chasing Alma, clearly pass a threshold—a literal watershed—separating the highlands that look toward the Valley of Guatemala/Nephi from terrain that starts to drop toward the Grijalva River drainage of Chiapas/Zarahemla.

A different geographical arrangement could also serve. That two places are suitable for the land of Helam warns us that we may not have our other sites for Book of Mormon events pinned down with absolute finality; but all we seek at this time is at least one plausible setting. Later, accumulated information may allow a definitive judgment. The alternative puts Helam around Malacatancito (on map 9,glf1 the left of the two possible sites indicated), where an archaeological site of Nephite age lies adjacent to the origin of the Rio San Juan as it "gushes out of an opening in the base of the Cuchumatanes Mountains." [^56] This might be the "pure water" that impressed Alma. The little valley here would make a comfortable Helam. The same valley of Alma serves as before, still only one day away. This second correlation would make sense if Limhi and his company, expecting pursuit, had thrown the Lamanites off by taking the easterly route. It may have been a trail Ammon and his company had learned about as they traveled up to Nephi not long before and on which they then guided Limhi (he had never passed through the wilderness, since he had been born in Nephi). Both these trails through Guatemala were well established and in frequent use in pre-Columbian and Spanish colonial times.

Glimpses of Mesoamerican Culture Among the Zeniffites

A number of features of life among the Zeniffites and their Lamanite neighbors in the land of Nephi in the late second century B.C. are illuminated by a knowledge of cultural and geographical characteristics of southern Mesoamerica.

The prophet Abinadi warned Noah and his priests on the Lord's behalf: "It shall come to pass that I will send forth hail among them, and it shall smite them; and they shall also be smitten with the east wind; and insects shall pester their land also, and devour their grain. And they shall be smitten with a great pestilence—and all this will I do because of their iniquities and abominations" (Mosiah 12:6-7). No scriptural record tells of the fulfillment of this prophecy, but the threat turns out to be a valid one on the Guatemalan scene where it seems to have been uttered. The conditions foretold are phrased in such a way as to indicate they were within the realm of nature's recognized potential, yet they were so rare that the listeners normally did not contemplate such a combination of calamities as a serious possibility. Highland Guatemala does occasionally suffer just those prophesied conditions under unusual circumstances. Abinadi's point was that God would cause these rare phenomena to come about jointly as unusual punishment for the Zeniffites' gross wickedness.

Geographer F. W. McBryde explains that certain meteorological situations produce an extremely drying north or northeast wind. (Recall that the "east" among pre-Columbian peoples in highland Guatemala coincided with what on our present maps is north or northeast.) These freak "norte" winds hold back the moist air from the Pacific side that normally flows into the highland valleys daily. As a result, the normal pattern of life-giving showers is upset. Fire danger heightens under these unusual conditions, with drying gusts reaching as high as 35 miles an hour. Great hailstorms occasionally (March through May) accompany these winds, as the strong surge of dry air converges along the coast with moist Pacific air, forming huge hail-generating thunderheads that drift inland above the north ("east") wind. [^57] Thus, a period of "east wind" could cause disastrous weather problems in Guatemala/Nephi, in just the terms the prophet said.

He also warned that insects would come to attack the crops. Migratory locusts periodically caused great destruction to corn fields in the Yucatan Peninsula and highland Guatemala. [^58] The dry interior Motagua River valley, only 15 miles "east" from our Nephi, had a climate that particularly favored the pests. The dry "norte" winds could drive the swarms those few miles onto the Zeniffites' fields. The Annals of the Cakchiquels, one of the traditional histories from the highlands, mentions two locust infestations shortly before the Spanish conquest, and there must have been many more. [^59] Food shortages that result from destructive weather and locust infestations are known historically to have brought malnutrition and pestilence in their wake. [^60] As Abinadi foretold, the pattern of wind, hail, insects, and famine, which on the surface seems rather arbitrary, turns out to be logically, integrally linked when we have our geography correct. They could happen, and would be devastating, if the Lord chose to trigger them.

The crops of the Zeniffites are of interest in several ways. As we have noted, corn appears as the most prominent food. That is what we would expect in most parts of Mesoamerica. But the "wheat" and "barley" mentioned as among their crops are another story. Botanists today believe that the earliest wheat in the New World was introduced by Spaniards. I am aware of no clear-cut evidence to the contrary, although there are hints that warrant closer examination. [^61] Wheat now grows in Guatemala but only at elevations higher than our Nephi. [^62] Possibly the Nephites brought seed with them and grew wheat for a time, only to have it disappear from cultivation later on, a not uncommon phenomenon in the experience of migrating groups. But the "problem" may be one of scientific method rather than of the Book of Mormon's statements. In 1982, for example, apparent domesticated barley was reported found in Arizona, the first pre-Columbian occurrence in the western hemisphere. [^63] That such an important crop could have gone undiscovered for so long by archaeologists justifies the thought that wheat might also be found in ancient sites.

Another possibility is that edible seeds not familiar to most of us were labeled with the names "wheat" or "barley." (Names do shift: "corn" in England means wheat; in Scotland, oats; in North America, maize.) Amaranth, considered an Old World grain, was grown and used in Mexico at the time the Spaniards arrived. Botanist Jonathan Sauer thought its origin to be American, but he noted too that it was widely distributed in the Old World in pre-Columbian times. Its uses in the two hemispheres were strikingly similar also (it was popped and eaten as "popcorn balls" on special feast days); the similarities have suggested to some scholars that amaranth seed was carried across the ocean in ancient times. [^64] Could the name translated in the Book of Mormon as "wheat" actually have been amaranth?

San Jose Mogote and the northern valley of Oaxaca, the best candidate to have been the Jaredite Moron. (Courtesy Richard Jones.)

Two other puzzling plants are mentioned in Mosiah 9:9, among those cultivated by the Zeniffites: "sheum" and "neas." The former word has recently been identified as "a precise match for Akkadian s(h)e'um, 'barley' (Old Assyrian 'wheat'); the most popular ancient Mesopotamian cereal name." [^65] The word's sound pattern indicates it was probably a Jaredite term. This good North Semitic word was quite at home around the "valley of Nimrod," north of Mesopotamia, where the Jaredites paused and collected seeds before starting their long journey to America (Ether 2:1, 3). (Incidentally, the form of the word as the Book of Mormon uses it dates to the third millennium B.C., when the Jaredites left the Near East. Later, it would have been pronounced and spelled differently.) Apparently the Nephite scribe could not translate it to any equivalent grain name, nor could Joseph Smith do so when he put the text into English. The plant and its name no doubt were passed down to the Nephites/Zeniffites through survivors from the First Tradition, just as corn itself was. Since the words barley and sheum were both used in the same verse (Mosiah 9:9), we know that two different grains were involved, but what "sheum" might specifically have been in our botanical terms we cannot tell at this time. Perhaps this was amaranth?

Beans were an important part of the Mesoamerican diet; the fact that Hebrew pol, "bean," [^66] so nearly matches Mayan terms for bean like bul or bol [^67] hints that linguistic research on plant names ought to continue vigorously and carefully; the opportunistic poking about in lexicons that characterizes so much research on the Book of Mormon will not do. Another candidate for such study is, of course, " neas" (Mosiah 9:9). On the basis of name, a long shot is that it could be tobacco (compare Mam Mayan ma's), [^68] but if the plant was mentioned because of its practical importance in the diet, possibly the avocado was intended. ("Avocados probably provided the main source of fat to the Indians of pre-Columbian Mexico and Central America, playing the role of the olive in the Old World." [^69])

"Wine" and the "vineyards" in King Noah's land (Mosiah 11:15) can definitely be clarified by attention to linguistic matters. Those terms seem puzzling at first glance, since wine was apparently not made from grapes in the New World. (Certain grapes were present, but we do not know that they were used for food or drink. [^70]) However, the Book of Mormon nowhere says that "grapes" were present, only "vineyards." The Spaniards spoke of "vineyards" referring to plantings of the maguey (agave) plant from which pulque is made. [^71] And various sorts of "wine" were described by the early Europeans in Mesoamerica: one from bananas in eighteenth-century Guatemala, another from pineapples in the West Indies, palm wine from the coyol palm trunk (manufactured from Veracruz to Costa Rica), and the balche of the Mayan area, made from a fermented tree bark. [^72] Clearly Noah the "wine"-bibber in the book of Mosiah could have been drinking something intoxicating besides the squeezings of the grape.

Another bit of Mesoamerican atmosphere appears in a figure of speech the writer used in Mosiah 20:11. "Like dragons did they fight," he wrote (see also Alma 43:44). What kind of "dragons" did he have in mind? The reference was probably to the crocodile or caiman. There are a number of reasons to think so. One colonial period observer described these saurians thus: "Very ferocious, and greatly feared. . . . Some of the caymans are from twenty to thirty feet and upwards in length . . . and covered with scales through which a musket ball cannot pierce. Their tails are very powerful and dangerous; and their mouths are large, with three rows of formidable teeth." [^73] But this "dragon" was much more than a dangerous bit of the natural world. In Mesoamerican mythology a giant creature of crocodilian form was thought to float on the supposed subterranean sea. His back was the surface of the earth, and his connection with earth and waters tied him symbolically with productivity and fertility. This "earth monster" is repeatedly shown at the base of relief carvings at Izapa (on the Chiapas/Guatemala border), in early Maya sculpture, and even in Olmec art, hence the idea is very old and fundamental. [^74] Mayan art represented an aspect of this being by a mere jawbone symbol. [^75] (Incidentally, the name Lehi means "cheekbone" or perhaps "jawbone." To be able to say that one was descended from "Jawbone," Lehi, would have been impressive among Mesoamericans.) The Book of Mormon and the Near Eastern cultural background from which it developed represents a crocodile-related monster in similar ways. Second Nephi 9:9-10, 19, and 26 picture "the devil" as a dragon or monster dwelling beneath the earth's surface. The Israelites shared with their Near Eastern neighbors the idea and image of this being as a symbol of chaos and evil. The Old Testament name of the creature is sometimes given as "leviathan." [^76] Its scaly back formed the ridges and hills of earth's surface. The "high places" where early Palestinian inhabitants worshipped were named from a root that meant "back of an animal." [^77] The sea creature—chaos—was thought to have been conquered by Jehovah in an ancient epic struggle (Isaiah 27:1; 51:9; Psalm 74:13-14). This is surely the dragon referred to in 2 Nephi 9:9 and the "old serpent" in Mosiah 16:3. The entire topic of dragons, monsters, and serpents is obviously too complex to do more than touch on here. We can at least note two things about Zeniff's dragon imagery: (1) it had powerful meaning to his listeners—beyond being a mere literary phrase, and (2) the complex of ideas is represented not only in the Book of Mormon but in Palestine and in Mesoamerica as well.

The intention of chapter 4 has been to demonstrate that the early portion of the Book of Mormon plausibly, believably, fits a specific area in Mesoamerica at a particular period of time. Its people wrote, thought, spoke, believed, and acted in ways very much at home in that area. The movements of its peoples can be mapped between real places having the characteristics the volume reports. Once that point is established we can draw from Mesoamerican and Near Eastern materials in order to add depth and breadth to our reading of the Book of Mormon. A little of that has been done here. Much more information could have been arrayed on these points, but perhaps enough has been presented to show the way.

Nowhere have I insisted that specific Book of Mormon people must be identified with particular sites, structures, or artifacts. At some points the fit between scriptural specification and external fact seems to me to have passed beyond mere plausibility to the level of probability. As the saying goes, if the shoe fits, wear it. Yet at this moment our situation seems roughly similar to what Professor Bright has said about biblical studies: "In spite of all the light that has been cast on the patriarchal age, in spite of all that has been done to vindicate the antiquity and authenticity of the tradition, archaeology has not proved that the stories of the patriarchs happened just as the Bible tells them. . . . At the same time—and this must be said with equal emphasis—no evidence has come to light contradicting any item of the tradition. One may believe it or not as one sees fit, but proof is lacking either way." [^78] Yet, Bright goes on, archaeology has provided "a flavor of probability" for the patriarchal accounts. So much remains to be done on the Book of Mormon in its setting that "a flavor of plausibility" concerning the setting of the early Nephites is as far as we dare go at this time, but ultimately Bright and I are both talking about the same kind of endeavor. Meanwhile, Mosiah, Benjamin, Zeniff, and Alma can now be seen more nearly as real people, where before, they were only one-dimensional, because their lives are set in a believable setting replete with its own detail.

Footnotes

56.

---
Notas:
[^1] John Tvedtnes has discussed the evidence that the assembly and ceremony under Benjamin's direction were a version of the Israelite feast of the tabernacles: "The Nephite Feast of Tabernacles," in Tinkling Cymbals: Essays in Honor of Hugh Nibley, ed. and privately published by John W. Welch (Los Angeles, 1978). Available as Preliminary Report TVE-78 from the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies (P.O. Box 7113, University Station, Provo, Utah 84602).
[^2] Henry F. Dobyns, "Estimating Aboriginal American Population: An Appraisal of Techniques with a New Hemispheric Estimate," Current Anthropology 7 (October 1966):395-416, with comments by others; William A. Haviland, "A New Population Estimate for Tikal, Guatemala," American Antiquity 34 (1969):429-33; E. B. Kurjack, Prehistoric Lowland Maya Community and Social Organization: A Case Study at Dzibilchaltun, Yucatan, Mexico, MARI 38 (1974), pp. ix-xi, 5-9, 15-17, 23-27, 94-98.
[^3] S. F. de Borhegyi, Archaeological Synthesis of the Guatemala Highlands, HMAI 3, part 1 (1965), p. 13; but he extends the duration of the heavy population unduly in the light of newer information.
[^4] Samuel K. Lothrop, Atitlan, CIWP 444 (1933), pp. 9-14.
[^5] Gareth W. Lowe, "The Civilizational Consequences of Varying Degrees of Agricultural and Ceramic Dependency within the Basic Ecosystems of Mesoamerica," in Observations on the Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica, ed. Robert F. Heizer and John A. Graham, UCAR 11 (1971), pp. 212-48.
[^6] Gareth W. Lowe and J. Alden Mason, Archaeological Survey of the Chiapas Coast, Highlands, and Upper Grijalva Basin, HMAI 2, part 1 (1965), p. 217.
[^7] T. Patrick Culbert, The Ceramic History of the Central Highlands of Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 19 (1965), p. 79.
[^8] Carlos Navarrete, Archaeological Explorations in the Region of the Frailesca, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 7 (1960), pp. 15, 37.
[^9] Miguel Covarrubias, Mexico South (New York: Knopf, 1947), p. 89, reports an old man in Tabasco who completed in a week a trip to and from a town about sixty miles away, apparently walking nearly twenty miles per day.
[^10] Frederick A. Peterson, Some Ceramics from Mirador, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 15 (1963), pp. i, xii-xiv, 1-2.
[^11] Jorge Angulo V., "Un Posible Codice de El Mirador, Chiapas," in Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia (Mexico), Departamento de Prehistoria, Tecnologia, Cuadernos 4 (1970).
[^12] Pierre Agrinier, Mounds 9 and 10 at Mirador, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 39 (1975), pp. 3, 96.
[^13] Personal communications from Andrew McDonald, and unpublished reports, BYU-NWAF.
[^14] Thomas A. Lee, Jr., Mound 4 Excavations at San Isidro, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 34 (1974), pp. 1-4, 78.
[^15] Lawrence H. Feldman, Languages of the Chiapas Coast and Interior in the Colonial Period, 1525-1820, UCAR 18 (1973), p. 81.
[^16] R. F. Smith, personal communication.
[^17] Culbert, Ceramic History, p. 79.
[^18] G. C. Vaillant, The Aztecs of Mexico (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1950), pp. 183, 186; J. E. S. Thompson, Maya History and Religion (Norman: Oklahoma University Press, 1970), p. 168; A. V. Kidder, "Introduction," in Uaxactun, Guatemala: Excavations of 1931-1937, by A. L. Smith, CIWP 588 (1950), pp. 1-12.
[^19] This composite picture can be supplemented by studying such readable books as Michael D. Coe, Mexico (3rd ed.) and The Maya; Muriel P. Weaver, The Aztecs, Maya, and Their Predecessors (2nd ed.); and R. E. W. Adams, Prehistoric Mesoamerica. All are informative, even while they exhibit notable inaccuracies. Perhaps the widest perspective, because of its sweep into modern times, is provided by Eric Wolf's Sons of the Shaking Earth. However, no existing book is up-to-date or presents a picture in terms I have used.
[^20] Gareth W. Lowe, "Burial Customs at Chiapa de Corzo," in Archaeological Burials at Chiapa de Corzo and Their Furniture, by Pierre Agrinier, NWAF 16 (1964), pp. 71-72.
[^21] William A. Haviland, "Principles of Descent in Sixteenth Century Yucatan," Katunob 8, no. 2 (December 1972):64.
[^22] In Hebrew, as pointed out to me by John Tvedtnes, personal communication.
[^23] Albright, Yahweh, pp. 124-44, 197-99.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 142-43, 204-5.
[^25] See my "The Book of Mormon as a Mesoamerican Codex,"Society for Early Historic Archaeology, Newsletter and Proceedings 139 (1976), pp. 4-6.
[^26] References are in my paper "The Significance of an Apparent Relationship between the Ancient Near East and Mesoamerica," in Man Across the Sea, ed. Carroll J. Riley et al. (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971), pp. 234-35.
[^27] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya, 2nd ed. (Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1947), plate 28.
[^28] Felix W. McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography of Southwest Guatemala, SISA 4 (1945), map 20 and plates 19-23.
[^29] Ibid., map 20, plate 47, p. 179.
[^30] Ibid., pp. 132, 168, 179-80.
[^31] Compare the striking symbols in Ezekiel 36:1; 43:1-2; 47:1, 2, 7, 12, and 20 with the Atitlan site, recalling that the lake, like the Dead Sea in Palestine, would be on this Jerusalem's "east" and the ocean on its "west." Also note Ezekiel 17 as treated in my article "The Twig of the Cedar," The Improvement Era 60 (May 1957):330ff. Isaiah and Jeremiah, among others, use the same symbols.
[^32] Ibid., pp. 97, 99.
[^33] See, for example, John A. Graham, "Discoveries at Abaj Takalik, Guatemala," Archaeology 30 (May 1977), pp. 196-97.
[^34] Lothrop, Atitlan, pp. 60-61, gives evidence for one site so submerged.
[^35] Stephan de Borhegyi, "The Development of Folk and Complex Cultures in the Southern Maya Area," American Antiquity 21 (1956):343-56.
[^36] E. M. Shook, "Lugares Arqueologicos del Altiplano Meridional Central de Guatemala," Antropologia e Historia de Guatemala 4, no. 2 (June 1952):10-11, 30.
[^37] Lee A. Parsons, Bilbao, Guatemala: An Archaeological Study of the Pacific Coast Cotzumalhuapa Region, vol. 1, Milwaukee Public Museum Publications in Anthropology 11 (1967); Graham, "Discoveries," pp. 196-97.
[^38] Concerning the importance of trade to Kaminaljuyu and the nearby Pacific lowland strip, and the focal position of those two regions in trade in southern Mesoamerica at this time, see Lee A. Parsons and Barbara J. Price, "Mesoamerican Trade and Its Role in the Emergence of Civilization, " in Observations on the Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica, ed. Robert F. Heizer and John A. Graham, UCAF 11 (1971), pp. 180-95.
[^39] Gordon R. Willey, T. Patrick Culbert, and R. E. W. Adams, eds., "Maya Lowlands Ceramics: A Report from the 1965 Guatemala City Conference," American Antiquity 32 (1967):298-300; Graham, "Discoveries."
[^40] William T. Sanders and Barbara J. Price, Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization (New York: Random House, 1968), pp. 42-44.
[^41] References for the Mesoamerican idea are in my "Apparent Relationship," pp. 239-40.
[^42] David A. Freidel, "Civilization as a State of Mind: The Cultural Evolution of the Lowland Maya," in The Transition to Statehood in the New World, ed. Grant D. Jones and Robert R. Kautz (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), p. 191. Compare Lee A. Parsons, "Post-Olmec Stone Sculpture: The Olmec-Izapan Transition on the South Pacific Coast and Highlands," in The Olmec and Their Neighbors: Essays in Memory of Matthew W. Stirling, ed. Elizabeth P. Benson (Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, 1981), p. 257.
[^43] Freidel, "State of Mind," pp. 191, 204.
[^44] Ibid., p. 200.
[^45] Ibid., p. 204.
[^46] Ibid., pp. 198, 223.
[^47] Robert M. Carmack, Toltec Influence on the Postclassic Culture History of Highland Guatemala, MARI 26 (1970), p. 72; Lawrence H. Feldman, "Tollan in Central Mexico," Katunob 8, no. 3 (February 1973):1-6.
[^48] Carmack, Toltec Influence, pp. 72-73.
[^49] Jacinto Quirarte, Izapan and Mayan Traits in Teotihuacan III Pottery, UCAR 18 (1973), pp. 11-30. His chronology can be more carefully specified now, the Izapa and Kaminaljuyu comparisons falling in the earlier half of the first century B.C. or possibly a little earlier.
[^50] I believe that Mosiah I was readily accepted as king over the people of Zarahemla (Omni 1:19) in part because he had come, with obvious credentials (Omni 1:14; Mosiah 1:16), from the "Tulan" of Nephi/ Kaminaljuyu. Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson in Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland: Kolob Book, 1950), pp. 149-57, attempt to relate "Tulan" to early Nephite centers, though not to "the city of Nephi."
[^51] Robert Wauchope, Protohistoric Pottery of the Guatemala Highlands, in Monographs and Papers in Maya Archaeology, ed. W. R. Bullard, Jr., HUPM 61, part 2 (1970), pp. 237-38. Compare H. E. D. Pollock, "Introduction," in Mayapan, Yucatan, Mexico, H. E. D. Pollock, et al., CIWP 619 (1962), p. 13.
[^52] A. P. Maudslay, trans. and ed., Bernal Diaz del Castillo: The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico, 1517-1521 (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Cudahy, 1956), p. 24.
[^53] I. W. Johnson, "Basketry and Textiles," HMAI 10, part 1 (1971), p. 312. Matthew Wallrath in Excavations in the Tehuantepec Region, Mexico, American Philosophical Society Transactions, n.s. 57, part 2 (1967), p. 12, notes that wild silk was collected and spun in the isthmus area, and that the cloth had very high value. Clavigero also reported that fiber of the ceiba tree's pod was woven by Mexican Indians into fabric "as soft and delicate, and perhaps more so, than silk." C. Cullen, ed., The History of Mexico, vol. 1 (Philadelphia: Thomas Dobson, 1817), p. 41. Compare A. M. Tozzer, ed., Landa's Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, HUPM 18 (1941), p. 201, 205 and J. E. S. Thompson, ed., Thomas Gage's Travels in the New World (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1958), p. 149.
[^54] Hugh Nibley, Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967), pp. 255ff.
[^55] Jeremiah F. Epstein, "Pre-Columbian Old World Coins in America: An Examination of the Evidence," Current Anthropology 21 (1980):1-20.
[^56] McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography, pp. 33, 72, 84.
[^57] Weights and Measures in the Time of Mosiah II, Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, Preliminary Report STF-83 (Provo, Utah, 1983).
[^58] Handbook of Latin American Studies 37, Social Sciences (1976), p.70, abstracting a pamphlet published in Ecuador in 1975. This was copper money, each piece being in the shape of an axe head.
[^59] Evon Z. Vogt, The Zinacantecos of Mexico: A Modern Maya Way of Life. (New York: Holt, Rinehart, Winston, 1970), p. 98; Tozzer, Landa's Relacion, pp. 182-84.
[^60] Robert Ritzenthaler, Recent Monument Worship in Lowland Guatemala, MARI 28 (1967), pp. 107-11, especially figure 7.
[^61] Suzanne W. Miles, Sculpture of the Guatemala-Chiapas Highlands and Pacific Slopes, and Associated Hieroglyphs, HMAl 3, part 1 (1965), pp. 237-75. Compare T. Proskouriakoff's comment in Dumbarton Oaks Conference on the Olmec, ed. Elizabeth P. Benson (Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, 1968), p. 176; she contradicts the usual view that "idols" were abundant.
[^62] William F. Albright and C. S. Mann, Matthew (New York: Doubleday, Anchor Books, 1971):CLIII; I. Levy, The Synagogue: Its History and Function (London: Valentine, Mitchell, 1964), pp. 7-14.
[^63] Megilla 4, 23; Berakot 11; Shabbat 1, 11.
[^64] Jack Finegan, Light from the Ancient Past, 2nd ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1956), pp. 289-91; John A. Tvedtnes, The Church of the Old Testament (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967), pp. 24-25.
[^65] The definition of an altar is unclear. Large stones sometimes termed altars are occasionally shown in art serving as seats ("thrones?") for dignitaries. Jacinto Quirarte, "Terrestrial/Celestial Polymorphs as Narrative Frames in the Art of Izapa and Palenque," in Pre-Columbian Art History: Selected Readings, ed. Alana Cordy-Collins and Jean Stern (Palo Alto: Peck Publications, 1977), p. 53, says, "The stela-altar complex is also Izapan in origin." The distribution of "altars" at Izapa can be seen in Susanna M. Ekholm, Mound 30A and the Early Preclassic Ceramic Sequence of Izapa, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 25 (1969), pp. 2, 5, 17.
[^66] William F. Albright, "The High Place in Ancient Palestine," in Supplements to Vetus Testamentum (Leiden: Brill, 1957), pp. 247-48, 250-57; Roland de Vaux, Ancient Israel: Its Life and Institutions (London: McGraw-Hill, 1961), pp. 284-87.
[^67] E. M. Shook and A. V. Kidder, Mound E-III-3, Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala, ClWP 596 (1952), pp. 56-64.
[^68] 68. Juan Pio Perez, Diccionario de la Lengua Maya (Merida, 1877), pp. 33-34 ("bul," "buul"); Alfredo Herbruger, Jr., and Eduardo Diaz Barrios, Metodo para Aprender a Hablar, Leer y Escribir la Lengua Cakchiquel, vol. 1 (Guatemala: 1956):165 ("boloss").
[^69] 69. Norman A. McQuown, "Indigenous Languages of Native America," American Anthropologist 57 (1955):509.
[^70] 70. McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography, p. 144.
[^71] 71. Tozzer, Landa's Relacion, p. 198, note 1079.
[^72] 72. For example, Thomas Gage, in Thomas Gage's Travels in the New World, ed. J. E. S. Thompson (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1958), p. 76.
[^73] 73. McBrycle, Cultural and Historical Geography, pp. 144-46. Thompson, ed., Gage's Travels, p. 76. Tozzer, Landa's Relacion, p. 198.
[^74] 74. Diego Garcia de Palacio, Relacion hecha . . . en la que Describe la Provincia de Guatemala (1576), Squier edition (New York: 1860), p. 25.
[^75] 75. J. E. S. Thompson, Maya Hieroglyphic Writing: Introduction, CIWP 589 (1950), pp. 110-11, 274-75; V. Garth Norman, Izapa Sculpture, Part 2: Text, NWAF 30 (1976), pp. 30-36, 225-28, and elsewhere; Jacinto Quirarte, "Tricephalic Units in Olmec, Izapan-Style, and Maya Art," in The Olmec and Their Neighbors: Essays in Memory of Matthew W. Stirling, ed. Elizabeth P. Benson (Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, 1981), pp. 289-308.
[^76] 76. Thompson, Maya Hieroglyphic Writing, pp. 110-11, 274-75.
[^77] 77. Clifford, Cosmic Mountains, pp. 52-54; Albright, "High Place," pp. 184-85; Howard Wallace, "Leviathan and the Beast in Revelation," in The Biblical Archaeologist Reader, eds. G. Ernest Wright and David Noel Freedman (Chicago: Quadrangle, 1961), pp. 290-98.
[^78] 78. Albright, "High Place," pp. 248-50. De Vaux, Ancient Israel, p. 284.
