John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

5

Growing Pains

Our considerations of early Nephite life have shown that a number of facts presented in the Book of Mormon fit the Mesoamerican scene. More correspondences appear as we continue the account. We shall look at the growth in Zarahemla's extent and power, Alma's experiences, and the missionary activity of the sons of Mosiah.

The Expansion of Zarahemla

It was three years after Benjamin's announcement that his son Mosiah was to become king that Limhi's and Alma's separate groups arrived in Zarahemla from Lamanite country. Now the new king called an assembly of his subjects in the pattern his father had followed. They were more numerous by several thousands due to the arrival of the refugees, and the social structure had grown much more complex.

Benjamin had allowed his people to assemble themselves family by family (Mosiah 2:5-6). [^1] Even then they must have separated themselves informally into two bodies for, after all, they spoke different languages (Omni 1:17-18). But in the later gathering, the social and cultural differences are more explicit. Mosiah's call to assemble positioned the people in two distinct groups, consisting of the Nephites proper and the people of Zarahemla. After the initial business, newly arrived Alma addressed them by speaking in turn to "large bodies" (Mosiah 25:15). Apparently there were seven of these, for immediately afterward he proceeded to organize seven "churches" or congregations (verses 19-23). Alma's own people from the land of Helam would have been one of the groups. Limhi's Zeniffites no doubt formed another. (Possibly these two were joined together, since Alma's people had once been Zeniffites.) The resident Nephites from throughout the local land of Zarahemla must have been numerous enough and residentially dispersed enough, or they differed enough in kin ties, to require at least two more units. That would leave three of the congregations for the people of Zarahemla, the most numerous segment of the population (Mosiah 25:2). These groups were distinguished from each other by their residence areas, and those areas were probably controlled on a lineage basis.

Mosiah's people obviously existed in a complex social setting. Language and cultural differences inside his kingdom were great. At least three traditions were present: (1) an old isthmian tradition carried by the people of Zarahemla, (2) the Nephite culture brought by the original immigrants from Guatemala/Nephi under Mosiah I but later modified, and (3) the Zeniffite pattern, shaped by new influences received during their residence among the Lamanites in the land of Nephi for two generations. Clearly, Zarahemla was a center of ethnic, linguistic, and cultural mixing at this time—a zone connecting the southern portions of the "promised land" and the narrow neck area.

A community in such a central position at times undergoes a period of rapid growth, taking advantage of emerging trade possibilities and the vigorous exploration of new cultural forms made possible by internal stimulus. Zarahemla certainly seems to have been growing rapidly at this time and for the next few decades. Clues to the growth are scattered throughout accounts of both normal life and serious conflict. "The people began to be very numerous, and began to scatter abroad upon the face of the earth, yea, on the north and on the south, on the east and on the west, building large cities and villages in all quarters of the land" (Mosiah 27:6). This language extends the Nephite domain beyond the small riverine territory we glimpsed earlier. The sons of Mosiah soon "traveled throughout all the land of Zarahemla, and among all the people who were under the reign of King Mosiah" (Mosiah 27:35, my emphasis). That statement indicates that some of the king's subjects now lived outside the immediate land of Zarahemla, which his father had ruled. With increasing dispersion it became impossible to hold assemblies of all his people anymore. This is evident in Mosiah's procedure when the issue arose on who should be the new king to replace him. This time he did not call a meeting. Instead, he merely "sent out" among the people, presumably by oral messengers. But almost immediately it proved necessary to send in addition even a written word" (Mosiah 29:1, 4), perhaps to ensure clarity and uniformity. This is the first clear record of written communication being put to use for administrative purposes among the Nephites. The business of government was getting more complex and time-consuming. Ruling having become a full-time task, King Mosiah did not—could not, probably—claim that he supported himself by his own labor as his father had.

The growing burden of rule helped persuade Mosiah that a reform in government structure was desirable. As a result, the monarchy was abandoned, and a system of "judges" was installed to rule "throughout all the land of Zarahemla, among all the people who were called the Nephites" (verse 44). This language also communicates extension, undoubtedly beyond the local region surrounding the chief city.

Only nine years later we find Alma many days distant, in the city of Ammonihah, then considered to be "in the borders of the [greater] land of Zarahemla" (Alma 25:2). The local leaders there acknowledged their formal, though minimal, allegiance to the chief judge in the city of Zarahemla. The Nephites continued using both the narrow and the broader meanings of the name "Zarahemla" (compare Ether 9:31, where Zarahemla refers to most of the land southward, with Mormon 1:6, where it is clearly more localized.) Neither are we nowadays consistent in using geographical terms; witness the problem whether "America" means a nation or a hemisphere. Exactly the same problem arises in references to "the land of Nephi," where the label was applied to part of a valley (Mosiah 7:7, compare verse 21 and 19:26) or to a territory hundreds of miles from sea to sea (Alma 22:27). We have to read such terms in context, of course. Usually the geographical extent intended is evident, but we might be misled by hasty reading.

The size of Zarahemla's population shows growth to match the expansion. This is apparent in accounts of war casualties. Our first numerical data come at about 90 B.C. from the battle in which Amlicite dissenters suffered 12,532 slain and the loyal Nephites 6,562 (Alma 2:19). All these people were "Nephites," politically speaking; the account does not talk about Lamanites at all. It is reasonable that not over half the combatants were slain, which means that at least 40,000 warriors were involved, and perhaps somewhat more. Various studies of ancient warfare suggest how to translate that figure to total population. The ratio usually believed to apply is one soldier to about five total inhabitants. Using that figure, we may conclude that the total population of those "who were called Nephites" was 200,000 or more.

A useful statement about Lamanite population at the same time appears at Mosiah 25:2-3, where we learn that all the people under Nephite rule numbered fewer than half as many as the Lamanites. If the estimate arrived at above for the Nephites is sound, that would put Lamanite population over 400,000. Partial confirmation for such a number comes from further casualty reports. A little after the Amlicite affair, a Lamanite attack on the Nephites resulted in "thousands and tens of thousands" being destroyed; however, we are not told how many of these were Lamanites and how many Nephites. Anyway, the reservoir of Lamanite men had certainly not emptied yet, despite previous deaths in battle. A decade after the Amlicite conflict we get still more data. Alma 28:2 says that "tens of thousands of Lamanites were slain and scattered abroad." The writer had not used the expression "tens of thousands" when the nearly 20,000 Amlicites and Nephites had been slain, so the term here must mean many more than that—at least 30,000 Lamanite dead. An attacking army on the order of 75,000 or more seems called for. The usual ratio of 1:5 yields a figure of 375,000 for the total population back home, but that is probably too low. (The Lamanites were operating hundreds of miles from home, which leads to the conclusion that somewhat fewer than one out of five were mobilized. It would take more people at home to support them on a lengthy expedition such as the geography suggests for this case.) If the ratio one in six is used instead, the total Lamanite population from which the force had been drawn would be on the order of 450,000. As crude as our estimates must be for lack of more detailed information in the text (and conceding that the Nephite reports of Lamanite casualties might be exaggerated), the size of the Nephite and Lamanite populations we have calculated is probably of the correct order of magnitude.

Let us now consider Mosiah 25:2-3 from a different point of view. It reports fewer of the Nephites, strictly speaking, than of the ethnic or cultural group termed "the people of Zarahemla." The Nephites descended from Lehi—including Alma's and Limhi's people—would reasonably have been 40 percent of the total of 200,000, based on the wording of the text. That could mean that the Nephites proper were on the order of 80,000 people. This little exercise serves to emphasize the disparity between the core Nephite population and the huge numbers of Lamanites, which the recordkeepers keep emphasizing. Realistically as well as psychologically, the Lamanites were a fearsome enemy.

We have been talking about sizable populations. What evidence is at hand that numbers of that order were living in southern Mesoamerica around 100 B.C.? The question can't be answered directly. Calculating ancient populations produces heated disputes among the experts. Archaeologists look at the physical remains, then tend to suppose that what they have discovered and counted so far represents all the people there were. Historians and demographers use different data and often judge the ancient inhabitants as many times more numerous. Even when the same information is available to two experts, their individual judgments yield different estimates. [^2] But we do know that about the time when the Nephite record reports the wars and casualties just discussed, the population at Kaminaljuyu (the city suggested to be Nephi, the Lamanite center) was likely at the highest level in its history. For example, the excavators of the tombs in Mound E-111-3 calculated that the debris scraped from the surface nearby and piled up to form just this one huge mound contained broken pottery fragments from around half a million pots. On that basis a population in the tens of thousands at the site before the mound's construction around 50 B.C. has been inferred. [^3] Certain peoples in highland Guatemala shortly before the time of the Spanish conquest are reported in traditions to have fought with armies of 60,000, 80,000, and even up to 200,000 on one side, for decade after decade. [^4] So there is no question that the scale of inhabitation and of armies supported that the Book of Mormon indicates for the Lamanites were feasible in terms of the carrying capacity of the land we label Nephi. The only question further research may answer better is, were those numbers actually there at the very time when the books of Mosiah and Alma say they were?

The Amlicite incident has several interesting geographical implications beyond its casualty data. First, there is the question of the home territory of the rebels. Amlici wanted to be king. He was cunning and sophisticated, a follower of Nehor, the professional priest with the Jaredite name. It would be a good bet that part of Amlici's appeal to a sizable population was that he was a descendant of the old chief, Zarahemla. He might well have been a person of privilege who wanted kingly authority to augment power he already possessed (Alma 2:1-2; compare 51:8). He certainly had a strong political base before he launched his move. His main supporters were geographically distinct from the loyalist Nephites in Zarahemla, for these Amlicites "gathered themselves together" and then "came upon the hill Amnihu, which was east of the river Sidon, which ran by the land of Zarahemla" (verses 9, 15, my emphasis). As we have already seen, in the ensuing battle the Amlicites fled up to the valley of Gideon, later dropping back down to cross the Sidon and joining a big Lamanite army advancing down the west bank of the river. (See map 7.) It is apparent that Amlici had made an arrangement with the Lamanites whereby he and his followers were to lure the Nephite army away from the city of Zarahemla at a crucial moment to allow the undetected invasion by the Lamanite force. But where was home to the rebels, where they "gathered" and whence they "came"? While we are not told, we can infer the location. They would not have come from upriver, of course. Had that been their location, they would simply have joined with the Lamanite force as it came through their territory. Nothing said at any point in the Nephite record suggests sizable populations away from the river zone on either its eastward or westward sides. But there was room downstream. The downriver stretch is rarely mentioned in the Book of Mormon. It was once, during the later attack led by one Coriantumr. Then the Lamanites seized Zarahemla without warning and pushed on downriver through "the most capital parts of the land" (Helaman 1:27).

The geography we are following makes that area coincide with the lower central depression of Chiapas, where the speakers of the Zoquean language had long lived. [^5] They had been in the land long before the Nephites arrived. Their ancestors had been bearers of the Olmec culture in the time of the Jaredites. There is little reason to question that they were of basically the same stock as the folk followers of chief Zarahemla. Their leaders would have lost a great deal of power and privilege when the Nephite intruders took over rulership in Mosiah I's day. At the time we are now considering, the expansion of the Nephite elite's power throughout the entire valley could well have spurred this "nobility" to wish to regain rulership for one of their own lineages. This is the logical base from which an Amlici probably proceeded. The variety of peoples under Nephite domination was so geographically divided by river and "wilderness" areas and so linguistically and culturally varied that "dissension" and power struggles among the localized groups, like the one started by Amlici, long continued to challenge the "Nephis," the ruling line descended from the original king, Nephi. Evidence from Chiapas suggests that the Santa Rosa/Zarahemla area might be at loggerheads with the area downstream. The Chiapa de Corzo site, the largest city within the entire central depression at this time and the heart of that downstream sector, was larger and more prosperous than Santa Rosa. No wonder it might rebel against overlordship located upstream. Furthermore, at this period of time (the second century B.C.) Chiapa de Corzo maintained clear-cut cultural ties to the Mayan speakers to the south, that is, to Lamanite country in our Book of Mormon terms. [^6] An alliance between Amlicites based in the Chiapa de Corzo area and the Lamanites in Nephi (highland Guatemala) would have formed a vise, putting pressure on the Nephite center. Of course, we cannot say for sure that this geographical arrangement is how things really were. No one knows enough facts yet to be sure, but it very reasonably could have been so.

Alma's Circuit

The picture of Zarahemla's expanding influence is clarified further in the story of Alma's preaching mission (Alma 5 through 15). He began his retrenchment effort in Zarahemla itself, among the seven congregations. From there he traveled over the river to the east and up to the valley of Gideon, where a Nephite city had been established after the Amlicite battle (Alma 6:7).

The first leg of Alma's journey is easily located on our map. Gideon was, we saw before, in the uplands east of the Sidon valley. In terms of our geographical correlation, the Comitan Valley is the likely place for Gideon. Another possibility, but less likely, is the Teopisca-Amatenango area. (An archaeological survey of these highlands revealed that these areas were first settled, but only in a few spots, in about the first century B.C., Alma's time. [^7] That makes sense in terms of the Book of Mormon, which practically ignores the highlands on the east of the land of Zarahemla, except for Gideon.)

The second leg of his preaching circuit took the Nephite high priest to Melek, near the west wilderness. This place is implied in the several references to it to be some distance from Zarahemla (Alma 8:3; 45:18). On the western edge of the central depression of Chiapas one major settlement area stands out. Called the Frailesca, its name came from the fact that the friars of the Dominican religious order of the Catholic Church controlled this productive territory in Spanish colonial days. Near Villa Flores, the heart of the area, is an impressive ruined site now labeled Vera Cruz II. It is the largest settlement in the whole western zone that dates to the late second century B.C. when Alma made his journey. [^8] (However, the Book of Mormon never mentions any city of Melek, so no large center need be expected.) A primary route directly linked Santa Rosa/Zarahemla with this Frailesca/Melek region. The several adjacent valleys that together constitute the western zone would have constituted "all the borders of the land which was by the wilderness side," whose people flocked together to hear Alma preach (Alma 8:5). (See map 10.)

Map 10. Further Details in the Land of Zarahemla (Central Depression).

The route taken by Alma from Melek ran "on the north" parallel to the mountain wilderness on his left. Beyond it lay a narrow coastal strip. During his three-day trip he seems not to have gone through any settlement worth mentioning. Since he was an older man by this time, we should not suppose he would cover in three days more than 50 or 60 miles. [^9] From the Frailesca such a trip would have brought him to the archaeological site of Mirador, a major regional center of western Chiapas from Jaredite times until after the Nephites disappeared. Its 30 major mounds are impressively concentrated in an area about 400 meters on each side. This place was prominent enough to justify the pride of the Ammonihahites in its importance (Alma 9:4). Its cultural connections with the Zarahemla/Santa Rosa area were definite though not intimate, the same type of relationship implied in the Ammonihah people's guardedly hostile response to Alma's message (Alma 8:11-12).

Mirador was the key to a distinct geographical zone, the Jiquipilas-Cintalapa valley. This flattish zone is the most northwesterly extension of the central depression and thus the major route from Chiapas to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. The city's immediate position is at the low point of the valley, just before the river draining the valley enters a deep canyon on its way to join the Grijalva/Sidon. Immediately east of Mirador the road inland rises dramatically almost 2,500 feet onto an intermediate plateau, so the site appears to be in a "hole" of sorts. [^10] This situation may be related to the statement about Ammonihah, that Alma and Amulek, his new companion, "came out even into the land of Sidom" (Alma 15:1; my emphasis). Later settlers were also said to "go in" to the place (Alma 16:11). In few topographic settings could such expressions have been more appropriate.

The large mound at Mirador in western Chiapas gives the site its name, "Lookout," and could have been one reason the people of Ammonihah were so proud of their city. (Photo by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

The flat Cintalapa River valley in which Mirador lies is the chief route between central Chiapas and the Pacific coast. (Photo by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

Excavation at Mirador has revealed that the place was an important center in Alma's day. One tomb contained remnants of two ancient bark paper books or codices. These are the only definite books recovered so far in Mesoamerican excavations. (Despite extensive consultation with leading technical specialists, personnel of the BYU-New World Archaeological Foundation who dug at the site have been unable to find any means of separating the congealed pages of the volumes; [^11] one fragment tantalizingly showed the presence of glyphs. [^12]) From their archaeological setting they date around A.D. 450, so this find has no direct significance for the Book of Mormon, but it does vividly remind us of the books, no doubt of the same type, that existed at Ammonihah in Alma's day. The vengeful Nehorite priests of the place burned not only the wives and children of the men who believed in Alma's preaching, but "they also brought forth their records which contained the holy scriptures, and cast them into the fire also, that they might be burned" (Alma 14:8). Other notable events also took place at Ammonihah: two great discourses by Alma and Amulek; their imprisonment and miraculous deliverance; the sudden destruction of the place by the Lamanites, which transformed the site into "the Desolation of Nehors"; and the later construction of fortifications around the city, which foiled a new Lamanite attack (Alma 49:14).

The consistency of the geographical information in the Book of Mormon is confirmed in the account of the attacks on Ammonihah. Around 80 B.C. just after Alma's experience there, "the Lamanites had come in upon the wilderness side, into the borders of the land, even into the city of Ammonihah" (Alma 16:2) and destroyed it. Nine years later they came in by the same route, expecting easy pickings against the partially rebuilt city (Alma 49:1-3). In both cases, it is clear, the Lamanite force had journeyed from the land of Nephi northward along the coastal wilderness strip on the west of the land of Zarahemla" (Alma 22:28); the Nephites never defended that zone, it seems. (They probably never even occupied it seriously, for their record mentions no settlement, no event there; see map 10.) When the attackers got far enough northward, they "went over into the borders of the land of Zarahemla, and fell upon the people who were in the land of Ammonihah" (Alma 25:2). The "over" is precisely correct, for they would have had to cross the western wilderness chain of mountains from the coast to get to Ammonihah, the first major city they came to on the main route. The western Sierra Madre range can be seen on the skyline from Mirador (compare map 10) . The fit of text to terrain would be difficult to improve.

One of these attacks positions another city, Noah, in relation to Ammonihah. As the enemy came upon Ammonihah the second time, they were shocked to discover that chief captain Moroni had fortified the place (Alma 49:4). Frustrated there, they moved farther inland (verse 12) to Noah. The earlier attack had overrun Ammonihah and then carried beyond far enough to capture some prisoners "around the borders of Noah" (Alma 16:3). Moroni guessed that Noah would again be their alternative target, and he was right. These two incidents indicate that Noah was the next city as one came from the west past Arnmonihah on the way toward the "capital parts" along the big river. The logical candidate to meet these requirements is Ocozocuautla, a major archaeological site near the modern community of that name. Like Mirador, it is near the modern highway, which parallels the ancient route. This settlement too has been investigated by the BYU-NWAF. The results show another quite impressive center that was flourishing modestly at about the time the Lamanites attacked. [^13]

When Alma was on his preaching tour, he at first departed from Ammonihah toward another city, Aaron (Alma 8:13). No mention was made of Noah then. It is apparent that Aaron lay in a somewhat different direction. Likely Alma at first followed the route toward Ocozocuautla/Noah but branched off toward Aaron before reaching Noah. Later, however, when he and Amulek "came out" of the Ammonihah valley and over the intervening elevation heading to Sidom, they would have passed through Noah (see map 10).

Alma never did reach the city Aaron on his journey. While on the road he was turned back by an angel's command to teach again in Ammonihah. But our picture of overall Nephite geography is clarified by consideration of Aaron's position. (This matter was considered briefly in chapter 1.) According to Alma 50:14, the region administered from Aaron abutted on Nephihah's territory, although the latter city was down in the east lowlands (Alma 50:14; 59:5). So we see that Aaron is linked both with Arnmonihah, to the north and west of Zarahemla, and with Nephihah, on the eastern and southern limit of Zarahemla-controlled territory. At least one reconstruction of Book of Mormon geography some years ago found these references to Aaron irreconcilable, concluding that two Aarons must be involved. Not so, it turns out. As we saw in chapter 1, with Ammonihah near the west wilderness and Nephihah in the eastern lowlands, Aaron, associated with both, would be about halfway between the seas.

In the northwesterly portion of the state of Chiapas we are considering, one ancient site dominated the middle sector of the land, San Isidro. It lies on the middle course of the Grijalva River. The BYU-NWAF dug at the site just before the waters of Nezahualcoyotl Dam inundated it some years ago. San Isidro was found to be the economic and political key to the whole Middle Grijalva zone and the largest site on the river downstream from Chiapa de Corzo. [^14] A person going from Mirador/Ammonihah toward the east lowlands would naturally pass through this city, traveling on or near the great river through the hilly tangle that separates the central depression from the lowlands. The road from Mirador to the east coast would head in a direction such that the traveler would miss Ocozocuautla, as Alma appears to have done at first. The entire arrangement of distances, topography, and drainage involving San Isidro provides a neat solution for the Aaron "problem." Incidentally, the excavation at San Isidro showed that it was not occupied during the first century B.C., the period following Alma's day. This would explain why we hear nothing further of the place through the period of wars and migrations covered later in the books of Alma and Helaman. [^15]

Sidom, to which Alma moved from Ammonihah, was apparently the center of an area more populous than Ammonihah and Noah. Neither of the latter two is mentioned as having a dependent hinterland. At Sidom, however, those responding to Alma's teaching and affiliating with his church "were many; for they did flock in from all the region round about Sidom, and were baptized" (Alma 15:14). Surely Sidom lay on the big river, the Sidon. The name linkage has to be significant; baptism was especially linked to the spot, and the demands of overall geography put it there. The impressive archaeological site of Chiapa de Corzo seems to be Sidom. During several ancient periods it was the largest city in Chiapas, with many dependent towns and villages in its nearby network. It would have been a rich and crucial target for the Lamanite leader Coriantumr, since it and its zone were the "most capital" part of the entire river basin (Helaman 1:27). As a focal point for trade and the ceremonial center for the entire lower part of the central depression, it would also be the logical place to which refugees from Ammonihah like Alma and Amulek would gravitate (Alma 15:1). A further interesting hint of the Sidom/ Chiapa de Corzo relationship lies in names. At the time of the Spanish conquest the name given Chiapa by Tzeltal Indians in the vicinity was zactan, "white lime." The Semitic word sidon may come from sid, "lime." [^16] The possibility of a linguistic link invites further study.

Chiapa de Corzo was almost surely occupied, since at least 1,000 B.C., by speakers of some version of the Zoque language. True Nephites, the actual descendants of Nephi, would have been unusual at either place. (Note that Amulek's first statement to Alma in Ammonihah was "I am a Nephite" [Alma 8:20, compare 10:2-3]. Obviously, most people there would not have said that; otherwise it would have been absurd for him to begin that way.) If I am right that Amlici and his forces had come from this area, there is some irony in Alma's preaching success at Sidom. He was, of course, a genuine Nephite, born and bred, one of the type Amlici had been trying to overthrow. Now he comes in and has a powerful impact on religious beliefs and practices, turning many people toward the (Santa Rosa) Zarahemla pattern.

By the time Alma reached Sidom he had completed two-thirds of a circuit around the central depression and was ready to go back home. (A reasonable guess why he never went on to Aaron is that events at Ammonihah and Sidom had used up the time he had allotted for his tour, perhaps determined by anticipation of seasonal bad weather.) With Amulek along, Alma left Sidom and "came over" to the city of Zarahemla (Alma 15:18). No significant population centers are mentioned en route. In the Book of Mormon the language "came over" plausibly refers to travel across an intervening elevation. The standard, sensible route from Sidom/Chiapa de Corzo would indeed have been "over," via the highlands, east of rather than along the river. The higher route provided smoother traveling and was much cooler. Movement alongside the river would have been interrupted by bluffs and ravines or would have passed through difficult Angostura canyon. Besides, the hot climate at the bottom of the confined valley would cause discomfort. Once more the modern highway, seeking out the easier route, parallels the ancient way up through the highlands. Alma and Amulek would have ascended from Chiapa de Corzo to the 7,000-foot level, around San Cristobal de Las Casas, an area that archaeological investigation shows was settled only lightly if at all in their time. [^17] They would press on through the Teopisca Valley before dropping down to the river just downstream from Zarahemla. Map 10 shows the likely route, probably about the same one taken earlier by Amlici and his rebel army to reach the hill Amnihu.

Every Book of Mormon statement about the setting of Alma's journey works out consistently on this geographical scene. So do the dates of occupation of the ancient sites mentioned, as far as present information allows us to check. In addition, certain social and cultural parallels are revealed in the story. We'll check their consistency next.

Trends in Nephite Social Structure

The expanding range of Zarahemla's influence demanded and produced important changes in the life lived in simpler times. King Benjamin would have been shocked by the role of paid lawyers, yet such specialists had an acknowledged place in society when Alma visited Ammonihah (Alma 10:14; 11:20). The structure of governmental administration also had to grow as population and distances increased. Benjamin seems not to have had even a minimal staff; but a set of functionaries necessarily served Mosiah, his successor (Mosiah 29:1, 4). The size of government grew enormously in the next generation, for Moroni made clear in his complaints to Pahoran during the Amalickiahite war that the number of governmental officials was great (Alma 60:7-8, 11, 21-22, 33). A century later the text is even more explicit that there were "many officers" (3 Nephi 6:11).

The differentiation of specialists in government was accompanied by the rise of professional priests. As early as the beginning of rule by the Nephite judges, Nehor, the prototype preacher-for-profit, was executed in hopes of staunching "priestcraft," but that did not stop the trend; "there were many who . . . went forth preaching false doctrines . . . for the sake of riches and honor" (Alma 1:16). And in all likelihood, full-time special roles such as craftsmen and merchants were also stimulated by the technical and social developments indicated in Alma 1:29 and Helaman 6:11. By the end of the first quarter century A.D., we are told there were "many merchants" (3 Nephi 6:11).

Part of the social difference arising at this period was due to the increasing significance of priests. The case of the Zoramites is clear; their religious leaders, as part of the wealthier stratum of society, systematically exploited the lay population (Alma 31:23-32:5). The priests of Noah among the Zeniffites had followed the same course two generations earlier (Mosiah 11:3-6). Later priests repeatedly sought new people to exploit (Mosiah 23:25, 29-39; 24:1, 8-9; Alma 25:4-5). The professionalizing of the priest's role had been proposed by Nehor immediately prior to the Amlicite trouble, and subsequently the "Order of Nehor" grew in popularity (Alma 1:1, 3, 12, 16; 14:16; 16:11; 24:28). Amlici himself, who wanted to be king over the Nephites, was apparently a believer in the principles behind the Nehor cult, "he being a very cunning man, yea, a wise man as to the wisdom of the world" (Alma 2:1). The Nephite priests were accused by Korihor, a dissident with a Jaredite name, which suggests connection to an ancient tradition of exploiting the people (Alma 30:23). It was false in that case, but the fact that such a charge could make him popular (verse 18) means that some priests must have been in the habit of seeking power and wealth (Mosiah 27:3-5 implies there was basis for the charges). Perhaps the prime offenders were mainly the old-line "official" priests attached to the throne. These had nothing to do with Alma's church (Mosiah 27:1). No doubt they were connected with the sacrificial rites carried out under the law of Moses in connection with the institution of kingship (Mosiah 2:3; note the unspecified "ceremony" of Mosiah 19:24). Priests in Old Testament days were known to profit themselves through their offices.

Part of the power of the priests lay in their superior knowledge. Their control of ceremonial lore and the books preserving it allowed them to associate with and be part of the "power structure." That association would tend to lead them to share with the ruling elite the ambition to control society for their own ends (compare Mosiah 11:3-11).

The Amulonite and Amalekite priests blatantly played the power role among the Lamanites, taking advantage of their crucial position as experts in esoteric knowledge (Mosiah 24:1, 4-8). Before their conversion the younger Alma and the sons of King Mosiah were of a similar type—sons of the privileged class, wealthy, learned, and nominally religious. Alma "became a very wicked and an idolatrous man. And he was a man of many words, and did speak much flattery to the people" (Mosiah 27:8; my emphasis). All this points up how central the role of religious leader or priest was at this period in Nephite and Lamanite society. Every statement made above about functions and abuses of the priesthood could be, and probably has been, made in the scholarly literature concerning the priest's role in Mesoamerica. [^18]

The Nephites in Alma's day were setting out on a sequence of social development that would prove disastrous. Specialization, however, in skills was less significant to the direction the Nephites were going than was the rise of class differences. Even in "the church" Alma "saw great inequality among the people, some lifting themselves up with their pride, despising others, turning their backs upon the needy and the naked" (Alma 4:12). Continued for years, this process produced genuine social classes. Their rise is particularly clear among the Zoramites, where the "poor class" complained that the priests and the wealthy with "their costly apparel, and their ringlets, and their bracelets, and their ornaments of gold, and all their precious things" (Alma 31:28) had excluded them from the places of worship (Alma 32:2-5). As the trend matured, people came to be "distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning" (3 Nephi 6:12). Eventually, "there became a great inequality in all the land" (verse 14).

This development had not occurred overnight. A slow, inexorable process had produced the condition, which reached a climax just before Christ's advent. At that point there was a respite, due no doubt to the leveling effects of the great destruction and to general acceptance of the gospel of Christ. After an interval, however, the process began again. Within a few generations the expanding population once more separated according to rank and wealth, "and they began to be divided into classes" (4 Nephi 1:26). That pattern amplified itself until the extermination of the Nephites and continued afterward among surviving groups.

Of course, the Book of Mormon is not a social history. We see certain major developments in society reflected in occasional descriptions or indicators in the scripture, such as I have cited, but it is difficult to see the full picture. We could say, as the prophets did, that the people desired wickedness, but that seems more a description than an explanation. What immediate factors worked to push the Nephites in the fatal direction they proved unable to resist? What has been learned about Mesoamerican life sheds light on what was probably happening in Nephite society.

Geographical circumstances in Mesoamerica favored certain directions of social and political development. One key factor was that the most productive farming areas were small and were separate from other good areas; therefore, extensive nations continuously inhabiting wide stretches of territory did not develop, as they did in Eurasia. Each local area had its unique combination of temperature, soils, water, plants, seasons, and so on. Thus, agriculture, on which the social life and culture of a given locality was based, differed significantly from region to region. Long adaptation had brought each local group into effective adjustment with its special natural setting and had developed correspondingly different customs and ways of thinking. Mesoamerica was more a mosaic of regions—a quasi-archipelago of "islands" of culture amid a "sea" of wilderness—than a harmoniously integrated civilization.

Fragmentation produced a number of effects that compounded one another. First, land resources in any one area being limited, a rise in population could lead to conflict, as "have-not" peoples reached the limit supportable by the lands available to them. Second, these small-scale settlement units did not normally need, nor could they support, large political structures. Rule was usually in the hands of a dominant lineage, often of outside origin (they could be more objective about petty local disputes). The rulers were required, of course, to carry out certain administrative services for the local population (such as settling quarrels and organizing defense). Their dominance was anchored in religious tradition that justified their right to rule.

The mosaic pattern of culture and nature also meant that certain highly valued resources, such as green jadeite stones and precious feathers, were available only at a distance. Thus, trade was stimulated. However, the long distances separating centers meant that such commerce demanded heavy investment. The ones capable of organizing and controlling it were the elite lineages, a case of the rich getting richer. Trade frequently loomed as so large a concern that it restrained the tendency to war between regions, because the elites cultivated diplomatic relationships with their peers in other lands in order to protect their merchants. A network of elites thus tended to build up, transcending local boundaries, members of which "scratched each other's backs."

However, life was not coldly secular. Religion was infused into nearly every aspect of group life. In those times technology was so far lacking in its ability to overcome difficult and unpredictable natural problems that all Mesoamerican peoples, indeed all ancient peoples, felt they must acknowledge their dependence on divine power and cultivate its intervention on their behalf. That concern was usually manifested through elaborate public ceremonies in the charge of the numerous priests. Obviously this sketch is a vastly oversimplified version of the varied reality of Mesoamerican life, [^19] but, like a parable, it is still useful as a learning device.

Under these constraining forces of geography and culture, dominant lineages and leaders rose and fell regularly. Beneath those ebbs and flows a fundamental folk population continued quietly. The commoners had regard for priests and rulers only as they could not escape the necessity. Mesoamerican "history" consists of the complex, still unintegrated record of elites competing for power and glory. That spotty sequence was projected on a background of little-changing folk life.

The general pattern so characteristic of Mesoamerica developed among the Nephites on either side of Alma's time. Looking at the scripture to detect those social factors among its people may seem inappropriately coldblooded to some religious people. Is scripture not, they ask, a religious record? Indeed it is, but religion is not a category divorced from life as it is lived. Moroni's title page to the Book of Mormon makes clear how much of its message is wrapped up in Nephite social history. Fourth Nephi and Mormon underline the point: noble possibilities open to the Nephites were compromised again and again because the people succumbed to social and cultural forces at play on them in their setting. Instead of being what they might have been, a people of God, they let themselves become mere Mesoamericans. Their experience may warn Latter-day Saints about our vulnerability to social and cultural pressures to Americanize, or Europeanize, or otherwise "adapt" to our surroundings in the same fatal fashion.

The archaeological evidence from Chiapas in southern Mexico, where we think Zarahemla was, definitely indicates an increase in social distinctions during this period from around 125 to 75 B.C. One tomb dated about then at Chiapa de Corzo included some 35 imported pottery vessels, which had come from as far away as 600 miles, from Oaxaca, southern Veracruz, Guatemala, and El Salvador. Only a wealthy, socially prominent person could have commanded the resources represented by this lavish cache. All earlier burials had contained only modest local offerings. [^20] This is but one bit of hard evidence of the social change process we detect going on according to both the Book of Mormon and the external sources of information.

A more intimate level of the society of Alma's time can be observed by examining how Alma made entry into the communities he visited, as shown by his situation at Ammonihah. On the prophet's first visit he seems to have had no personal contacts, which may help explain the short shrift given his message. Had Alma had close kinfolk in the city, no doubt he would have sought them out. Upon his return, however, he was at least able to locate a man of his own descent group. This was Amulek, an influential member of the local elite in Ammonihah, to whom he was directed by an angel. With such entree, Alma soon began to have some success. Probably many of his converts were among Amulek's own "kindred" (Alma 10:4, 11-12; 14:1). The nature of Alma and Amulek's relationship is notable. As mentioned earlier, when Alma had approached him, Amulek identified himself as a "Nephite" (Alma 8:20). "I am Amulek . . . a descendant of Nephi," Alma 10:2-3 reports him saying. Mosiah 17:2 gives Alma's descent in identical language. We understand, then, that the two were establishing that they belonged to the same lineage. A Mayan practice at the time of the Spanish conquest shows the same principle governing how to get along in strange territory: "When anyone finds himself in a strange region and in need, he has recourse to those of his name [kin group]; and if there are any, they receive him and treat him with all kindness." [^21] Missionary experience in many lands has taught Latter-day Saints that Alma would more likely succeed once he had made connection with a person who would trust him and could be an intermediary between him and some local people. Amulek filled the need nicely. Several bases for trust tied the two men together: they were both of the socially privileged class (Alma 10:4; 15:16, 18; Mosiah 29:42); both were members of the lineage of Nephi; and both were also believers in the same religion (Alma 8:20, 29). With Amulek's aid, a core of support, or at least tolerance, for Alma built up through Amulek's extensive kin network. We can suppose the Nephite prophet proceeded in the same way at Melek and Sidom. In a society of the sort described in the Book of Mormon, as in Mesoamerican groups generally, the building of social ties mostly went on through kinship connections. Only the most unfortunate in ancient Mexico were without a network of "many kindreds and friends" (3 Nephi 7:4). Trade and migration were normally facilitated by personal connections. The spread of religious ideas, or of any other aspect of culture, also proceeded mainly through such networks of influence. In fact, the structure of both Book of Mormon and Mesoamerican society at certain times consisted of little more than kinship bonds elaborated.

We find two social tendencies described in both the Mesoamerican sources and the scripture. On a basic level continuity is manifest, based on the local, ecologically tied pattern of social relationships that kept kinship and neighboring at the forefront. At the same time, men of ambition, power, and prestige constantly attempted to increase their advantage against the inertia of the folk institutions. Often they succeeded, only to end up bringing disaster on the unstable social system they had created.

A Glance Northward

The fact that Alma was interested in Ammonihah and Aaron, spots that would have seemed far northward from Zarahemla in his father's day, is indicative of a rising interest in the north. Soon it would culminate in major Nephite migrations past "the narrow neck" into the land northward. After moving from Nephi to Zarahemla, the survivors of Limhi's exploring group, which had visited the final Jaredite battlefield just before 125 B.C., undoubtedly told their story over and over again. The ancestors of chief Zarahemla surely had passed on their own traditional tales about the north, where their founders had landed before coming to Zarahemla (Alma 22:30-32). They had also encountered Coriantumr, the last surviving Jaredite ruler, north of the narrow neck (Omni 1:21). The passing down of Jaredite names like Morianton, Nehor, Korihor, and Coriantumr (even Moroni means "one from Moron" [^22]) and the transmission of maize already noted further witness that Mulek's descendants had absorbed cultural and genetic elements from the Jaredite era. Most of that stream of influence must have been brought to bear on the Nephites through the people of Zarahemla. By the time Limhi brought the twenty-four gold plates of Ether with him to Zarahemla, Mosiah felt translating them was urgent "because of the great anxiety of his people; for they were desirous beyond measure to know concerning those people who had been destroyed" (Mosiah 28:11-12, 17-18). Only a few years later chief commander Moroni had intense concern for the destroyed Jaredites, whom he called his "brethren," in the land northward (Alma 46:22, 17). And when Morianton, six years later, wanted to colonize the land northward, both he and Moroni already knew a good deal about the country (Alma 50:29, 32).

The ruins of La Venta, thought to be the city of Mulek. (Photo by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

This discussion has touched on several aspects of social structure revealed in the Book of Mormon record of Alma's time. The upshot is threefold: (1) Nephite society was engaged in a marked expansion in geographical extent and complexity; (2) there was societal continuity behind the dramatic changes; and (3) Book of Mormon society around 100 B.C. agrees basically with what we know about Mesoamerica; the geography and culture of that area shed light on the scriptural peoples at many points.

Cultural Contrasts

We have identified some interesting points of similarity between Book of Mormon and Mesoamerican social arrangements. We also see traditional ways of thinking about or interpreting the world that seem to tie the scriptural record to Mesoamerican cultures.

Two religious traditions are visible among the descendants of Lehi, just as among the Israelites in Palestine. In the latter case, the prophets taught a morally demanding, austere, and idealistic faith. It required adhering to specific rites, beliefs, and standards of behavior, yet it was not highly ceremonialized. Its continuing rival I call "naturalistic." It, too, aimed at a kind of salvation by tribal obedience. The prophets led some of the people of Israel to ennobling truths much above the level of their neighbors. Their system's chief rival can be called Baalism, mainly a collection of religious practices and beliefs passed on to the Israelites from the Canaanites. The effective main aim of Baal worship was the same as that of other naturalistic religious systems around the world—it sought to control nature to man's advantage, using principles akin to magic. Such religion at one level was always localized, each region having its own version of the cult. A ceremonially more spectacular version was supported by the people who dominated national life—the "Establishment." The monuments and artifacts having ceremonial or religious meaning that have survived from the Palestine of Old Testament times were largely products of ceremonial Baalism. [^23]

Tied to the nature-oriented ritual of the Baal cult was a still more intimate and fundamental layer of worship, mainly consisting of paying homage to the ancestors and observing rites of passage: birth, reaching adulthood, marriage, death. Witchcraft and shamanistic healing belonged to the same complex. Much of this semi-religious activity was carried out unofficially in family, kin, and neighborhood groups. [^24]

An altar and stela combination, characteristic of Izapa and related southern Mesoamerican sites of the Second Tradition. (Photo by James C. Christiansen used by permission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

These several public and private versions of Canaanite religion were connected through a unified worldview or conception of what man, nature, and the heavens are like. Most Near Easterners in Lehi's day shared a basic knowledge of the concepts and symbols commonly used to convey that worldview. (Just as today "modern" people the world over tend to share a common worldview centering on poorly understood mechanistic science, rationality, and materialism, even though they may differ rhetorically about certain details, like "socialism" or "capitalism.") The primal sea, the deity controlling rain and drought who was thought to be located at a sacred mountain, mythologically explained movements of sun and moon, the ritual awakening of vegetation in the spring, and so on—all those ideas central to Near Eastern thought were ordered and explained in a picture basically common to the minds of all the inhabitants of Palestine, whether Israelites or Canaanites.

The prophetic tradition opposed Baalism. Early Israel's devotion to the naturalistic tradition was shown at Mount Sinai, where the dancing, the golden calf, and other ritual expressions and religious ideas of Canaan and Egypt were manifest. Moses and the other prophets struggled against the cruder system of thought, trying to pull the people upward to a plane of meaning above the cultural background of their times. The chief theme of the religious history of Israel was the interplay between the prophets with their lofty view and the backsliding tendencies of the bulk of the Israelites.

The same situation prevailed in the promised land of America. In addition to what Lehi's descendants brought, the land contained a religious system comparable in important ways to that of the Canaanites. The religious ideals and behavior transmitted by the continuing Mesoamerican population would resonate with the naturalistic, Baalist elements in the minds and lives of the less faithful in Lehi's and Mulek's groups. That contrary worldview constantly challenged the Nephite prophets, who did their best to lift their people to gospel-level faith. Scholars of Mesoamerican cultures have identified elements of belief and practice that reflect a Mesoamerican world view quite similar to that of the Canaanites in the Old World and, for that matter, many other places in the world. [^25] The Nephites—here meaning the entire ethnically complex population dominated by the lineage of Nephi—kept drifting toward that substratum of magical worldview. The Almas, Nephis, and Mormons among them tried valiantly to lift this heterogeneous mass of people to a grander view of man and creation, but only rarely did they succeed for long.

The Old Testament prophets used the symbolic language of the Baalist worldview as a vehicle for teaching the people ("after the manner of their language," as Doctrine and Covenants 1:24 says; teaching has to begin where people's minds are, not where we wish they were). Prophets have done so in all ages without qualms, for symbolic language is necessary, particularly for talking of the unseen world, and it might as well be language people already know. So the Old Testament is full of allusions to sacred mountains, the great deep, doves, serpents, and what not, used to teach about Jehovah and about principles. Precisely the same phenomenon is visible in the Book of Mormon. Nephi taught about Christ as Redeemer by referring to him in terms of a major Mesoamerican (and Old Testament) sacred symbol, the elevated serpent who blesses [^26] (Helaman 8:13-16; Alma 33:19-22; John 3:14; Numbers 21:9).

When Alma taught the Zoramites a lesson in faith by referring to the tree of life sprouting from the heart (Alma 32:28-43), he was using Mesoamerican religious imagery. [^27] As we have already seen, the ideas of pure water and the primal sea beneath the surface of the earth had been employed as a language of religious instruction a generation earlier by Alma's father. Tradition or culture can be used for good or evil, to teach the gospel or Baalism. The cultural symbols in use among Nephites and Lamanites may look to us as strange as those in the Book of Revelation. But in both cases the symbols are only tools, not substance. The representation of a serpent may be used by respectable prophets or by benighted priests. We can expect that Nephite ideas and phrasings would fit within the Mesoamerican context. Yet isolated concepts or symbols cannot tell us the structure in which they all made sense. The Book of Mormon shows us that structure—a rather pure version of the prophetic tradition. In the surviving native sources, we see glimpses of the naturalistic tradition.

A major tributary of the Sidon or Grijalva River, near its "headwaters" around Manti. (Photo by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

The Sidon or Grijalva at the lower end of the central depression of Chiapas. (Photo by James C. Christiansen used by permission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

The Mission of the Sons of Mosiah

The account of King Mosiah's sons and their friends preaching among the Lamanites in the land of Nephi displays further information on the arrangement of territories and natural features. Once more it proves possible to fit those scriptural features consistently and plausibly into the Guatemalan setting. We also see that social and cultural developments among the Lamanites parallel what was going on in Zarahemla. The characteristics of culture, history, and geography sketched in the scripture for the Nephites of the first century B.C. again fit with the Mesoamerican scheme of things.

Map 11. From Nephi to Zarahemla: The Missionary Journeys of Mosiah's Sons.

The missionaries proceeded up to the land of Nephi by a route that some of Alma's or Limhi's people probably had told them about. (See map 11.) But telling sometimes fails to convey adequate details about actuality. In this case the trip proved more difficult than previous journeys (Alma 17:7-9). The party finally stopped at a landmark junction where they knew they would have to separate to go to various destinations within the general land of Nephi. This spot was "in the borders of the land of the Lamanites" (Alma 17:13, 18). From there Ammon went directly to the land of Ishmael, and Aaron headed for the city of Jerusalem, while others in the group next showed up at a place called Ani-Anti. None of these spots had been mentioned in earlier discussions of the land. Probably they had all been settled systematically, at least by the Book of Mormon peoples, in the time since the departure of Limhi's and Alma's groups a generation earlier. The junction where the brothers parted is very plausibly Los Encuentros. This is both a present-day highway junction and also an ancient meeting point of paths from four directions.

In Ishmael Ammon became a servant to the local king, Lamoni, whom he converted in a remarkable manner (Alma 17:20-19:36). In Lamoni's company he started to travel "down to the land of Middoni," where his brethren had been imprisoned (Alma 20:7). En route they met Lamoni's father, ruler over the entire land of Nephi. A personal combat ensued. The result was that Ammon won for Lamoni independent sovereignty from the old monarch. Lamoni and Ammon then continued on their way to Middoni.

When the original missionary band split up, Aaron went directly to a land called Jerusalem, "away joining the borders of [what Alma had called] Mormon" (Alma 21:1). Nephite dissidents had led the Lamanites in building "a great city" there. (The place had been founded not long before; here is another case where the status of "great city" did not refer to the duration or size of a settlement but to its concept and layout.)

We saw earlier that Mormon best fits near the eastern end of Lake Atitlan, nearest to the city Lehi-Nephi (specifically at Panajachel or nearby). [^28] Jerusalem fits the sense of Alma 21:1-2 if it was located on the opposite side of the lake, which would still put it "near the borders" of Mormon. The likely spot is near Santiago Atitlan, on the extreme southwestern tip of Lake Atitlan. [^29] The lake was "obviously deified" in native thought; sixteenth-century Indians considered Lake Atitlan bottomless, a reminder of the great underground body of water with no bottom on which the Mesoamerican earth monster (equivalent to the Hebrew tannin or leviathan) was thought to float. [^30] Impressive volcanic cones tower on either side of Santiago Atitlan, completing the linkage of mountain and "deep." This Jerusalem had been consciously named after the city of the Jews. Symbols associated with Old World Jerusalem—the "deep," the peaks, waters to the "east," and other cosmological features—were used by Old Testament prophets like Isaiah, [^31] who so much interested these dissident Nephites (Mosiah 12:20-26). These symbols would have been on the minds of the founders who chose this site.

Along the entire shore of the lake, the most favorable spot for a city is on the relatively large piece of flat land around Santiago Atitlan. Boat commerce on the lake (a source of wealth for a community—compare Mosiah 24:5-7) centers in this area for good geographical reasons, as explained by McBryde. [^32] The spot was also close to the main areas of Lamanite population only a few miles away down in the hot but agriculturally rich piedmont zone. Ruins and monuments indicate that elaborate religious and art traditions existed in that foothill region in late B.C. times. [^33] The Jerusalem area is virtually an extension of the piedmont up to the lovely lakeshore. The new city no doubt represented symbolic and settlement concepts that the Amalekite and Lamanite priests had already got used to in the lower, hotter zone.

Let us recall that this Jerusalem was covered by waters at the time of the Savior's crucifixion (3 Nephi 9:7). Now, the level of Lake Atitlan has shifted dramatically—by as much as 60 feet within historical times, and up to 15 feet in a single year—so a city located on this shore could understandably be submerged quite abruptly. [^34] So several interesting and plausible reasons lead to our locating Jerusalem at this site.

Highland Guatemala, an area where Alma, Limhi, and the sons of Mosiah may have lived and labored. (Courtesy Richard Jones.)

Unsuccessful in his preaching at the new city, Aaron "came over" (Alma 21:11) to a village named Ani-Anti. Probably "came over" means that he walked across the foot of Volcan Toliman; the normal path from Santiago Atitlan to the next village runs over those lava outflows. At Ani-Anti he met some of his companions, who had arrived by another route. They must have gone the other way around the lake from their dispersal point, past the old "Mormon" area where Alma had hidden out. San Lucas Toliman, on the southeast extremity of the lake, fits the bill as Ani-Anti.

Aaron and his companions next went over to the land of Middoni, where Ammon and King Lamoni later found them in prison (Alma 20:30; 21:12). The geographical statements made by the Book of Mormon concerning Middoni are neatly accounted for if it was located in the valley of Antigua, Guatemala's picturesque colonial capital. Here two of the country's most impressive volcanic cones frame a narrow but lush valley, closely tied in its cultural history to the neighboring Nephi area. Devastating earthquakes and eruptions have periodically struck the place. Only informal archaeological investigations have been carried out in this valley so far. Abundant remains testify to a large population in Book of Mormon times, even though no major ruin has yet been discovered (one could well be deeply covered by volcanic ash). [^35] Incidentally, no city is mentioned in the land of Middoni by the scripture, only the "land."

The land called Ishmael, where Ammon had found Lamoni, fits in the Chimaltenango area. That would make it a logical first stop for the Nephite missionary after he separated from his brothers; the place is on the regular route to or from Nephi that the Zeniffites, Alma, and others had followed in earlier times.

We can detect an interesting overall configuration of these Lamanite lands when we read the summary tabulation of converted and nonconverted Lamanites in Alma 23:9-12 (compare 25:13). The converts all clustered around Lehi-Nephi, the principal city of the entire area since the days of father Nephi. This city, we have seen, very likely was located within the bounds of modern Guatemala City. Shilom and Shemlon were in the same valley. Ishmael was separated from Lehi-Nephi by a modest intervening plateau, the Midian of Alma 24:5, a logical rendezvous point. Placing Midian in this area (Sacatepequez) meets all the criteria. From Ishmael, Ammon and Lamoni would indeed have dropped "down" noticeably to Antigua/Middoni (Alma 20:7). The cities of Lemuel and Shimnilom are mentioned in a context to suggest they were in the vicinity of Lehi-Nephi, but neither is more than listed in passing, so we cannot locate them confidently. One or both could have been near Canchon, or in the Valley of Pinula, where ruins of correct date are found immediately east of the Valley of Guatemala. [^36]

Interestingly, this whole set of converted lands forms a "symbiotic region"—an ecologically connected territory whose economy naturally tended to be integrated. That may help explain why the Lamanites throughout this section came to act as a unit under the converted Lamanite king at Lehi-Nephi, the prime city.

The unconverted areas were in "the land of Amulon, and also in the land of Helam, and . . . in the land of Jerusalem, and in fine, in all the land round about" (Alma 24:1). Very likely the areas "round about" included the populous foothill area. There, at sites like Monte Alto and El Baul, considerable continuity with the old Olmec/Jaredite tradition appears in the archaeological remains. [^37] A different cultural tradition could have made those places especially resistant to missionizing.

I suspect there was a practical reason why the leaders in the peripheral areas opposed the missionaries and the converted king. His Anti-Nephi-Lehi people chose to "open a correspondence" (Alma 23:18) with the Nephites of Zarahemla through the Nephite missionaries. An interpretation of the situation in terms of Mesoamerican patterns leads to the following hypothesis. If political, economic, and religious cooperation were to break out between the king's people and the Nephites in Zarahemla, the ambitions of the Amalekite and Amulonite leaders for power and wealth would be threatened. The diehards would then face a potent rival, who would disrupt the south Guatemalan network of commerce (Mosiah 24:7). Direct ties between the highland region and the Nephite homeland would leave the competing Amalekite/Amulonite area out of "the action." [^38] While this idea is only speculative, it is completely Mesoamerican, and it also helps explain Book of Mormon events.

The Lamanites who were angry at the missionaries' influence eventually lashed out at the converts, even though they were ethnic brothers. They "came up" to the Nephi core area armed "for the purpose of destroying the king" (Alma 24:20). The vengeance-seeking army probably came from the foothill zone along the normal attack route up through Shemlon/Amatitlan.

Lamanite Kingship

The lands where the sons of Mosiah worked were limited to a restricted part of the highlands, yet the geographical description of the realm under the rule of the king of the Lamanites refers to areas stretching from east sea to west sea (Alma 22).

First, a time sequence is laid out for us in the record. The earliest Lamanite domain was strictly on the west coast. From there the Lamanites exerted pressure on the early Nephites around the city of Nephi and ended up taking control of that zone. By the close of the Zeniffite period, around 125 B.C., Lamanite dominance had spread to include Helam and Amulon. Still later, during the missionary period, lakeside Jerusalem and other peripheral areas had been settled. The culmination of expansion is reported around 80 B.C., when Alma 22:27 informs us that the Lamanite king had some sort of sovereignty over peoples in regions "bordering even to the sea, on the east and on the west." The picture that archaeology and the historical sources permit us to paint at this time suggests how rulership could have worked, but it provides no positive indication that such dominion was a reality in 80 B.C. So a degree of cultural and linguistic similarity is evident through nearly all the areas from the Pacific coast of Guatemala to the Gulf of Campeche [^39] (the east sea and west sea of the Book of Mormon).

The king's rule at a distance cannot have been based on a coercive apparatus. When the chips were down, he could not even control people in the highland areas near his capital. For example, his son and subordinate local ruler Lamoni told him no when he felt strongly on a point, even though the son "feared to offend him" (Alma 20:11; compare 24:2). "Government" as we think of it was restricted in those times by such factors as lack of routine communications, weak recordkeeping, and poorly developed administrative procedures. Instead of sending subordinates to call Lamoni to account, the king made the trip alone to do it, and he fought Ammon personally. No hint is given that he even had any servants along. The great king's governing role consisted mainly of conferring credentials on subordinate chiefs or "kings" like his sons (Mosiah 24:2; Alma 20:9). Those local leaders were indeed bound to him in return, probably most visibly through some sort of tribute system (a partial equivalent of taxation in modern times). The title "king" was easily claimed (see Alma 2:9; 47:6; 3 Nephi 7:9), but a ruler's powers were limited at best; Mosiah 20:25 emphasizes how limited. These leaders were really "chiefs" in today's social science jargon, for they lacked the structure and enforcement powers characteristic of real state government. [^40] Their strength was reinforced especially by the symbols surrounding the office of king. Rituals, myths, and sacred paraphernalia conferred on a legitimate "king" a degree and quality of power in the eyes of the people that no army alone could produce. Yet it would be a mistake to downplay the Lamanite monarchical institution too much. For example, one of the only two uses of the term "palace" in the Book of Mormon occurs in reference to the Lamanite king. (Apparently Zarahemla never had a "palace" worth mentioning.) Mere existence of this term points to a significant concept of kingship, [^41] even though the practice may have fallen short. If one location in southern Mesoamerica might have been the seat of a king with a palace and nominal powers extending from sea to sea, it would have been Kaminaljuyu, or Nephi. At the time we are talking about, it was clearly the premier site throughout the area from Campeche to El Salvador.

The best analysis of what was going on in highland Guatemala at the time spoken of in the books of Mosiah and Alma is by Southern Methodist University professor David Freidel. He considers it clear "that social life and public art reached a peak during the Late Preclassic period (300 B.C.-A.D. 100)." [^42] During the rest of pre-Columbian history the area was "balkanized" in political fragments that never again attained even the limited degree of unity enjoyed in Mesoamerica 1,900 years ago. [^43] The symbols of rulership and worship represented in public art are remarkably abundant and varied at Kaminaljuyu. "Apparently sculptors from many localities resided and worked in this cosmopolitan center." Moreover, the "rich variety of sculpture found at Kaminaljuyu" no doubt indicates "significant interaction between polities." [^44] Lack of a "shared ideology and religion" suggests that there was no single, stable political structure mediating among the separate groups or tribes. "Maintenance of each [political unit] was based on a related but separate and equal status." Yet Dr. Freidel detects "incipient development of a regional elite" identifying itself as an overarching social entity that provided a limited measure of unity. [^45] This highland development centered at Kaminaljuyu soon stimulated similar effects in the lowlands to the north in "the east." Thereafter, the highlands were the probable source of the symbols that became popular in the lowlands and the continued source of new imagery. [^46]

A sensitive reading of the Book of Mormon confirms these points. Nephi/Kaminaljuyu was the dominant cultural center to which surrounding localized cultures looked, but its political history was checkered—early and small-scale "Nephis" as kings, then disruption, neglect of the city (Mosiah 9:7-8) during a half-hearted Lamanite occupation, takeover by the Zeniffites, then loose Lamanite kingship followed by a Nephite-influenced Anti-Nephi-Lehi interlude, and so on. At the time the Nephite missionaries were there (Alma 17-22, around 90 B.C.), a politically weak "king over all the land" charismatically united the greater land of Nephi (Guatemala). Ideas and symbols (for example, the "Great Spirit" of Alma 18-19) as well as friendship and kinship relations (Alma 20:4, 9), rather than formal administrative bonds, were the links holding together the "balkanized" political scene. Furthermore, key ideas are said to have moved out of the highland Nephi center to stimulate political developments in the lowlands (as in Alma 25:5-11; 43:4-7).

Our picture of Lamanite kingship is clarified further by the verb in Mosiah 24:2: "The king of the Lamanites had appointed kings over all these lands." This rings a Mesoamerican bell. Traditions referring back as early as A.D. 700 picture local kings as receiving their commissions to reign from a central ruler in "Tulan." [^47] Many different centers were recognized as Tulans at different times, but one thing was always required: would-be local rulers had to get a legitimate "franchise" from the prime Tulan of the time. "In Tulan . . . they received their power and sovereignty," says the Popol Vuh. [^48] The most famous Tulan was the metropolis of Teotihuacan. The practice of delegating local kingship charters might have stemmed from there, beginning a couple of centuries A.D. Yet the custom could be still older. Jacinto Quirarte has demonstrated that a particular set of art symbols that had long been considered central in Teotihuacan culture actually first appeared at Izapa in Chiapas, or at Kaminaljuyu, as early as the first century B.C. [^49] That is precisely the time when the Lamanite king we have described ruled. Might Teotihuacan's status as "Tulan," the center of rulership, have had a Guatemalan precedent? If the king's city of Lehi-Nephi was then functionally a Tulan, and if he had the power to appoint local rulers throughout a territory that stretched from sea to sea, then the Book of Mormon account takes on a new light. Instead of the king's widespread reign being an anomaly, a problem we cannot handle, the scripture becomes a clue that a profoundly important Mesoamerican pattern existed a little earlier than has been traced by the scholars. [^50]

Archaeologists may well object that the diversity of local art and artifacts is too great to allow for any measure of political interaction of the kind just sketched. In the immediate pre-Spanish period in Guatemala, however, local variations in ceramic and artifact styles mask what we know from lineage histories to have been rather wide and real political unity. [^51] The reverse is also true—styles often crossed ethnic, political, and linguistic boundaries. Obviously the criteria for determining political interaction on the basis of material remains are still uncertain.

The epic of the missionary party ended with one more Nephite-led retreat from the Guatemala Nephi highlands. The converted Lamanites "departed out of the land, and came over [the Cuchumatanes massif] near the borders of the land" of Zarahemla (Alma 27:14). They camped there, somewhere above Manti, while their Nephite guides went ahead to Zarahemla to assess the reception that awaited them. En route the sons of Mosiah met their old friend Alma, on his way from Gideon to Manti. Fourteen years of joy and pain were recounted on the spot (Alma 17:1-27). Then they all, including Alma the high priest, traveled to Zarahemla. In the end, the news in the capital was good. The Anti-Nephi-Lehis, or people of Ammon, as they now came to be called, were given a land of their own, Jershon. Informed of that, they moved through Gideon (Comitan Valley), along the upland route, and down to their new home near the east sea without ever seeing Zarahemla itself.

Meeting the Archaeologist Halfway

The section of the Book of Mormon we have just been discussing raises several points that relate to material remains that archaeologists examine. Sometimes the significance of their findings proves elusive in relation to the scriptural text. A few more comparisons between the archaeological and textual materials may sharpen our sensitivity to the methodological problems involved and will underline the need for caution in handling both sorts of data.

Linen and silk are textiles mentioned in the Book of Mormon (Alma 4:6). Neither fabric as we now know them was found in Mesoamerica at the coming of the Spaniards. The problem might be no more than linguistic. The redoubtable Bernal Diaz, who served with Cortez in the initial wave of conquest, described native Mexican garments made of "henequen which is like linen." [^52] The fiber of the maguey plant, from which henequen was manufactured, closely resembles the flax fiber used to make European linen. Several kinds of "silk," too, were reported by the conquerors. One kind was of thread spun from the fine hair on the bellies of rabbits. Padre Motolinia also reported the presence of a wild silkworm, although he thought the Indians did not make use of the cocoons. But other reports indicate that wild silk was spun and woven in certain areas of Mesoamerica. Another type came from the pod of the ceiba tree. [^53] We may never discover actual remains of these fabrics, but at least the use of the words in the Book of Mormon now seems to offer no problem.

The "money" of Alma 11 is another story, however. It would be nice to say that the problem has been solved, but that is not true. Hugh Nibley has given a sensible introduction to the difficult topic of "What is money?" from a Near Eastern perspective. [^54] But the question remains, was money used in Mesoamerica, the land of the Book of Mormon? No reliable data show that minted coins were used anywhere in the pre-Columbian New World, despite rare, puzzling finds of Old World coins. [^55] But money need not take the form of coins. It can be any agreed-upon medium in standard units that serves as a public measure of value. Several kinds of money in this sense were known in Mesoamerica. The commonest was the cacao bean, which continued in use at least up to fifty years ago. (People could literally drink up their money then, in the form of cocoa!) [^56] The system reported in the Book of Alma followed Israelite practice before the Babylonian Exile in that the money units employed (such as the shekel) were weight units of metal rather than standardized coins. Minted coins apparently came into use in Palestine only after Lehi left there. Certainly the "money" units given in Alma 11 were proportionate weights. The inappropriate term "coinage" in the chapter heading is an error due to nineteenth century editing, not a part of the ancient text. Research has also shown recently that relating measures of grain to values of precious metal, in the manner of Alma 11:4-19, was an Egyptian practice. [^57] Whether there was Mesoamerican weighed money we cannot say. No serious study of money usage there has ever been done. As I explain at length in chapter 7, the entire subject of metals in Mesoamerica in Book of Mormon times needs far more research to fill major gaps in our knowledge. South American metallurgy is much better understood than that in Mexico and Guatemala, yet startling finds are turning up even in that "well-known" area. Most recently a burial containing 12,000 pieces of metal "money" (though not coins as such) was found in Ecuador, for the first time confirming that some ancient South Americans had the idea of accumulating a fortune in more or less standard units of metal wealth. [^58] Such a startling find in Mesoamerica could change our present limited ideas.

Another aspect of ancient culture also deserves clarification on the basis of archaeology. Three types of religious places are mentioned in the Book of Mormon: temples, sanctuaries, and synagogues. These places of worship ought to leave remains, shouldn't they? We gave brief consideration to temples in the previous chapter, but not to the other two types. A sanctuary is usually considered a structure at a revered spot where unscheduled individual and family worship can take place. In Palestine, Bethel was such a place, in use at least from the time of Abraham's worship there (Genesis 12:8; 28:16-22) to Lehi's day (2 Kings 23:15). The Israelites who came to America would no doubt have followed the practice of designating and worshipping at sanctuaries. Some of these would have existed in homes or residential localities; believers in God were expected "to call on his name and confess their sins before him," "watching and praying continually" (Alma 15:17; 17:4). Native homes in many parts of Mesoamerica today continue a pre-Columbian custom of devoting a corner of the house to quiet, daily rituals. Hilltops too have served, and still do, as sanctuaries where individuals leave offerings. Waterholes and lakes are also frequent worship spots. [^59] Pre-Columbian stone monuments themselves are considered sacred today in many localities. People resort there to confess sins and pray for forgiveness. [^60] Lamanite and Nephite sanctuaries might have taken any of these forms.

On that note we should return to the previous discussion of prophetic versus Baalist religion. Consistently, worship led by the prophets deemphasized (though it did not exclude) sacred objects and places. Its main concerns were spiritual results rather than physical setting. Such religious furniture as archaeologists have recovered in Palestine seems to derive mostly from the nonprophetic tradition. In the American promised land, we would expect a similar distinction. The esoteric sculptures and paintings of ancient Mesoamerica were nearly all of some religious significance, it is supposed, but they probably had little or no place in the worship of Benjamin or Alma. Of course, before his conversion the younger Alma had been an idolatrous man (Mosiah 27:8), as had his father before him (Mosiah 11:7; 17:2). Visitors to the museums of Mesoamerica or to great sites like Teotihuacan may see remains aplenty of the baser worship, but we should not expect to connect those objects directly with the religion of the Nephite prophets. It is of interest, then, that monumental religious art is largely absent in those areas of Chiapas that I associate with the Nephite presence during Book of Mormon times. On the contrary, the places of prime Lamanite inhabitation, according to this geographical interpretation, do yield many religious images, particularly during the times when the Book of Mormon tells us that religious practices were decadent. [^61]

What were synagogues? They are mentioned among both Nephites and the Lamanites under dissident Nephite influence (Alma 21:4-5; 32:1-12; Helaman 3:9, 14; Moroni 7:1). Would they have left ruins that might have been discovered? At first glance the very idea seems to pose a problem for the Book of Mormon. Many historians have maintained that synagogues were not known among the Jews until well after Lehi had left Palestine. Another group of experts, however, now argue that the synagogue predated Lehi's departure. They propose that when King Josiah carried out his sweeping reforms of Jewish worship in order to clean out pagan intrusions, he closed the old sanctuaries (2 Kings 23). "The centralization of worship in Jerusalem from 621 B.C. onwards, with many Jews thereby denied a share in temple worship, must inevitably have led to the establishment of non-sacrificial places of assembly" [^62]—in effect, synagogues. So at least the concept of the synagogue could well have been around for a generation by the time First Nephi begins. Later synagogues served as community centers open to any who wished to worship or speak (compare Alma 26:29). According to the Babylonian Talmud, the Jewish synagogue was normally oriented to face Jerusalem and was also located on the highest place in town and near water. [^63] A synagogue was not necessarily a building; it might be only an enclosure.

Structures for seemingly sacred purposes that meet most of the Talmudic criteria existed in early Mesoamerican sites. It remains for some ambitious student to make detailed comparisons. That study should look carefully at names as well as ruins. The term synagogue is difficult to distinguish in concept from related terms used in the Book of Mormon. The "churches" set up by Alma in Zarahemla, and also the "assembly" of the Lamanites (Alma 21:16), were apparently functional parallels to synagogues. Several Old Testament terms signify "congregation" or "assembly" or the meeting place for such a group, the terms overlapping in translation. One of those words has come to be translated "synagogue," but anciently words like synagogue, ekklesia, kenishta, and 'eda were translated quite freely as though they were equivalent. [^64] Thus, we may find that whatever distinguished a synagogue from a local church by Nephite standards was so subtle that we will be unable to tell them apart on the basis of their remains.

Altars are mentioned twice in the Book of Mormon (Alma 15:17; 17:4). They ought to be identifiable in the archaeological remains. In fact, the Mesoamerican use of an altar together with a stela apparently originated on the Pacific coast of Guatemala. [^65] Perhaps this complex will prove to be related to that in use in Israelite Palestine in Lehi's day, where a memorial stela (massebah) was erected for a deceased person at a "high place" or sacred mound where sacrifices were offered; for "each bamoth [high place or sacred mound] had to have its altar." [^66] The stela-altar-sacred-mound complex is, of course, characteristic in the Mesoamerican Second Tradition.

Delicate pots of "curious workmanship" like this have been found as offerings in "sepulchres" such as the one constructed for the king of the Lamanites in the first century B.C. (See Alma 19:1.) (Photo by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

Another construction showing up in the remains of the past is what the Book of Mormon calls a "sepulchre." The Lamanite queen asked Ammon if her unconscious spouse, Lamoni, should be interred in one of these, "which they had made for the purpose of burying their dead" (Alma 19:1, 5). At Kaminaljuyu tombs of that very time period have been excavated that give us a good idea of what a Lamanite "sepulchre" probably looked like. Tomb I in Mound E-III-3 was found to contain the remains of some highly honored person. The tomb had been dug down into the top of the artificial mountain, the largest single earthen platform at the dead city. Terraces or benches had been left along the walls of the hole cut down into the clay fill. The richly dressed corpse had been carried there on a litter, no doubt accompanied by an extensive procession of mourners (compare Alma 18:43). After the litter bearing the corpse, head to the south, had been carefully placed in the center of the burial chamber, rich furnishings and equipment for use in the life after death were placed on and around the body. When the ceremony was completed, a flat timber roof was constructed and covered with clay fill. (Eventually the timbers rotted, whereupon more clay was added to fill in the depression and make the surface smooth on top. Still later, tomb robbers dug down to look for precious ornaments.) In a second tomb in the same mound, three skeletons were found in addition to the principal one. Their condition and position suggested they had been sacrificed to accompany the deceased leader. Perhaps they were slaves [^67] (compare Mosiah 7:15; Alma 17:28; 27:8).

We see points at which archaeological findings may touch directly upon statements in the Book of Mormon. Meeting the archaeologist halfway is probably a good idea, but perhaps he will need to come even further if his work is to be significant to elucidate properly the written record.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare Alma 51:33 and 52:28 concerning enervating lowland heat with the data on disastrous attempts in Spanish colonial times at resettlement of highlanders at low altitudes. They often would "quickly get sick and die." Felix W. McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography of Southwest Guatemala, SISA 4 (1945), p. 11.
[^2] A parallel, though of course not necessarily connected, practice of the same manner of naming rulers is reported from highland Guatemala, where a famous Quichean prince, Keh Nay, furnished the name: "Until the Spaniards came, the kings had this name of Keh Nay, because it is like 'Caesars' among the natives." Munro S. Edmonson, The Book of Counsel: The Popol Vuh of the Quiche Maya of Guatemala, MARI 35 (1971), p. 230, quoting a native source.
[^3] Sylvanus G. Morley, The Ancient Maya, 2nd ed. (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1947), plate 19. A temporary exception may have occurred in Late Classic times, according to Donald L. Brockington in "The Archaeological Sequence from Sipolite, Oaxaca, Mexico" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin, 1966). Also, a private communication from Brockington, cited in P. and S. Turner, Chontal to Spanish-English and Spanish to Chontal Dictionary (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1971), p. 335, reporting coastal Oaxaca sites with Late Classic ceramics like those of Tabasco, presumably produced by Mayan speakers. Compare Michael D. Coe's interpretation that a "highly Mayoid" culture occupied the Gulf Coast area in the Late Classic (Archaeological Synthesis of Southern Veracruz and Tabasco, HMAI 3, part 2 [1965], p. 705), but this too was temporary.
[^4] Edward B. Sisson, "Settlement Patterns and Land Use in the Northeastern Chontalpa, Tabasco, Mexico: A Progress Report," Ceramica de Cultura Maya, no. 6 (1970), pp. 41-54.
[^5] Philip Drucker and Eduardo Contreras, "Site Patterns in the Eastern Part of Olmec Territory," Journal of the Washington Academy of Sciences 43 (1953):392-93; Thomas A. Lee, Jr., "The Historical Routes of Tabasco and Northern Chiapas and Their Relationship to Early Cultural Developments in Central Chiapas," in Mesoamerican Communication Routes and Cultural Contacts, ed. Thomas A. Lee, Jr., and Carlos Navarrete, NWAF 40 (1978), p. 54.
[^6] Philip Drucker, La Venta, Tabasco. A Study of Olmec Ceramics and Art, Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 153 (1952), p. 5.
[^7] Jorge L. Tamayo, in collaboration with Robert C. West, The Hydrography of Middle America, in HMAI 1 (1964), p. 93; Lee, "Historical Routes," p. 57.
[^8] Rene R. Gadacz, Pre-Spanish Commerce in the Gulf Coast Lowlands of Mexico (Calgary, Alberta: Western Publishers, 1979), p. 50.
[^9] Sisson, "Settlement Patterns," p. 49.
[^10] F. V. Scholes and R. L. Roys, The Maya Chontal Indians of Acalan Tixchel, CIWP 560 (1948), pp. 3, 18.
[^11] Personal communication, Philip Drucker, 1953.
[^12] Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Bernal Diaz Chronicles, trans. and ed. A. Idell (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1956), pp. 49-50.
[^13] Site T-2 is appropriately placed for one. Some of the nine or ten surrounding sites will probably prove of the same period; many of them are not yet dated. Sisson, "Settlement Patterns."
[^14] A recent newspaper article is symptomatic of the tendency in discussions of Mesoamerican geography even today. Discussing oil prospects in Belize (formerly British Honduras), a reporter refers to dramatic oil discoveries "north of here" in Mexico. In fact, the discoveries were in the states of Chiapas and Tabasco, straight west of Belize; of course the area referred to is northward (toward Mexico City). Christian Science Monitor, 16 July 1977, p. 7.
[^15] Roman Pina Chan and Carlos Navarrete, Archaeological Research in the Lower Grijalva River Region, Tabasco and Chiapas, NWAF 22 (1967), pp. 3-11.
[^16] For parallels between their voyage and arrival and Mesoamerican traditions, see my article in The Improvement Era, "The Twig of the Cedar," 60 (May 1957):330-37.
[^17] Drifted dune sand covered the site after its Phase IV (last "Olmec"?) occupation, strongly suggesting abandonment after about 550 B.C. Philip Drucker, Robert F. Heizer, and Robert J. Squier, Excavations at La Venta, Tabasco, 1955, Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 170 (1959), pp. 81-82, 113, 218-30.
[^18] Philip Drucker in "The La Venta Olmec Support Area," in Kroeber Anthropological Society, Papers 25 (Fall 1961), pp. 59-72, describes it in detail.
[^19] Matthew W. Stirling, "Great Stone Faces of the Mexican Jungle," National Geographic Magazine 78 (September 1940):327.
[^20] See note on the subject in Chapter 3 referring to Ignacio Bernal, The Olmec World (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969), p. 59.
[^21] Constance Irwin, Fair Gods and Stone Faces (New York: St. Martins, 1963).
[^22] Gareth W. Lowe, Thomas A. Lee, Jr., and Eduardo Martinez Espinosa, Izapa: An Introduction to the Ruins and Monuments, NWAF 31 (1982), p. 306.
[^23] R. Sidrys, J. Andreson, and D. Marcucci, "Obsidian Sources in the Maya Area," Journal of New World Archaeology 1, no. 5 (1976):1-13, Fred W. Nelson and Barbara Voorhies, "Trace Element Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts from Three Shell Midden Sites in the Littoral Zone, Chiapas, Mexico," American Antiquity 45 (1980):540-50. El Chayal is not the only possible obsidian source near Kaminaljuyu, as these references make clear, but it is the most likely one.
[^24] Interestingly, George Kubler's picture of pilgrimage centers, in conjunction with the loose sense of territoriality evident in Mesoamerican cultures, resonates with the tone of the Book of Mormon. He suggests that trade developed along pilgrimage routes to holy sanctuaries "maintained by priestly corporations," as was more or less the case in later Mesoamerica. He continues: "Thus if we were to imagine the mental geography of Pre-Classic travelers, it would resemble a network of paths rather than a jigsaw map, and it would display the nodes and crossroads more prominently than the network or the boundaries. Unpopulated deserts and mountains would be less important than towns and their alignment along rivers and roads. Thus a Pre-Classic 'map' would have looked like points, and lines connecting them, rather than a 'map' of areas sharing boundaries." George Kubler, "Comments," in Observations on the Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica, ed. Robert F. Heizer and John A. Graham, UCAR 11 (1971), p. 160.
[^25] Pierre Agrinier, Mound 1A, Chiapa de Corzo, Chiapas, Mexico: A Late Preclassic Architectural Complex, NWAF 37 (1975), p. 41.
[^26] Lee, "Historical Routes," pp. 49-60; Carlos Navarrete, "The Pre-Hispanic System of Communications between Chiapas and Tabasco," in Mesoamerican Communication Routes and Cultural Contacts, ed. Thomas A. Lee, Jr., and Carlos Navarrete, NWAF 40 (1978), pp. 87-99.
[^27] Frans Blom and Gertrude Duby, La Selva Lacandona (Mexico: Editorial Cultura, 1957).
[^28] Leo Waibel, La Sierra Madre de Chiapas (Mexico: Sociedad de Geografia y Estadistica de Mexico, 1946), p. 216.
[^29] Carlos Navarrete traversed the same area but found even less, not even Mulleried's sites. "Un Reconocimiento de la Sierra Madre de Chiapas: Apuntes de un Diario de Campo," Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Centro de Estudios Mayas, Cuadernos 13 (1978).
[^30] Gareth W. Lowe, Archaeological Exploration of the Upper Grijalva River, Chiapas, Mexico, NAWF 2 (1959), p. 57, fig. 58c. Subsequent work shows sufficient connection between Izapa Late Preclassic ceramics and those of the Central Depression that the likelihood is seen of communication across the pass near Motozintla at that time and thus of at least some sites along that route then. Gareth W. Lowe, Thomas A. Lee, Jr., and Eduardo Martinez Espinosa, Izapa: An Introduction to the Ruins and Monuments, NWAF 31 (1982), p. 14.
[^31] Manuel Gamio, "Exploracion Economico-cultural en la Region Oncocercosa de Chiapas, Mexico," America Indigena 6, no. 3 (1946): mapa 3, based on data from Mullerried which showed "piramides" at three locations in the vicinity. Their presence demonstrates the ecological capability for significant sites, though no Preclassic sites have yet been reported.
[^32] Thomas A. Lee, Jr., A Preliminary Report of the First Phase of Excavations at Guajilar, Chiapas, 1976. Unpublished paper in files of the BYU-NWAF.
[^33] Donald E. Miller, La Libertad, A Major Middle and Late Preclassic Ceremonial Center in Chiapas Mexico: A Preliminary Report. Unpublished paper in the files of the BYU-NWAF. Miller tentatively ends inhabitation of the site at around 100 B.C. Andrew McDonald, who also examined the ceramics, believes the following phase is also represented (personal communication). Should that not be the case, Guajilar or Ojo de Agua might prove to have been the city of Manti.
[^34] David L. Webster, Defensive Earthworks at Becan, Campeche, Mexico: Implications for Maya Warfare, MARI 41 (1976), pp. 3, 113.
[^35] For example, Robert Wauchope, "Protohistoric Pottery of the Guatemala Highlands," in Monographs and Papers in Maya Archaeology, ed. W. R. Bullard, Jr., HUPM 61, part 2 (1970):99. Sanders noted: "Evidence is rapidly accumulating to demonstrate that Classic Mesoamerican societies in general . . . were considerably more militaristically oriented than was thought." William T. Sanders and Joseph W. Michels, Kaminaljuyu Project-1968 Season. Part 1: The Excavations, PSUO 2 (May 1969), p. 166; Claude F. Baudez and Pierre Becquelin, "Archeologie de Los Naranjos, Honduras," Mission Archaelogique et Ethnologique Francaise au Mexique, Etudes Mesoamericaines 2 (1973), pp. 3-4, 69. Angel Palerm was among the first to recognize the frequent occurrence of warfare in early Mesoamerica, in his "Notas Sobre las Construcciones Militares y la Guerra en Mesoamerica," Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Anales 8 (1954):123-34.
[^36] Webster, Defensive Earthworks, p. 95.
[^37] Florencia Muller, "Instrumental y Armas," in Antropologia, Teotihuacan. Onceava Mesa Redonda, vol. 1 (Mexico: Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia, 1966), pp. 232-37.
[^38] A. P. Maudslay, trans. and ed., Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico, 1517-1521 (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Cudahy, 1956), pp. 331, 19; H. H. Bancroft, The Native Races [of the Pacific States], vol. 2 (San Francisco: A. L. Bancroft and Co., 1882), p. 410.
[^39] Bancroft, Native Races, p. 407.
[^40] Bernal Diaz, Chronicles, pp. 161-62, 110, 103.
[^41] Bancroft, Native Races, p. 412.
[^42] Ibid., pp. 107, 112-16.
[^43] Robert Carmack, Toltec Influence on the Postclassic Culture History of Highland Guatemala, MARI 26 (1968), p. 80.
[^44] Ibid., pp. 106, 112-16.
[^45] Lawrence H. Feldman, "'Tollan' in Central Mexico: The Geography of Economic Specialization," Katunob 8, no. 3 (February 1973):3-6.
[^46] J. J. Williams, The Isthmus of Tehuantepec, Being the Results of a Survey for a Railroad. . . (New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1852), pp. 92-93, 97-98, 247.
[^47] Donald L. Brockington, "Investigaciones Arqueologicas en la Costa de Oaxaca," Boletin INAH 38 (1969):33-40.
[^48] Brockington, "Investigaciones," pp. 33, 35.
[^49] J. Charles Kelley and Carroll R. Riley, eds., Precolumbian Contact within Nuclear America, Southern Illinois University Museum, Meso-American Studies (Carbondale, 1969); Carolyn Baus Reed Czitrom, "Figurillas Solidas de Estilo Colima: Una Tipologia," Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Departamento de Investigaciones Historicas, Coleccion Cientifica: Arqueologia 66 (Mexico, 1978), p. 55; Clinton R. Edwards, "Possibilities of Pre-Columbian Maritime Contacts among New World Civilizations," in Man Across the Sea: Problems of Pre-Columbian Contacts, ed. Carroll L. Riley et al. (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971), pp. 3-10; Michael D. Coe, "Archaeological Linkages with North and South America at La Victoria, Guatemala," American Anthropologist 62 (1960):363-93; Robert C. West, "Aboriginal Sea Navigation between Middle and South America," American Anthropologist 63 (1961):135-37.
[^50] Albert Collier, The American Mediterranean, HMAI 1 (1964), pp. 128-29.
[^51] Edwards, "Maritime Contacts," p. 8.
[^52] John L. Sorenson, "Evidences of Culture Contacts Between Polynesia and the Americas in Precolumbian Times" (M.A. thesis, Brigham Young University, 1952); David H. Kelley, "Linguistics and Problems in Trans-Pacific Contacts," Actas y Memorias, 35a Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1962, vol. 1 (Mexico, 1964), pp. 17-18; George F. Carter, "Domesticates as Artifacts," in The Human Mirror: Material and Spatial Images of Man, ed. Miles Richardson (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1974), pp. 206-15. Several of the papers in Man Across the Sea touch on the matter, both pro and con. See especially the paper by Donald Brand, one of my teachers.
[^53] Jerry K. Loveland, "Hagoth and the Polynesian Tradition," BYU Studies 17 (1976):59-73.
[^54] "The aristocratic bearers of Monte Alban II culture" may have come from "Chiapas or the Guatemalan highlands, or perhaps the highlands by way of Chiapas," says Ignacio Bernal in The Olmec World (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969), p. 166. The whole Izapan art style of south-central Veracruz likewise derived from Chiapas. Michael D. Coe, Archaeological Synthesis of Southern Veracruz and Tabasco, HMAI 3, part 2 (1965), pp. 694-96; John F. Scott, "The Danzantes of Monte Alban. Part I: Text," Dumbarton Oaks Studies in Pre-Columbian Art and Archaeology 19 (Washington, 1978), pp. 58-59, 70-71.
[^55] Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th ed., s.v. "Chronology: Pre-Columbian America," by J. E. S. Thompson.
[^56] E. R. Thiele, The Mysterious Numbers of the Hebrew Kings: A Reconstruction of the Chronology of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951), pp. 14-15, 28, 165-66; idem, A Chronology of the Hebrew Kings (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1977).
[^57] Thiele, Mysterious Numbers, pp. 44-46, 294; Jay H. Huber, "Lehi's 600 Year Prophecy and the Birth of Christ," Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, Preliminary Report HUB-82 (Provo, Utah, 1982).
[^58] Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th ed., s.v. "Chronology: Christian;" P. L. Maier, First Christmas, The True and Unfamiliar Story in Words and Pictures (New York: Harper and Row, 1971); Werner Keller, The Bible as History (New York: Wm. Morrow, 1956), pp. 343-53; R. A. Rosenberg, "The 'Star of the Messiah' Reconsidered," Biblica 53, no. 1 (1972), pp. 105-10; Jack Finegan, Light from the Ancient Past, 2nd ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1959), pp. 252, 257, 260-61. More recently three English astronomers have concluded that the "star of Bethlehem" was a nova or exploding star, which Chinese records report shone for 70 days in the spring of the year 5 B.C. "Better Late Than Never," Smithsonian Magazine 8 (March 1978), p. 14. See also Owen Gingerich's review of additional books on the subject, in Journal for the History of Astronomy 12, part 3 (1983):212-13.
[^59] Encyclopaedia Britannica article cited in previous note (s. v. "Chronology: Christian").
[^60] Encyclopaedia Britannica, s.v. "Chronology: Pre-Columbian America.
[^61] Robert F. Smith in unpublished working papers has shown that the Jaredite lineage history works out very neatly as covering just 130 katuns, the Nephite history 50 katuns, and the two together 180 katuns.
[^62] Arguments have been made that a 360-day "prophetic year" lies behind chronological statements in the Old Testament. Robert Anderson, The Coming Prince: Or the Seventy Weeks of David with an Answer to the Higher Critics, 10th ed. (London: J. Nisbet, 1915; reprinted, Grand Rapids: Kregel, 1957). The use of time periods of symbolic length, as well as the manipulation of numbers in relation to prophets' reckoning of time, may be seen in Numbers 14:34; Ezekiel 4:5-6; Revelation 11:2-3; 12:6; 13:5.
[^63] J. E. S. Thompson, "Symbols, Glyphs, and Divinatory Almanacs for Diseases in the Maya Dresden and Madrid Codices," American Antiquity 23 (January 1958):297; R. L. Roys, The Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1967, originally 1933), pp. 184-85.
[^64] "Chiasm in Kings," Linguistica Biblica 31 (1974):52-67. Dennis E. Puleston, in "An Epistemological Pathology and the Collapse, or Why the Maya Kept the Short Count," in Maya Archaeology and Ethnohistory, ed. Norman Hammond and Gordon R. Willey (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1979), pp. 63-71, demonstrates a fascinating pattern that proves somewhat similar.
[^65] See J. E. S. Thompson, "Symbols, Glyphs, and Divinatory Almanacs . . . ," American Antiquity 23:297.
[^66] Personal communications; "The World Ages in India and Mesoamerica," Society for Early Historical Archaeology, Newsletter and Proceedings 137 (March 1975); idem, The Nine Lords of the Night, UCAR 16 (1972), pp. 53-68. Kelley would not accept a 600 B.C. transmission from the Old World as able to account for the Old World elements he believes were incorporated into the Mesoamerican system. Certain of those features he thinks were developed by the Greeks, especially at Alexandria, hence his insistence that 200 B.C. would have been the earliest date possible for the transoceanic transmission, probably via northwest India, but ultimately from the eastern Mediterranean. However, there is reason to believe that, as with a great deal of culture history, ideas traditionally credited to the Greeks were in reality around earlier. Kelley's 200 B.C. limiting date could prove too late.
[^67] Vincent H. Malmstrom, "A Reconstruction of the Chronology of Mesoamerican Calendrical Systems," Journal for the History of Astronomy 9 (1978):105-16. In a later article Malmstrom amplifies aspects of his argument while holding open the possibility of transoceanic diffusion to the Pacific coast of southern Mesoamerica as a source for some of the calendrical development. See "Architecture, Astronomy, and Calendrics in Pre-Columbian Mesoamerica," in Archaeoastronomy in the Americas, ed. Ray A. Williamson, Ballena Press Anthropological Papers 22 (Los Altos, California: Ballena Press, 1981), pp. 249-61.
