John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

6

A Setting for War

The latter half of the book of Alma tells of the crucial middle portion of Nephite history. Beginning shortly before 75 B.C. and continuing intermittently for thirteen hard years, the Nephites fought a war for their existence against a canny, determined enemy. The war was part of a process by which Lamanites, led by Amalickiah and other dissatisfied Nephite power-seekers, pressed northward out of their traditional lands into Nephite territory. The Nephites came very near to being overrun. But the dynamics of that situation will have to be addressed elsewhere. Here we will look only at the conflict to clarify further geographical and cultural aspects of the setting in which the Book of Mormon peoples lived.

When the converted Lamanites—the Anti-Nephi-Lehis—arrived in the land of Zarahemla, they were sent to the land of Jershon as part of a plan by the government to guard against a possible Lamanite invasion. Jershon was in a region of crucial weakness in the Nephite defenses; the east lowlands needed garrisoning, and the Anti-Nephi-Lehis would serve the purpose. While these former Lamanites had become pacifists, they could at least provide logistical support for the Nephite armies in the zone.

Map 12. Plausible Scenes of the Wars in the Extended Land of Zarahemla.

Simultaneously, Alma, the high priest, with friends and two of his own sons, addressed an adjacent problem area with strategic implications. The party traveled into the land of Antionum. (See map 12.) There they sought to reclaim a group called the Zoramites who were wavering in their loyalty to Nephite rule. Antionum was located "east of the land of Zarahemla, which lay nearly bordering upon the seashore, which was south of the land of Jershon, which also bordered upon the wilderness south, which wilderness was full of the Lamanites" (Alma 31:3). If Alma could anchor the Zoramites within the Nephite political and cultural sphere, it might forestall war. The highland Lamanite culture centers were then expanding into the lowlands—to the Nephites "the wilderness south." To attack the Nephites in that sector, they needed a base, and allies. The Zoramites in Antionum offered both. Thus, "the Nephites greatly feared that the Zoramites would enter into a correspondence with the Lamanites" (verse 4). Political allegiance and religious orthodoxy were closely connected, as in all the ancient world, and the high priest's first concern was for the Zoramites' faith. Upon coming among them, Alma was shocked to find how far the Zoramites had veered from the Nephite ideal. Despite some preaching success "among the poor class of people" (Alma 32:2), the missionaries were finally forced by the Zoramite elite to leave the land for Nephite Jershon. Their converts followed (Alma 35:1-6).

It is an interesting commentary on Nephite conceptions of the land that the territory on the south described as "wilderness" should be "full of the Lamanites." Clearly the essence of "wilderness" lay not in the absence of inhabitants but in something else, apparently the substantial modifications of the landscape that civilization entails. Probably that southern section had been only lightly populated in earlier times but was now being settled seriously. Some of those settlers were Lamanites who had been driven out of the coastal strip to the north ("the east wilderness") by an armed Nephite sweep. The Nephite leaders had made a strategic decision to gain actual control over those coastal lands, which they claimed but had hitherto allowed Lamanite squatters to occupy (Alma 22:29; 50:9). While the population settled in the south wilderness were called "Lamanites" by the Nephites, they must actually have included remnants of earlier peoples who deserved the label mainly because a Lamanite king was now over them. That ethnic variety prevailed is confirmed by Alma's observation that "many of them are our brethren" in the land of Antionum (Alma 31:35; compare 43:13). Highland Lamanites as active rulers in this muggy zone would have had a hard time. They were biologically adapted to a much cooler habitat. [^1] Yet if the prime Lamanite king carried the title "Laman," as the title "Nephi" was borne by the king over the early Nephites (compare Mosiah 10:6; 24:3; Jacob 1:11), then all his subjects would have been "Lamanites," even if native lowlanders. [^2]

Before long "the Zoramites became Lamanites" (Alma 43:4), that is, they shifted allegiance to Lamanite rule. Precipitating that action was the Zoramite leaders' anger at the Nephites' sympathetic reception of those Zoramite lower-class refugees who had followed Alma to the land of Jershon. The Zoramites thereupon "began to mix with the Lamanites" (Alma 35:10). Even while the missionaries were in Antionum there must have been regular interchange between the people of that land and the Lamanites farther south, for Corianton, Alma's son, had been able to travel from Zoramite territory "over into the land of Siron, among the borders of the Lamanites, after the harlot Isabel" (Alma 39:3). So the text is plain that in this sector of the land the border between Nephites and Lamanites was fluid. Gaining the allegiance of this one group of marginal Nephites, the Zoramites, was apparently part of a drawn-out process of political and economic expansion of Lamanite power in which religion likely played only a subsidiary part.

The first military confrontation took place near Jershon. The Lamanites approached it from their newly acquired base in Antionum. The Nephites were heavily outnumbered (Alma 43:13-14, 21). When they did meet their enemies "in the borders of Jershon," they were shielded by personal armor, to the consternation of their foes. Afraid to attack against such an unexpected tactic, the enemy armies departed out of the whole area, going via the wilderness "round about" to "the head of the river Sidon, that they might come into the land of Manti" (verse 22).

Jershon, we saw, was located in the eastern lowlands somewhere between Bountiful and Lamanite country. Sufficient cultivable land was available in the vicinity to support both the new settlers and at least part of the Nephite army (Alma 43:13; but see 60:9). This was the land farthest east and south that the Nephites could convert into a defensive base at that moment. There the Nephite commander, Moroni, made his headquarters "camp" for the remainder of the war (compare Alma 50:31). (No city of Jershon is mentioned.)

The "borders by the east sea" was flat, wet costal plain for the most part, somewhat like this area in Veracruz state. (Photo by James C. Christiansen used by permission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

The initial skirmish and retreat made it appear that the threat on the Jershon front had disappeared, but that would not prove true. Strategic geography dictated that the Lamanites would attack later in the same area. The principal aim of the Lamanites was to cut the Nephites off from the land northward by seizing the narrow neck (Alma 50:11, 32; 52:9). The enemy would attack Nephite defenses wherever it seemed most likely they could penetrate to the isthmus. An early attack along the west coast had been discouraging (Alma 16:2-9), yet they probed the same spot again, with no more success (Alma 49:1-15). Anyway, the west coast approach was dangerous; the apparent narrowness of the wilderness strip through which they had to travel to reach the neck on the west side would have rendered them vulnerable to being cut off by the Nephites around Melek. Neither did Lamanite attacks get far through the center of the land (see Alma 2:27-35; Helaman 1:15-32). That left the eastern sector as the obvious front. We saw in chapter 1 that the portion of the east coast controlled by the Nephites was limited; thus the distance a Lamanite attack would have to go to reach the narrow neck was tantalizingly short.

The people of Ammon soon proved more hindrance than help in Jershon. As a result, they were shifted to sheltered Melek (Alma 35:13) in the upper Sidon basin. They probably felt happier at Melek's intermediate elevation than sweltering in lowland Jershon, for they were of highland birth. Moroni pressed on with his preparations for defense, clearing out straggler Lamanites along the coast and installing garrison cities, using colonists from the Zarahemla area (Alma 50:9-11). Some of them may not have been enthusiastic about the conditions they found facing them when they arrived (verses 26, 29). The city of Moroni was practically on the coast (Alma 62:32; 3 Nephi 8:9; but Alma 62:34 suggests there may have been a little wilderness between it and the sea), and it was the most exposed of the set (Alma 50:13). Nephihah was an even more crucial base farther inland (Alma 50:14; 59:8-9). Lehi, Morianton, Omner, and Gid were other settlements established to beef up the southeast sector and to provide a buffer for the headquarters in Jershon. Overall, the Nephites were trying to hold a straight line extending from the sea inland as far as there was any chance of attack (Alma 50:8).

The Lamanite assault did finally come. Led by the Nephite renegade Amalickiah, it first hit Moroni, and then a string of other cities. The Lamanite squatters who had been expelled from the coastal strip in the garrisoning action would, of course, have provided the attackers with knowledge of every trail and obstacle. Nephihah's inland position is confirmed by the fact that the thrust bypassed it. Jershon, too, was far enough inland to be safe (Alma 43:4, 25; compare 50:27), although it was outflanked as the Lamanites poured northward near the sea. The record reports Nephihah's capture at this time (Alma 51:24-26), but that statement is incorrect if we credit Alma 59:9-11. (We need not be shocked to find that the scribes made errors. Moroni on the title page of the Book of Mormon suggests as much, saying, "If there are faults they are the mistakes of men.")

The great amount of interrelated information presented in this portion of the scripture enables us to relate the record to the Nephite physical scene. All the places mentioned can be identified with plausible geographical scenes and archaeological sites. The reasons for settlement in those spots become apparent, and the logic of Amalickiah's campaign and of Moroni's defense are clarified. Map 12glf1 identifies the most reasonable positions for each land or city mentioned.

A line marking the limit of Mayan languages and culture runs through this east central area. This border apparently held at the time of the Spanish conquest, just as it had many centuries earlier in Classic times. [^3] Even in ancient Olmec days, sites of that culture fell on one side of this line. [^4] It seems that some sort of ecological boundary must separate the territory on either side of the line, inhibiting flows of population and culture across it. Whatever the cause, a narrow zone twenty or so miles wide does seem to have constituted a long-lasting ethnic frontier. The zone falls precisely where the Nephite-Lamanite boundary in the east sea sector fits in the geography developed in chapter 1.

The geographical area of southern Mexico where the Nephite defenders stood against the Lamanites is now called the Chontalpa. Sluggish stream drainage leaves much of the flat land too wet to settle, but here and there higher spots on river levees or slight geological rises permit villages to exist. [^5] The famous site of La Venta is one of these, on a rise a few square miles in extent amid swamps near the Tonala River. Travel through the coastal area is limited to two or three well-established trails that run roughly northwest-southeast along the higher ground. Native warfare at the time of the Spanish Conquest was confined mostly to October through February. Food was then abundant, and the seasonal flooding had mostly abated. Along the coast lies a strip of overgrown old beach dunes up to a couple of miles wide. It is continuous enough to permit travel along it parallel to the beach and free from the swamps just inland, which hold the discomforts of sand, wind and insects. [^6]

The Chontalpa zone is bounded on one side by the Rio Seco. Until colonial Spanish times, the main stream of the Grijalva River reached the sea via the channel of the Seco, but then the high-leveed stream in one of its regular floods broke into a new outlet far to the east, where it now runs. [^7] The old course essentially followed the language and culture boundary mentioned above. As R. Gadacz notes, "Many of the rivers in Tabasco served as provincial boundaries." [^8] The river is a formidable enough barrier that it would have made a logical defense line for captain Moroni. Moroni and Nephihah were the key garrisons anchoring this neat "line of the possession of the Lamanites" (Alma 50:13). This geographical picture explains why the Nephite record never mentions the Sidon River on the east coast, because the stream itself constituted the frontier rather than being a feature that the Nephites had need to cross.

The city of Moroni surely was named for the Nephite captain of that time, after the custom of naming a land and settlement after "him who first possessed it" (Alma 8:7). Everything said about Moroni fits neatly if we suppose it was located near Laguna Mecoacan, through which the Grijalva/Sidon formerly emptied. Alternatively, it might have been at or near the site of Tupilco a few miles farther along the coast. Sisson found in his archaeological reconnaissance of this area that in the Late Preclassic period, including the time when Moroni was fortifying that section, that "waxy-feeling" pottery characteristic of the Mayan area was distributed throughout the lowlands of Guatemala and southeastern Mexico right up to the eastern side of Laguna Mecoacan, and then stopped. Quite a different style existed beyond the lagoon and ethnic border. [^9] At the time of the conquest, too, a single "economic bloc," coinciding with the distribution of the Mayan languages, extended all the way from Honduras to this same ethnic limit. [^10] That distribution agrees with what appears to have been the realm of the lowland "Lamanites." If Moroni founded his own new city at the very border near the lagoon, his provocative action would have all but invited the Lamanite attack. The other possible location for Moroni is interesting for an additional reason. An archaeological site at nearby Tupilco in recent decades was washed into the sea by powerful storms on the Gulf, whose waves sometimes pound the shore. [^11] We are reminded that the city Moroni "did sink into the depths of the sea" at the time of the great storm marking the crucifixion of the Savior (3 Nephi 8:9). Moroni's location at about this point on the coast would then fit the natural setting, although, of course, the original ruins went under the water 1,900 years ago, according to the Book of Mormon.

The city of Nephihah, founded at the same time as Moroni, plausibly is one of a cluster of sites of Late Preclassic date located by Sisson a few miles west of the Rio Seco frontier. The "plains" near Nephihah (Alma 62:18) would be part of the Chontalpa's extensive, anciently uncultivable, savanna grasslands. (Bernal Diaz described one of the earliest Spanish battles on the mainland just a little east of here. Thousands of native warriors waited to fight them on such a "plain," and this proved ideal terrain for the Spanish horses to maneuver. [^12]) Lehi, Morianton and Moroni seem to have been satellites to Nephihah, the regional (market?) center (Alma 51:24; 59:5; 50:14). Those three were located nearer the coast than Nephihah. But Lehi and Morianton must have been very near each other, for their people quarreled over agricultural land almost as soon as they settled the places, and the Morianton group ended up incorporated politically with Lehi (Alma 50:25-26, 36). Sites of the correct time period and adjacent to each other were located by Sisson coastward from our possible Nephihah and could represent remains of those two minor settlements. [^13]

The subject of directions, discussed in the first chapter, is especially relevant now. At points in the account like Alma 50:13-15 reference to the map in terms of our modern meaning of the terms "north" and "south" could lead to confusion. But if we suppose that a certain skewing from the cardinal directions familiar to us today had taken place in Nephite terminology, for whatever reason, the situation makes sense. One added note: this account was written by Mormon, long after the events took place (note, for example, his editorial "I" cropping up in Alma 43:3). The directional terms are from his overall perspective as he wrote while located in the land northward. From his viewpoint the city Lehi would indeed be considered more northerly than Moroni (Alma 50:13-15), [^14] even without regard to the other data on Nephite directions in chapter 1.

Jershon, the one Nephite center on the east that the Lamanites never even threatened, must have been well inland. The area around the archaeological site of San Miguel, Tabasco, would fit the geographical requirements for Jershon. As far back as Olmec times it was a significant settlement, though dependent on La Venta about twenty miles away. [^15] One confirmatory situation is notable: When Morianton and his people headed out of their city toward the land northward, they traveled by a trail different than Teancum did. He pursued them with an army on another route, intending to "head them" (Alma 50:33). The feasible trails and distances involved in Teancum's getting the word in Jershon of Morianton's flight and then pursuing him successfully work out comfortably with Jershon around San Miguel. There are few options.

Omner, Gid, and Mulek were other cities mentioned by name, all on "the east borders by the seashore" (Alma 51:26). At first reading, this verse appears to make these places of equal importance and to place them in a neat line, but that picture fails to hold up. During the retaking of the garrison cities by Nephite counterattack, Omner was not mentioned at all, apparently having been bypassed, left to die on the vine (Alma 55:24-25, 33). Moreover, when Nephi and Lehi, his brother, launched a preaching mission much later (Helaman 5:14-15), Gid and Mulek were encountered in an order the reverse of what one would have supposed from Alma 51. That must mean Gid was offset inland from Mulek rather than in a line with the other settlements parallel to the coast. We know Mulek was not far from the sea, because Amalickiah's army passing through Mulek toward Bountiful ended up on the beach (Alma 51:32).

Note that Mulek was not one of the new garrison centers (Alma 50:14-15). It already had a history. The name Mulek links it to old chief Zarahemla's ancestor, the refugee prince of Judah (Helaman 6:10; 8:21). The party with which he arrived from across the sea landed on the coast of the land southward after reaching the land northward (and staying how long?) (Helaman 6:10; Alma 22:30). These facts make it likely that the city of Mulek was the earliest center of this party of voyagers from the Mediterranean. [^16] Mulek's geographical relationships and suggested history fit the awe-inspiring archaeological site of La Venta, the ancient Olmec center a few miles upstream from the mouth of the Tonala River.

Several items of information support this identification. First is the fact that the place is accessible, via the river, to a party arriving by sea. Archaeological work shows that La Venta might have been totally abandoned at the moment of arrival of Mulek's party, offering them an unusual opportunity to settle at a proven spot. [^17] Alma 52:2 makes a point of the safety afforded a worried Lamanite invasion force by their holing up inside Mulek. Then in the account of the site's reconquest (Alma 52:17-23), the text confirms that Mulek was isolated in an unusual manner. Commander Moroni invited his enemies to fight on the plains between Mulek and Bountiful, but they refused. It took a trick to get them to "come out" of Mulek (verse 19) to where the Nephites eventually outsmarted them. La Venta/Mulek's position on an island amid surrounding swamps clarifies why such language would be used, and plains (verse 20) did extend near to La Venta and across much of the space between the Tonala River and Bountiful near the Coatzacoalcos River. The distances and terrain shown by the operation that finally won Mulek for the Nephites correspond well with this area. [^18]

One cultural fact about La Venta/Mulek also seems significant. La Venta's huge Stela 3 (see page 121) has carved on its face a famous scene in which a person of high status, whose facial features find parallels in surviving people in the Gulf Coast area as well as in Olmec art, is shown facing a gentleman who looks like a born Israelite. His striking beard and beaked nose are so prominent that he has been dubbed "Uncle Sam" by some scholars. [^19] This scene is commonly taken as the artist's representation of the leaders of two sharply different ethnic groups, one seemingly "Semitic," in a formal encounter, as Tatiana Proskouriakoff and Ignacio Bernal have suggested. [^20] Perhaps we are viewing a Mulekite leader together with a local chief over a group of folk survivors from the Jaredite debacle. The monument on which the scene appears dates, as closely as we can tell, to very near the time when the Mulek party would have landed, in the sixth century B.C. That is about when the First Tradition in Mesoamerica was in its death throes. Certain culture traits have also been noted at La Venta from this late occupation that compare to features in Phoenician—Israelite Palestine. [^21] Taken all together, these points indicate that La Venta is a good candidate for the city of Mulek. Some remains found at the site date to around the first century B.C., which seems to show that a modest population lived there when Amalickiah made his attack on Mulek.

Where would the land of Antionum be located? It was a zone where Lamanite influence was expanding into and colliding with the Nephite sphere. Taking the Lamanite-Nephite line as the Mayan/non-Mayan boundary near the Seco River, Antionum would seem to fall just beyond, on the Mayan side. Since there was at least one named hill in Antionum (Alma 32:4), it was likely situated at the edge of the foothills rather than on the open, flooded plain nearer the sea. Around Teapa or Pichucalco, Chiapas, or even as far seaward as near Villahermosa, the setting fits the requirements; archaeological materials of appropriate date are also found in the vicinity. Gareth Lowe puts his "Mixe-Zoque/Maya interaction zone," a cultural boundary across which he sees long-lasting conflict [^22] at this precise point (and on across the whole width of southern Mesoamerica, about where I see the Book of Mormon's "narrow strip of wilderness," Alma 22:27). Siron (Alma 39:3), still more clearly Lamanitish, would have been farther into Maya country, in the area round Macuspana, toward Palenque, where appropriately early cultural remains are likewise found. This place lies "over" hilly country into the next watershed from Antionum, as the text requires.

Amalickiah, the Arch-Dissenter

Alma 46 tells how trouble arose once more in Zarahemla over questions of power and privilege. Leader of the dissidents was Amalickiah, who wanted to become king over the Nephites (verses 3-6). Certain portions of the greater land of Zarahemla were more affected by Amalickiah's subversion than were others. Moroni himself took his "title of liberty" around in the center of the land to various groups and "sent forth" messages elsewhere, rallying the faithful to the principles of liberty and rule by elected judges (verse 28). When Amalickiah and his closest followers saw they had lost the political contest, they fled out of Zarahemla to the land of Nephi for a fresh start (verses 29-33).

In the classic pattern of the ambitious Nephite dissenter, this man went up to Nephi to egg on the king over the Lamanites to war against the Nephites (Alma 47:1). Many of the Lamanite folk, however, did not relish undertaking one more of the seemingly endless series of disastrous wars in which the Nephites always seemed to come out ahead. This time the majority of rebellious Lamanites from the vicinity of the city of Nephi simply fled to a nearby location called Onidah, "the place of arms." Nearby was a Mount Antipas on top of which they assembled after arming themselves. Onidah clearly was in broken country no great distance from the capital city of Lehi-Nephi. In Mesoamerica, what constitutes a "place of arms" is obvious; it can hardly be anything other than an obsidian outcrop. This volcanic glass was the most convenient, most effective, and cheapest substance for manufacturing arms or any cutting tools. (Note that Alma 49:2 informs us that "arrows and stones" were the chief weapons of the Lamanites.) Trade in obsidian was the mainstay of commerce from earliest times. Some routes over which it moved extended as much as 700 miles.

It happens that one of the most extensive sources of this key material is the hilly zone called El Chayal, approximately sixteen miles northeast of Kaminaljuyu. Spots within the kilometers-wide obsidian exposures at El Chayal are virtually paved with waste chips, where cutting implements have been shaped by chipping. Obsidian from El Chayal was exported widely as early as Jaredite times. [^23] So the unhappy Lamanite folk, expecting to have to fight the king's forces to keep from being pressed into military service, first went to Onidah, perhaps El Chayal, to arm themselves, then moved to the tactical safety of a mountain top.

After a series of characteristically sly moves, Amalickiah ended up on the throne, having out-maneuvered the anti-war Lamanites, the king's loyal forces, and the king himself, the last by assassination (Alma 47:10-19). Finally the ambitious ex-Nephite "took possession" of the "chief city" and ascended the throne. Once in control of Lamanite forces, Amalickiah first tried for a cheap surprise victory over the Nephites. That was the west coast thrust at the city of Ammonihah, as we saw earlier.

The narrow west "wilderness" (Alma 22:28), composed of mountain barrier and parallel coastal strip on the Pacific side of the greater land of Zarahemla, was apparently never settled or defended by the Nephites. A likely reason was that it was occupied by an old remnant population from pre-Nephite times whom it was easier to ignore than to expel. (Alma 50:11 may imply such an expulsion but is unclear; in any case, the Nephites did not settle it.) Only at the south and north extremities did the Nephites have any notable interest. On the south was "the city beyond" Antiparah, over the mountain pass and down "in the borders by the [west] seashore" (Alma 56:31). At the north end, at least in the fourth century A.D., was the land of Joshua, which the Nephites occupied in their final retreat (Mormon 2:6). The Pacific coastal zone of Chiapas together with paralleling mountains is surely this western wilderness. The great ceremonial center of Izapa is in correct position at the southerly end to be "the city beyond" Antiparah, although other sites in this Soconusco region would serve as well. (The text does not say it was a Nephite city. No other mention is made of this place. It could well have been a pilgrimage center open to various peoples, [^24] its sacred nature ensuring that military action, such as the Lamanite west coast forays, avoided it.) Twice the Lamanites sent armies along this western route, both times unsuccessfully. It was in the wake of these failures that Amalickiah decided to mount the attack on the east, whose setting we have already described.

Recall the speed of that east coast thrust that turned the Nephite defense line. Almost before either side could realize what had happened, the invaders were near crucial Bountiful. Later, bit by bit, the flow reversed; the Nephites ate away at Lamanite-occupied territory. After years of struggle, the final action unfolded so suddenly that within hours the last tier of cities fell again into the hands of the Nephites.

War on the Southern Front

The first Lamanite frustration on the east, when they were frightened off as they approached Jershon from Antionum (Alma 43:18-22), redirected their aggression. The next place where they could hope to gain leverage on the Nephites was the Manti region. "Therefore they departed out of Antionum into the wilderness, and took their journey round about in the wilderness, away by the head of the river Sidon, that they might come into the land of Manti and take possession of the lands" (verse 22). A valuable clarification of geographical relationships is offered to us here—how the Jershon-Antionum territory connected with Manti.

Manti was, of course, at the uppermost point of Nephite settlement on the Sidon. Immediately beyond it rose the headwaters of the Sidon in the wilderness that separated Nephite from Lamanite territory. It was thus very close to the Lamanites, but it had not been attacked earlier because it was of limited strategic value compared with the eastern lowlands.

Manti was a long way from the "borders by the east sea," we are given to understand. Moroni's informants had time to tell him at his camp in Jershon that the Lamanite armies were abandoning Antionum, whereupon he dispatched scouts to watch their movements. Simultaneously he sent an inquiry to Zarahemla to ask Alma's prophetic guidance as to where the enemy was headed. The response came back from Zarahemla to Jershon; then Moroni organized his army and headed the long way to Manti. He arrived there in time to alert the local militia and set up an ambush on the trail they knew the Lamanites would follow as they descended toward the river, the Sidon, near Manti (Alma 43:22-33). The route taken by the Lamanites from Antionum to Manti was either circuitous or difficult to travel, for weeks must have been consumed in all this going and coming on the part of Moroni's forces. And Moroni's force had a far more direct and easy way to travel from Jershon to Manti than the Lamanite attackers.

This picture of a long way "round about" in the wilderness agrees with what is implied about another journey by a Lamanite army. That was when Amalickiah was getting into position with his forces for the nearly successful drive on the east seacoast. The big army was already reported to be "coming into the borders of the land" before commander Moroni obtained authority from the governor of the land of Zarahemla to take action against the subversive "king-men," who had refused to take up arms to defend their land (Alma 51:14-16). He then sent his army to attack and subdue the section of the land controlled by those dissident leaders, who "professed the blood of nobility" (verse 21). (I argued earlier that this portion of the land was most likely downstream from Zarahemla, centering on Sidom/Chiapa de Corzo. At that site there is evidence that violence marked the transition from the Guanacaste Phase to the Horcones Phase, around 75 B.C. [^25] That was about when Moroni's forces went against the king-men "to pull down their pride," the dissidents being "hewn down and leveled to the earth" [verses 17-18].) All this time-consuming activity was going on when the Lamanites were "coming into the borders of the land." They would have headed for the east coast, to the land of Moroni, by nearly the reverse of the route taken by the Lamanite army on its way to Manti. "Round about in the wilderness" was obviously quite a distance.

A look at map 12glf1 shows how these times and distances work out. Two routes were available to the Lamanites between Antionum and Manti; they could have traveled over either. One slices through the vast Chiapas rain-forest wilderness via a network of jungle valleys. The other way skirts the rough country, going all the way to the Usumacinta River and following it upstream. The second is much longer but more sensible to travel, for there would have been settlements along the way to supply food, and the route was sure. The wilderness way, while feasible, went through some of the toughest country in all Mesoamerica, which was mainly unpopulated throughout the period we are talking about. [^26] The heart of the section is still called "el desierto de los Lacandon" (the wilderness of the Lacandon Indians). [^27] Either route taken by the Lamanite army would have allowed Moroni's forces time enough to reach Manti first.

No doubt the Nephite commander and his men followed the same track when they later went to the support of chief judge Pahoran. Dissidents had reasserted their claim to the government and seized control of Zarahemla, forcing the judge to flee (Alma 61:5). Moroni came up from his base at Jershon to the San Cristobal Las Casas area. Then he would have gone straight along the open valleys to Comitan/Gideon, where Pahoran awaited the relief force (Alma 60:30; 62:3-4, 6).

Another incident that took place on Moroni's return after helping Pahoran sheds more light on routes of march. He was headed with his army back toward the land of Nephihah and Jershon when he chanced upon "a large body of men of the Lamanites," captured them, and commandeered their provisions (Alma 62:14-18). Clearly, that particular route was not controlled by either side. The extent of wilderness meant that their boundaries were rarely firm and sure. (Kubler's observations on vague boundaries, in note 24, shed light here.) The story does not tell us enough that we can establish where the encounter took place, but for both to use the upper Teapa River Valley above Pichucalco would make sense, or it could have been nearer to the Sidon, close to modern Huimanguillo.

On the front south and west of Zarahemla a grinding conflict had developed as the Amalickiahite war dragged on (Alma 53-58). Manti fell to the Lamanites. The city of Zeezrom, too, was captured, although since it was mentioned only one time, it must not have been of pivotal importance (Alma 56:14). Farther toward the west sea lay Cumeni and Antiparah, two more places the Lamanites took. The land of Judea remained in Nephite hands, like a cork under pressure in a bottle, preventing the enemy from moving directly down to Zarahemla (Alma 56:15-18, 22-25).

These geographical relationships fit the scene in southern Chiapas. Map 12glf1 shows a logical arrangement of cities on this front. Their placement in relation to the terrain clarifies how the military events proceeded. The Sierra Madre mountains form an all but impossible barrier to regular travel between the seacoast and the interior depression all along its southern extremity, with one noteworthy exception: a pass links the upper tributaries region of the Grijalva. River via the town of Motozintla to the wide, rich foothill and coastland strip known as the Soconusco. In the opposite direction from Motozintla, a narrow river valley leads down toward the Grijalva. [^28]

Antiparah would lie in the pass across these mountains. We see why by examining the Nephite recapture of Antiparah. Antipus and Helaman, the Nephite leaders on this front, used "a strategem" to get the Lamanites to come out from within the city's defenses. They sent a small party past the place, teasing the Lamanites to pursue them. The group's destination was meant to be obvious by the route it took: "as if we were going to the city beyond, in the borders by the seashore" (Alma 56:30-31). So Antiparah lay in or near a pass on a route that led down toward the shore from Antiparah on the one hand and toward Zarahemla via Judea on the other. A band of men moving seaward within sight of a defense location in the river valley near Motozintla would obviously be headed over the nearby pass and down to Izapa or some other city in the Soconusco region. Antiparah fits well near Motozintla.

Near there occurred the remarkable battle of Helaman's 2,000 young warriors. Helaman and his Ammonite youths had come up from Melek (no doubt via Zarahemla, Helaman's home) to Judea to reinforce the beleaguered army of Antipus. They arrived just in time to thwart a Lamanite attack on Judea. The young men soon took part in the operation to regain Antiparah. Once the Lamanite forces had been drawn out of their stronghold, Helaman's company retreated northward into the wilderness (Alma 56:36-39). Along the open, flattish top of the line of mountains they raced through pine or oak forest. [^29] Had they tried to move down through one of the canyons wending toward Judea, their base, the Lamanites would have suspected a trap and turned back; and the purpose of the maneuver, to draw the Lamanites away from Antiparah, would have been foiled. After long pursuit, the forces met in a battle that gave the Nephites victory. The prisoners were then guarded from the battle site down to Zarahemla, while the main Nephite force returned to their base at Judea. Finally, once the weakened garrison at Antiparah had given up and retreated, Nephite concern about defending that "quarter of the land" was allayed. The map again makes obvious why.

Archaeological research has hardly begun in this rugged area. A quick reconnaissance from the Grijalva River up the valley as far as Motozintla found no sites of early date, but the archaeologist who did the work recognized that he had only begun the investigation and that much more searching was needed. [^30] Reports from an earlier day indicate that ruins of significant size do occur near Motozintla and also near Amatenango de la Frontera, farther down the valley, where I judge Cumeni could fit. [^31] The city of Zeezrom would be down nearer Manti, perhaps at the site of Guajilar, which was investigated in 1976 and 1977. It was a large settlement in the period of these Nephite wars. [^32] Judea would be in the Chicomuselo area, ideally positioned to cut off any Lamanite movement down against Zarahemla (Alma 56:25). In all these areas very little cultivable land exists; this explains the high degree of dependence of the Nephite and Lamanite forces on imported food (Alma 56:27, 29, 32; 57:6, 8, 11, 15).

The microgeography involved in the battle and marching routes that recovered Manti for the Nephites (Alma 58:13-29) could only be discussed fully with detailed local maps in our hands, and these are not available to me. Regional maps and personal observation suggest that generally plausible locations for those military movements exist. (The same setting also broadly accommodates the earlier battle thereabouts reported in Alma 43:25-54. Closer study is needed to check out details.) Manti itself seems likely to have been at the major ruin of La Libertad. It sits at the confluence of three large tributaries that form the Grijalva River just below the big site, and the required wilderness is immediately adjacent to the site. La Libertad was the largest city in the entire upper tributaries "quarter of the land" at about this time. [^33]

The recapture of Manti ended the great war, but its effect had been profound. Armed power under chief captain Moroni had been used repeatedly to provide the muscle so the central government could overcome the worst of the divisions and indecision that had afflicted it. People had been moved about quite arbitrarily to settle here and there as needed. Settlements would have been consolidated for defense, and drafts of labor were demanded to construct fortifications (Alma 50:10). Casualties on both sides had been heavy. And even after formal hostilities ceased, tension remained; continued Nephite watchfulness was required (Alma 62:42). The entire area ruled from Zarahemla was closer knit than ever. Urgent communication and the need for extensive movements of armed personnel and the women and children in their camps no doubt regularized routes of travel. Wealth, in part from increased trade, followed (verse 48). Attention had been further directed to the strategic value and resources of the neck area and the land northward beyond (Alma 63:4-10). Literacy and recordkeeping apparently also expanded (verse 12).

These characteristics of life in the isthmian area of the Book of Mormon agree with what we know of southern Mesoamerica in the period following 75 B.C. Moreover, the prototypes of many patterns appearing in Nephite and Mesoamerican life in the classic era of the fourth century A.D. are visible at this earlier time, including the wars, social classes, trade, cults and other features Mormon describes at the very end of his peoples' historical career.

Patterns in Warfare

At this point it will be helpful to make an excursion through some data on Mesoamerican warfare so that we might appreciate more fully how Moroni's men fought. The standard treatments of Mesoamerican culture have until very recently followed the line that warfare was a late exception—that the area's earlier groups practiced only the arts of peace. We now know this to be a complete distortion. It appears the Mesoamericans probably were rarely very peaceful. There is increasing evidence that armed conflict was frequent even in Olmec times. David Webster has published a monograph that insists that, at least for the Maya lowlands, "warfare and militarism were significant processes throughout the entire Classic" (in his terms, A.D. 300 to 900). Even earlier, "warfare during late Preclassic times was an essential factor in the political definition of the various subregions of the lowlands." [^34] And we also know now that in Honduras, highland Guatemala, central Mexico, and Oaxaca evidence has come to light that shows war was of great importance and antiquity. [^35]

When Cortez crossed southern Mexico during his epic journey to Honduras, he discovered fortifications around the Laguna de Terminos area very similar to those Moroni erected in the first century B.C. (Alma 53:1-5) in the east coastal lowlands only a few score miles from Cortez's route. The Book of Mormon describes a ditch being dug around the protected area; the excavated earth was piled inward to form a bank. Atop it a fence of timbers was planted and bound together with vines. That very arrangement is now well documented archaeologically. The National Geographic Society-Tulane University project at Becan in the center of the Yucatan peninsula has shown the pattern to be very old. Webster's interpretation of the excavations sees a massive earthen rampart around that center somewhere between A.D. 250 and 450, during the period when the final Nephite wars with the Lamanites occurred. The impressive size of this defensive construction is shown by Webster's observation that from the top of the embankment (not counting the probable timber palisade on top) to the bottom of the ditch the distance was nearly 35 feet. "An enemy force caught in the bottom of the ditch would have been at the mercy of the defenders, whose most effective weapons under the circumstances would have been large rocks." Moreover, "the extreme width of the defense provides additional protection, for heavy missiles can be thrown only with great difficulty from the embankment to the outside edge of the ditch in most places. To throw 'uphill' from the outside is almost impossible. Defenders, possibly screened by a palisade, could have rained long-distance missiles on approaching enemies using spearthrowers and slings." [^36] Compare these statements with Alma 49:22: "But behold . . . [the attacking Lamanites] were swept off the fortification by the stones and arrows which were thrown at them." A full comparison of Mesoamerican tactics, strategy, and defensive constructions—little as has been learned about the subject thus far—reveals many other instructive parallels with the Book of Mormon, most of them unsuspected only a few years ago.

Other features of military life are described in the scripture. The bows and arrows, stones and slings, javelins, darts, axes, and various sorts of shields are well attested in documents and archaeological remains from Mesoamerica. [^37] The "thick clothing" worn defensively by the Nephites (Alma 43:19) seems related to the suits of quilted armor (ichcauipilli) used by the Aztecs and their neighbors. Salt or some such substance was placed between layers of cloth and the combination quilted loosely. This garment could withstand a direct arrow impact, yet it was so light and cheap that the Spaniards themselves adopted it. [^38] There were other kinds of armor as well. [^39] What the Book of Mormon calls a "cimeter" (in the modern dictionary "scimitar"), like its namesake in Asia, was a weapon to be swung. Its smiting power was sufficient to cut through armor (compare Alma 43:44) or to kill at one "stroke" (verse 37). The Mesoamerican parallel would be the weapon the Aztecs called the maccuahuitl, a hardwood club edged on both sides with razor-sharp obsidian blades. The Spaniards called this feared weapon a "sword," said it was sharper than their own weapons, and learned with dismay that one blow with it could cut off the head of a horse. Bernal Diaz, among the conquering Spaniards, also reported "broad swords" distinct from the maccuahuitl, but these are not elsewhere described, as far as I know. [^40] Now, a sword in normal European terminology would have a pointed blade that would be used with a thrusting motion. The Book of Mormon never makes clear that such a weapon was in use by Nephites or Lamanites. Only in one case is there description of a "sword" with any kind of point: a Nephite soldier "smote" a Lamanite leader, accidentally scalping him; then he carefully picked up the scalp, "laid it" on the "point" of his sword (rather than spearing it, as we might expect), and raised it aloft (Alma 44:12-13). This odd description fails to make clear exactly how the weapon looked. While the Book of Mormon text leaves us unclear about the appearance and functions of the Nephites' sword-like weapons, so do the sources on ancient Mexico and Guatemala remain unclear about some weapons. The agreement between scripture and outside sources seems adequate at the moment; no major problem is apparent in reconciling the materials.

One principle of ancient American military organization clarifies certain statements in the Book of Mormon. Sometimes a Nephite or Lamanite "army" is described, but in the larger engagements we read of "armies" on each side. Mesoamerican captains led their own forces composed of men in their kin groups. Leaders did not have absolute power, but they did wield heavy influence in decisions affecting war. They and their advisors chose whether or not to commit their militia units to a particular campaign. (Full-time soldiers were an exception.) Moroni had much to gain by persuading leaders of these lineage units to join him, it appears from Alma 46:28, 50:12, and 62:4-5. The Amlicites (Alma 2:7-16) and the king-men (Alma 51:17-21) were composed of kin or geographical units who withheld their support from Moroni's official Nephite cause. In the end the king-men were compelled to commit their forces and to "hoist the title of liberty upon their towers, and in their cities" as a symbol of loyalty to the central government (verse 20). The language used by Mormon to describe the final battle of the Nephites also becomes more comprehensible in this light: "And behold, the ten thousand of Gidgiddonah had fallen, . . . and Lamah had fallen with his ten thousand; and Gilgal had fallen with his ten thousand; and Limhah had fallen with his ten thousand," and so on (Mormon 6:13-14). At the time of the Spanish conquest, Bernal Diaz used similar language regarding the organization of the Tlascalan armies that faced Cortez. Five captains appeared on the battlefield, each with his ten thousand men—"Of the followers of the old Xicotenga . . . there were ten thousand; of another great chief named Moseescaci there were another ten thousand; of a third, who was called Chichimecatecle, there were as many more," and so on. Each group carried its unique flag. (The Tlascaltec army that opposed Cortez had a great standard "carried" by the commander, although actually the pole was strapped to his back. [^41] We recall that "Moroni, who was the chief commander of the armies of the Nephites," took a piece of his coat, wrote a slogan on it, "fastened it upon the end of a pole," and "went forth among the people, waving the rent part of his garment in the air," as told in Alma 46:11-12, 19.) The Tlascalans also wore different uniforms to show their units, and "each captain had a different device [insignia], as do our dukes and counts in Castile." The decision whether to fight was arrived at separately by each captain for his group. [^42] Moreover, a leader of a Mesoamerican military unit had a special relationship to his men: "The warriors serving under him were conceptualized in the kinship framework as 'sons and vassals.' " [^43] That recalls in the Book of Mormon Helaman and his 2,000 "sons" as warriors.

The "armies" of the Nephites and Lamanites were probably composed of sets of single armies, each under the direct command of a lineage leader, each group coming from a single region and probably speaking a single dialect. [^44] Such a structure of command was brittle. A strange commander could not take over a unit in some purely administrative substitution. Thus "when the Lamanites [at Noah] saw that their chief captains were all slain they fled into the wilderness" and went home (Alma 49:25). In the same light we can understand why the fortifications constructed by astute Moroni resulted in an "increase daily" in his armies "because of the assurance of protection which his works did bring forth unto them" (Alma 50:12). The local political leaders were increasingly willing to back someone who looked like a winner.

The Hagoth Affair

With the onset of peace, pent-up curiosity about the land northward broke out publicly. Morianton, we recall, had envisioned taking over the territory beyond the narrow neck "covered with bodies of water" and had tried vainly to reach that area (Alma 50:29), which we have concluded would be in south-central Veracruz. Moroni had feared that an alliance would be made between that area and Bountiful, probably just on the other side of the Coatzacoalcos River. Joining those two regions into a single state would have revived the old territorial unit that the Gulf Coast Olmecs had exploited so successfully centuries before. An ambitious man like Morianton (whose name was purely Jaredite, incidentally) must have seen potentials for building political power in the land of Desolation and beyond which could resurrect the old Olmec/Jaredite pattern. Others apparently saw similar possibilities. The motto of the times among the restless after the war ended seemed to be, "Go north, young man."

The thirty-seventh year into the era of the reign of the judges (about 60 B.C. ) saw 5,400 men, plus women and children, leave Zarahemla for the north (Alma 63:4). In the next year many more departed. Perhaps others departed from Lamanite country at the same time. More than curiosity must have impelled such numbers. What was it? Probably as much push as pull was exerted. We saw earlier that the area in the land of Zarahemla that could boast good crop conditions was limited. We have also seen the population increasing over time. When too many bodies occupy a resource area, temporary accommodation may take place with increase in stress (as in the conflict with the kingmen), but eventually some of the surplus people are likely to relocate. A reading of Alma 62:39-41 (note especially the "famines") suggests that crowding of the resource base had been one cause of the war just past, as much as it had been a result. In any case, the land northward lay before them with the prospect that it could accommodate some of the crowded Southerners. They had already got into the pattern of wholesale resettlement under wartime conditions. But it is most unlikely that mere individuals would have gone off to northern colonies. Only "corporate," organized units would have the resources to undertake such an ambitious task. The groups likely would have to be strong in a military sense to take control of any areas of much value, for it is a general ecological rule that all the better settlement areas would long since have been occupied. Lineage units are likely to have been the ones to carry off a successful move. As a result, the Nephite colonies may have been quite concentrated geographically (but note Helaman 3:8). They would hardly have scattered by individual families on the face of the land, as did U.S. pioneers in the West. The prime movers were, in all likelihood, ambitious leaders who saw a chance for increased personal and lineage power in the move. Morianton and Jacob (3 Nephi 7:12) illustrate the type.

All this business of seeking new lands and new power sounds very Mesoamerican. [^45]

Those going overland (undoubtedly the majority) would mainly have moved via the narrow pass into just the zones Morianton had had his eye on, the eastern lowlands in the land northward near the narrow neck. Others took a sea route, settling along the west sea in the area in the land northward. By neither route would the migrants have traveled farther than necessary. We have no reason to think that distances of more than a couple of hundred miles were involved. (It makes little economic sense, for example, to ship a bulky product like timber very far, at least in ancient times—Helaman 3:10-12.)

There is one apparent exception to the likely rule of short travel. Helaman 3:4 reports that some Nephites "did travel to an exceeding great distance, insomuch that they came to large bodies of water and many rivers." That statement seems to imply a distance greater than the area in the land northward that Morianton tried to reach, so close to Bountiful that it might have allied with it (Alma 50:29, 32). In former times the floor of the Valley of Mexico was occupied by a set of lakes that were greater in combined size than anything else in central Mexico. It was this lake system that allowed the Aztecs to facilitate movement of goods needed to support their great city of Tenochtitlan. The exceptional concentration of resources permitted by the lakes as they linked adjacent lands is now considered a prime reason for the prosperity of the valley in Aztec times as well as earlier. For these reasons the region would have been attractive to colonizers and might have been the territory mentioned in Helaman 3. Perhaps the same area is referred to in 3 Nephi 7:12, which tells of a group of dissenters who fled to "the northernmost part of the land" and occupied a city named Jacobugath, which was burned at the time of the crucifixion (3 Nephi 9:9). Thus, very possibly the dimensions of the land northward referred to in the Nephite and Jaredite records could exceed somewhat the figures I offered in chapter 1. If travel went as far as the Valley of Mexico, that would be near the extremity of the Mesoamerican culture area at the time of our record. And if those greater dimensions did turn out to be correct, it would provide an interesting possible connection, through "king" Jacob and his dissenters, between the old Book of Mormon centers and Teotihuacan's rise to prominence, for those migrants to the Valley of Mexico could have reached that area at the beginning of the first century A.D., just as its growth rate was accelerating.

Hagoth was a major figure in promoting the northward migrations. The location of his home port is clear enough—exactly at the border between lands southward and northward that is right at the isthmus or narrow neck. On the west-sea or Pacific side of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec are large shallow lagoons that have often invited maritime activity. In the hills just inland on the isthmus grows fine timber, [^46] which was so desirable that the Spaniards cut it, floated it downriver to the Atlantic side, and shipped it to Cuba for building ships. The lagoons and the timber resources were located in precisely the spot on the Pacific side of the neck that chapter 63 of Alma calls for.

Settlements of the first century B.C. have been found scattered along the coast of the states of Guerrero and Oaxaca, a few hundred miles north of the isthmus. [^47] It is reasonable that some Nephite colonization and subsequent trade (Helaman 3:10) was directed there, particularly since good timber is rare on that hot, dry strip. Later on, at least, this area was definitely colonized by people from southern Mesoamerica. [^48] The colonists conceivably could have gone a considerable distance north, even to the state of Nayarit over 600 miles away, but if that was the case, they probably lost contact with their homeland, since even within the land southward over much shorter distances communication was often tenuous. (Note the ineffective, slow messages even among the top leaders in Alma 59; compare Mosiah 7:1.) There is concrete evidence that sea travel along the Pacific coast of not only Mexico but all the way to Ecuador in South America was an ancient, though probably not a regular, practice. [^49]

The "ship" of Hagoth, if it was like craft known later on the Pacific coast, was either a very large dugout canoe with built-up sides or a log raft with sails. Whatever its form, it could hardly have been a complex planked vessel at all resembling European ships. There is no evidence so far that such ships were constructed or used in the New World until after the Spanish conquest, and it seems unlikely that so important a technological item would have left no evidence, even in art. Still, the large dugout canoe sighted by Columbus on one of his voyages off the coast of Yucatan was of very respectable size, capable of carrying scores of people for days at a time. [^50] And with so much cultural evidence of coastal voyaging between South America and Mesoamerica, we may yet find that the large sea-going rafts known off Ecuador or Peru, and which were able to reach the Galapagos Islands off South America, [^51] were also made and used off Mexico, although this has not yet been demonstrated.

What about the LDS tradition that Hagoth, the Nephite shipbuilder who failed to return home, was an ancestor of the Polynesians? Years ago I compiled a large body of shared culture traits that indeed suggest historical links between those islands and various parts of the Americas, and this has been supplemented by others. Yet the evidence does not allow our pinning down any single time or place for a migration of trade that would persuasively explain the similarities. It remains impossible to demonstrate any clearcut connection between the two areas, although debate continues. [^52] Having been a missionary in Polynesia, I am well aware of the Hagoth theme in LDS tradition, but the evidence available does not support it as historically based fact. Neither can we rule out the possibility of a rare voyage between the mainland and the islands. Most of the evidence cited one way or the other is either weak or unclear. Those who choose to believe that Hagoth reached Polynesia must rely mainly on faith rather than on reliable evidence. [^53] The Book of Mormon itself, of course, says only that the man and his mates disappeared from the knowledge of the people in Zarahemla. For all they knew he might have died at a ripe old age on the west Mexican coast without a suitable vessel in which to make the return voyage. And neither do we know.

Chapter 3 in this book cited evidence from several central and south Mexican locations that cultural influences and probably elite migrants did arrive from southern Mesoamerica during the first century B.C. and took over local control. Monte Alban in Oaxaca, at the onset of its period II, is a particularly clear case. [^54] As research continues we can expect to learn more clearly how, and how much, these northward movements affected the localities the new settlers inhabited.

Nephite Chronological Reckoning

Scattered throughout the middle part of the Book of Mormon with increasing frequency as one reads on are statements about Nephite dating. Nearly all LDS readers simply consult the footnotes on each page that offer dates (none exactly correct) in our calendar. If we investigate the Nephite calendrical references exhaustively, the footnoted dates fall into question. Perhaps we will be able to clarify this matter by looking at Mesoamerican calendars.

By the time the Book of Mormon account reaches the middle of the first century B.C. (early in the Book of Helaman), it is dear to every reader that the scribes were deeply concerned with detailed chronology. This same cultural emphasis is also apparent in Mesoamerica. The major Mesoamerican peoples kept strict account of the passing of the years. We are best informed about the Maya of the Yucatan peninsula. They measured elapsed years from a distant date (3113 B.C.) of unknown significance. [^55] The earlier Nephites used as their fundamental reference date Lehi's departure from the land of Jerusalem (2 Nephi 5:28 is the first mention). For some six hundred years they followed this practice, although toward the end of that period a secondary reference developed, the date when the Nephite judges began governing in place of King Mosiah, as in 3 Nephi 1:1: "Now it came to pass that the ninety and first year [of the judges] had passed away and it was six hundred years from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem." In that year signs were observed marking the birth of Jesus Christ in Palestine (verses 2-26).

At the early end, the Nephite connection to biblical chronology is "the commencement of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah" (1 Nephi 1:4), when Nephi's record began. Lehi's departure from Jerusalem and the start of the Nephite count of years took place within a few months, it appears, and still within Zedekiah's first year. The editorial footnote in the current edition of the Book of Mormon dates that year as "about 600 B.C." We can now be more accurate, thanks to developments in Bible scholarship. The task was difficult in part because "the first year" of Israelite kings could have two meanings. By one reckoning a king was said to begin ruling in the partial year when he actually came to the throne; by another method, his initial year was the full calendar year following his accession to the ruling seat. The Jews in Lehi's time probably used the former system. [^56] In addition, there is the problem of connecting the Bible statements about chronology to our present calendar. Dates for the Jewish rulers have been worked out over many years of careful historical scholarship. The key information goes back through the European Middle Ages, through Roman Empire times, the Hellenistic rulers, the Persian empire, and finally to the annals of the Assyrian kings. Eclipses are mentioned in conjunction with events in the lives of those monarchs; astronomers can date those precisely, helping to anchor the entire sequence to our calendar within one or two years. [^57] Today the volume of interlocking information is so great that there cannot any longer be serious question about Zedekiah's date. The words of Nephi start with events that took place in the Jewish year overlapping our 597-596 B.C.

The second key connection of Old World historical dating with the Book of Mormon is at the birth of Jesus. That event cannot, so far, be dated with certainty in our calendar, since the historical records of that day ignored the obscure birth of the babe in Bethlehem. But there is general agreement among historians that the Herod who ruled at the time of the Savior's birth died in 4 B.C. Other historical facts are mentioned in the Gospels—Luke 2:2-3 names the ruler of a neighboring province in the Roman Empire at the time of the taxation that made Joseph and Mary go to Bethlehem; and there is evidence regarding the appearance of the "new star" that marked the nativity (Matthew 2:9-10; 3 Nephi 1:21). Putting all these historical considerations together is a complicated, controversial task. Most of the experts now agree that the birth of Jesus was "in or shortly before 4 B.C.," with a chance of its having been as early as 7 B.C. [^58] But, the reader may object, how can our calendar with its A.D. - B.C. distinction have been mistaken about such an important event? The explanation is that the year of the Savior's birth did not become significant to the calendar used in Europe until centuries after the event. The monk Dionysius Exiguus calculated the date soon after A.D. 500, but he made a mistake, mainly due to the inadequate historical materials available. [^59] So Christ was not born in 1 B.C., neither in A.D. 1, but probably in 4 or 5 B.C., or a bit earlier still.

Consider what this means for the Book of Mormon. Both by prophecy (1 Nephi 10:4; 19:8; 2 Nephi 25:19) and by Nephite historical reckoning (3 Nephi 1:1), the American scripture allots "600 years" for the interval between Lehi's departure in Zedekiah's first year and the birth of Jesus Christ. Yet secular historical records allow no more than about 593 years (597 B.C. to 4 B.C.) between these events. Although there appears to be a problem, an interesting solution exists. To grasp it we must suppose that Nephite time-keeping would have followed the principles of the calendar that was widespread in southern Mesoamerica in the time and place that the scriptural account was written. All the material in this book to this point supports that important relationship.

Note that the word "year" has several meanings in different civilizations. Various definitions of "years" are recognized, each used for a different purpose. An unabridged English language dictionary reveals that even we have several different counts for which we use the one word. Among the lowland Maya, whose calendar is the one we know best in southern Mesoamerica, at least three kinds of "years" were calculated: (1) the tzolkin or sacred year of 260 days (thirteen months of twenty days each), (2) the haab, which was 365 days long (eighteen months of twenty days each, plus a closing "month" or five "unlucky" days), (3) the tun of 360 days. The tun was used for most calendrical calculations, apparently serving as an approximation to the haab, having the special merit that it could be divided and multiplied far more conveniently (360 is divisible by many numbers, 365 by very few). The Mayan calendar specialists loved to "play around" with dates that went ahead millions of years and back as far as 400 million years! [^60] The Mayan counting system adapted to calendrical matters, then, went like this:

1 day = 1 kin

20 days = 1 minal ("month")

360 days = 1 tun ("year")

20 tuns = 1 katun

20 katuns= baktun ("cycle")

Let us not suppose that this recognition of several types of "year" units indicates any confusion on the part of the ancients about astronomical realities. The experts in the Mesoamerican societies knew with great precision how long it took the earth to go around the sun and how this cycle correlated with the moon in its motions, with Venus and Saturn cycles, and no doubt with other information on the heavenly bodies (in the Book of Mormon, compare Alma 30:44; Helaman 12:14-15). Use of the 360-day tun year was a conscious compromise of convenience, no more. Suppose the Nephites used the same system of counting time as the Maya. [^61] The prophesied "six hundred years" in that reckoning would constitute precisely one and one half baktuns (thirty katuns), a neat total of 216,000 days. But this count of 600 tun "years" would be about 3,156 days shorter than the total using our sidereal year today (approximately 365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, and 9.54 seconds long). In other words, "600 years" by the Maya tun method of calculating time would turn out 8.64 years shorter than "600 years" in today's conventional sense. If we mark off 600 tun years from Zedekiah's first year, 597-596 B.C., 216,000 days brings us into the year overlapping 5-4 B.C., an acceptable date for Christ's birth.

Further confirmation of this connection of Nephite chronology to the katun system is provided by the "baktun prophecy" that Alma seems to have made. To his son he foretold that the extinction of his lineage and people, the Nephites, would occur "in four hundred years from the time that Jesus Christ shall manifest himself unto them" (Alma 45:10-14). Samuel, the Lamanite prophet, announced the same interval to the Nephites' destruction (Helaman 13:5). Four hundred tuns would be one baktun or cycle in the Maya system (144,000 days or about 395 of our years). Omens and prophecies (as well as "generations") among the Maya were commonly phrased in terms of the beginning or ending of whole calendar units. [^62] In Mesoamerican thinking, Alma's and Samuel's prophecies for an entire baktun would have been exceedingly profound statements. And, of course, the 600 tuns before Christ, together with the 400 after his birth, make the entire Nephite history come out in "even" calendrical terms. We see the same tendency to make history fit a pattern among the Egyptians, the Aztecs, and even the Israelites. [^63] Yehudi Radday, an Israeli scholar, argues that the history of Israel in fact, not just in literary form, falls into a symmetrical pattern. [^64]

For emphasis, let us review these points. If the Nephite "year" had been the same as our present year of 365 + days, then the Book of Mormon prophecies and its history as well would be in error, for from Zedekiah to Christ's birth is in fact not 600 but closer to 592 of our solar years. But if we suppose that the Nephites used the method of calculating time that was standard in southern Mesoamerica, where the Nephite lands must lie, then 600 of the 360-day tun years used there matches rather neatly the apparent interval from Zedekiah to Christ. Not only is the "problem" eliminated, but we obtain an important perspective of the Nephites' use of the calendar system that prevailed in their geographical and cultural setting.

If space allowed, we could explore other interesting points opened up to us by this apparent relationship to Mesoamerican calendar and time concepts. Let us note in passing just one other scriptural statement. Amalickiah had almost gained victory over the Nephites on the east seashore when Teancum, a Nephite captain, stole at night into Amalickiah's camp "and put a javelin to his heart," then slipped away without awakening anybody. This was the last night of their year. (In that area war would be likely to occur between October and February, when rains and floods did not block movement; since Amalickiah was already well into his campaign at this time, it seems likely that this year end/beginning was at or near the winter solstice.) "And now, it came to pass in the twenty and sixth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi, behold, when the Lamanites awoke on the first morning of the first month [of the year], behold, they found Amalickiah was dead in his own tent. . . . And now, when the Lamanites saw this they were affrighted; and they abandoned their design, . . . and retreated with all their army into the city of Mulek, and sought protection in their fortifications" (Alma 52:1-2). Throughout later Mesoamerican societies immense effort was expended to determine whether a period of time was lucky or unlucky for some endeavor. Omens were regularly sought and frequently were tied to events of the last, or first, day. [^65] It would be highly characteristic of Mesoamericans to act as the Lamanites did upon the death of Amalickiah. To awaken on the first day of a new year to find their leader dead would have been far more unnerving to their omen-conscious feelings than we moderns may appreciate.

The hints about astronomy and calendar that we glean from the scripture fit comfortably in the context of Mesoamerican practices, but we do not yet know when the calendrical knowledge of the area became crystallized into the full form employed in Classic times. It was probably no later than 100 B.C., according to David Kelley of the University of Calgary, a leading specialist in this field. He also believes that key elements of the scheme were introduced from the Old World. [^66] More recent research seems to demonstrate that 235 B.C. was the actual year, based on astronomical necessities, when the "Maya" long-count calendar crystallized. [^67] (The long-count calendar involves a combination of the 365-day "vague year," which apparently has been used since about 1322 B.C., with the 260-day count of later origin.) This could have come about by some joining of Olmec knowledge with the developing southern Mesoamerican civilization which I have termed the Second Tradition.

The people of Zarahemla, when discovered by Mosiah, apparently used a lunar calendar, for they spoke of Coriantumr, the Jaredite ruler, surviving with them for so many "moons." That patently refers to Hebrew yerah, "lunar month" or "moon," reflecting the simple calendar of the non-literate Mulekites. (The Jewish calendar had been strictly lunar-based until the Jews borrowed the Babylonian system in Lehi's day.) Since "moon" is not referred to after Mosiah's arrival, it seems safe to suppose that he and his party brought a more sophisticated system from highland Nephi/Guatemala. The date Dr. Vincent Malmstrom believes saw the invention of the complex calendar of southern Mesoamerica, 235 B.C., falls in the reign of Mosiah I. Could there be some connection between combining his calendrical knowledge, brought from highland Guatemala, with the Mulekite system, the amalgam catalyzing the long-count development? Work on elucidating the calendar systems of Mesoamerica may yet shed light on influences and movements of Book of Mormon peoples in the third century B.C.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Preclassic Metal?"American Antiquity 20 (1954):64; idem,"Indications of Early Metal in Mesoamerica," University Archaeological Society Bulletin 5 (Provo, Utah, 1954):1-15. Only slight attention was paid to the argument, as in Gordon R. Willey, "The Prehistoric Civilizations of Nuclear America," American Anthropologist 57 (1955):585.
[^2] "A Reconsideration of Early Metal in Mesoamerica," Katunob 9 (March 1976):1-18.
[^3] "A Reconsideration," pp. 1-2. I have since gathered more examples.
[^4] Byron Cummings, "Cuicuilco and the Archaic of Mexico," University of Arizona, Bulletin IV, no. 8, Social Science Bulletin 4 (Tucson, 1933), pp. 38-39; Robert F. Heizer and James A. Bennyhoff, "Archaeological Investigation of Cuicuilco, Valley of Mexico, 1957," Science 127, no. 3292 (1958):232-33.
[^5] R. E. Longacre and Rene Millon, "Proto-Mixtecan and Proto-Amuzgo-Mixtecan Vocabularies: A Preliminary Cultural Analysis," Anthropological Linguistics 3 (1961):22.
[^6] Terrence Kaufman, "El Proto-Tzeltal-Tzotzil: Fonologia Comparada y Diccionario Reconstruido," Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Centro de Estudios Mayas, Cuadernos 5 (1972), p. 118; Marcelo Alejandre, Cartilla Huasteca con su Gramatica, Diccionario y Varias Reglas para Aprender el Idioma (Mexico: Secretaria de Fomento, 1899), pp. 84, 88; Hyacinthe de Charency, "Les Norns des Metaux chez Differents Peuples de la Nouvelle Espagne," Compte-Rendu, Congres International des Americanistes, Paris, 1890 (Paris, 1892), pp. 539-41.
[^7] "A Linguistic Look at the Olmecs," American Antiquity 41 (1976):80-89.
[^8] J. W. Grossman, "An Ancient Gold Worker's Tool Kit: The Earliest Metal Technology in Peru," Archaeology 25 (1972):270-75; A. C. Paulsen, "Prehistoric Trade between South Coastal Ecuador and other Parts of the Andes" (Paper read at 1972 Annual Meeting, Society for American Archaeology). Dates given in these papers need to be corrected backward to accord with bristle-cone pine corrections.
[^9] J. Charles Kelley and Carroll L. Riley, eds., Precolumbian Contact within Nuclear America, Southern Illinois University Museum, Mesoamerican Studies 4 (Carbondale, 1969).
[^10] "Aspectos Tecnicos de la Orfebreria de la Tumba 7 de Monte Alban," in "El Tesoro de Monte Alban," by Alfonso Caso, Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Memorias 3 (Mexico, 1969), pp. 393-94.
[^11] Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967), p. 254.
[^12] Clair C. Patterson, "Native Copper, Silver, and Gold Accessible to Early Metallurgists," American Antiquity 36 (1971):292-94.
[^13] Jose Antonio Gay, Historia de Oaxaca, vol. 1 (Mexico, 1881), pp. 4, 62. For the record, it is to be noted that F. W. Hodge, ed., Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, part 2, Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 30 (Washington, 1910), p. 833, says of a Creek Indian group (the "Tukabatchi") in Alabama that they "had in their possession certain metal records which they had preserved from time immemorial. Adair, (Hist. Ind. 178, 1775) says that in his time, they consisted of five copper and two brass plates. . . ."
[^14] Read H. Putnam, "Were the Plates of Mormon of Tumbaga?" Papers, 15th Annual Symposium on the Archaeology of the Scriptures (Provo: BYU Extension Publications, 1964):101-9 (available as a reprint from the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies). Regarding gilding, note Daniel F. Rubin de la Borbolla, "Orfebreria Tarasca," Cuadernos Americanos 3 (May-June 1944):XV, 127-38. Rubin points out the quandary of what happened to all the "gold" the Spaniards claimed to see. He concludes that a good deal of it was merely gold-plated copper, even though the documents never mention the gilding process. The plates of the Book of Mormon "having the appearance of gold" come to mind, of course. See also Heather Lechtman, "Pre-Columbian Surface Metallurgy," Scientific American 250 (June 1984):53-63.
[^15] David M. Pendergast, "Tumbaga Object from the Early Classic Period, Found at Altun Ha, British Honduras (Belize)," Science 168 (April 2, 1970):116-18.
[^16] The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible: An Illustrated Encyclopedia, vol. 1 (New York: Abingdon Press, 1962), pp. 467, 461.
[^17] P. T. Craddock, "Europe's Earliest Brasses," MASCA Journal 1 (Philadelphia, December 1978):4-5.
[^18] For example, Guy Stresser-Pean, American Sources on the Huasteca, HMAI 11 (1971), p. 590; W. C. Root, "Mexican Bronze," in Metals from the Cenote of Sacrifice, Chichen Itza, Yucatan, by Samuel K. Lothrop, HUPM 10, no. 2 (1952), p. 20.
[^19] Earle R. Caley and Dudley T. Easby, Jr., "New Evidence of Tin Smelting and the Use of Metallic Tin in Pre-Conquest Mexico, " Actas y Memorias, 35a Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1962, vol. 1 (Mexico, 1964), pp. 507-17.
[^20] A. V. Kidder, Jesse D. Jennings, and E. M. Shook, Excavations at Kaminaljuyu, Guatemala, CIWP 561 (1946), p. 144; David M. Pendergast, "Ancient Maya Mercury," Science 217 (1982):533-35.
[^21] H. H. Bancroft, The Native Races (of the Pacific States), vol. 2 (San Francisco: A. L. Bancroft and Co., 1882), pp. 407-8.
[^22] Rene Rebetez, Objetos Prehispanicos de Hierro y Piedra (Mexico: Libreria Anticuaria, n.d.).
[^23] Sigvald Linne, Mexican Highland Cultures, Ethnographical Museum of Sweden, Publication 7, n.s. (Stockholm, 1942), p. 132.
[^24] Sigvald Linne, Zapotecan Antiquities, Ethnographical Museum of Sweden, Publication 4, n.s. (Stockholm, 1938), p. 75.
[^25] Jane W. Pires-Ferreira, "Shell and Iron-Ore Mirror Exchange in Formative Mesoamerica," in The Early Mesoamerican Village, ed. Kent V. Flannery (New York: Academic Press, 1976), pp. 317-28.
[^26] John B. Carlson, "Lodestone Compass: Chinese or Olmec Primacy?" Science 189 (September 5, 1975):753-60.
[^27] Lincoln LaPaz, "Topics in Meteorics. Hunting Meteorites: Their Recovery, Use, and Abuse from Paleolithic to Present," University of New Mexico, Publications in Meteoritics 6 (1969), pp. 84-85.
[^28] J. C. Waldbaum, "The First Archaeological Appearance of Iron," in The Coming of the Age of Iron, ed. T. E. Wertime and J. D. Muhly (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1980), pp. 69-70.
[^29] H. Hensoldt, "Meteorites and What They Teach Us, I," American Geologist 4 (1889):37-38; Jose M. Arriola, "Sellos, Indumentaria, Utensilios Domesticos, Utensilios Industrial, Objetos Rituales, Caracteres Alfabeticos y Numericos," in La Poblacion del Valle de Teotihuacan, vol. 1, ed. Manuel Gamio (Mexico: Secretaria de Agricultura y Fomento, Direccion de Antropologia, 1922), p. 218.
[^30] LaPaz, "Topics in Meteoritics," p. 74.
[^31] Find a Falling Star (New York: Paul S. Ereksson, Inc., 1972), p. 238.
[^32] H. H. Nininger, Our Stone-Pelted Planet (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1933), p. 75.
[^33] Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1952), pp. 210-13.
[^34] Lenore O. Keene Congdon, "Steel in Antiquity: A Problem in Terminology," in Studies Presented to George M. A. Hanfmann, ed. David G. Mitten et al., Harvard University, Fogg Art Museum Monographs in Art and Archaeology 2 (Mainz, West Germany: Verlag Philipp Von Zabern, 1971), pp. 17-27.
[^35] Bancroft, The Native Races, vol. 2, p. 407.
[^36] "Evidence for the Sources and Use of Tin During the Bronze Age of the Near East: A Reply to J. E. Dayton," World Archaeology 5 (1973): 116.
[^37] Caley and Easby, "New Evidence of Tin," p. 515.
[^38] de Charency, "Les Noms des Metaux," p. 540.
[^39] R. de la Grasserie, Langue Zoque et Longue Mixe: Grammaire, Dictionnaire, Bibliotheque Linguistique Americaine 22 (Paris, 1898), pp. 161, 169.
[^40] This last point was drawn to my attention by Assyriologist Paul Y. Hoskisson, to whom I am grateful.
[^41] de la Grasserie, Langue Zoque, p. 170.
[^42] For example, Cecil H. Brown, "Growth and Development of Folk Botanical Life-Forms in the Mayan Language Family," American Ethnologist 6 (1979):366-85.
[^43] Lehi in the Desert, pp. 216-21; idem, Since Cumorah, pp. 256-58.
[^44] Donald D. Brand, "The Coati or Pisote (Nasua narica) in the Archaeology and Ethnology of Meso-America," Actas y Memorias, 35a Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1962, vol. 3 (Mexico, 1964), pp. 193-202. On a provocative theory of overlapping terms and classification, see the paper by Joe E. Pierce, "Culture: A Collection of Fuzzy Sets," Human Organization 36 (1977):197-200.
[^45] The Role of Semi-Domesticated Animal Resources in Middle American Subsistence (paper read at 37th Annual Meeting, Society for American Archaeology, 1972).
[^46] Representative sources include: Matthew Wallrath, Excavations in the Tehuantepec Region, Mexico, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n.s., vol. 57, part 2 (Philadelphia, 1967), p. 12; Kamar Al-Shimas, The Mexican Southland (Fowler, Indiana: Benton Review Shop, 1922), pp. 114-15; A. M. Tozzer, Landa's Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, HUPM 18 (1941), pp. 201-2.
[^47] L. C. Stuart, Fauna of Middle America, HMAI 1 (1964), pp. 318-19.
[^48] Franz Termer,"Der Hund bei den Kulturvolkren Altamerikas," Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie 82 (1957):1-57; Ricardo E. Latcham, "Los Animales Domesticos de la America Precolombina," Museo de Etnologia y Antropologia de Chile, Publicaciones 3, no. 1 (Santiago, 1922), pp. 42-73.
[^49] Richard Perry, Life in Forest and Jungle (New York: Taplinger, 1976), p. 91.
[^50] Al-Shimas, The Mexican Southland, p. 115.
[^51] Rafael Martin del Campo, "Contribucion a la Etnozoologia Maya de Chiapas," in Los Mayas del Sur y sus Relaciones con los Nahuas Meridionales (VIII Mesa Redonda, San Cristobal Las Casas, Chis.), vol. 1, Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropologicos 17 (1961):33.
[^52] August C. Mahr, "Semantic Evaluation," Anthropological Linguistics 3 (May 1961):12, 23-24.
[^53] Tozzer, Landa's Relacion, pp. 203-4.
[^54] Puleston, "Semi-Domesticated Animal Resources," p. 6.
[^55] Personal communication from Gareth Lowe, citing Anales del Museo Nacional David J. Guzman 5, nos. 17-18 (1954), an article by historian Jorge Larde which I have been unable to see directly.
[^56] Jane Wheeler Pires-Ferreira, Edgardo Pires-Ferreira, and Peter Kralicke, "Preceramic Animal Utilization in the Central Peruvian Andes," Science 194 (October 29, 1976):483-90.
[^57] Howel Williams, "Geologic Observations on the Ancient Human Footprints near Managua, Nicaragua," Carnegie Institution of Washington, Contributions to American Anthropology and History 52 (1952), p. 30. On the dating of the associated Usulutan pottery, see E. Wyllys Andrews V, The Archaeology of Quelepa, El Salvador, MARI 41 (1976), p. 65.
[^58] Michael J. Snarskis, "Stratigraphic Excavations in the Eastern Lowlands of Costa Rica," American Antiquity 4 (1976):348-50. The author reports having seen similar effigy vessels from Costa Rica in private collections, showing blindfolded, burden-bearing cameloids. Their date on stylistic grounds is between 300 B.C. and A.D. 300, when particularly strong connections prevailed between Mesoamerica and Pacific coastal Nicaragua and Costa Rica.
[^59] Franz Termer, "Antiguedades de 'La Violeta,' Tapachula, Chiapas," Estudios de Cultura Maya 4 (1964):90-92.
[^60] J. J. Williams, The Isthmus of Tehuantepec. . . (New York, 1852), p. 204.
[^61] Wallrath, Tehuantepec Region, p. 14.
[^62] Paul S. Martin and H. E. Wright, Jr., eds., "Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause," Proceedings of the International Association for Quaternary Research, VII Congress, vol. 6 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1967), pp. 98-104; Robert A. Martin and S. David Webb, "Late Pleistocene Mammals from the Devil's Den Fauna, Levy County," in Pleistocene Mammals of Florida, ed. S. David Webb (Gainesville: University Presses of Florida, 1974), pp. 114-45; Jim J. Hester, "Late Pleistocene Extinction and Radiocarbon Dating," American Antiquity 26 (1960):58-77; Paul S. Martin, "The Discovery of America," Science 179 (March 9, 1973):974.
[^63] Remains of a horse have been reported found in conjunction with human remains in excavations at Loltun Cave in the Maya area. No date is apparent from the report. Miami Museum of Science Institute of Maya Studies Newsletter 7, no. 11 (November 15, 1978):2. More positive is the evidence from Cenote Ch'en Mul, at Mayapan, Yucatan, reported by C. E. Ray. Two lots including horse bones were collected from the bottom stratum almost two meters down. Ray reluctantly concluded that they had to be pre-Columbian ("Pre-Columbian Horses from Yucatan," Journal of Mammalogy 38 [1957]:278.) Mercer had found other horse remains in southwest Yucatan caves in association with artifacts. The Hill Caves of Yucatan (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1896), p. 172.
[^64] A. V. Kidder, "Miscellaneous Specimens from Mesoamerica," Carnegie Institution of Washington Notes on Middle American Archaeology & Ethnology 117 (March 1954):20, figure 4e.
[^65] David M. Pendergast, "The Prehistory of Actun Balam, British Honduras," Royal Ontario Museum Art and Archaeology Occasional Paper 16 (1969):44-45.
[^66] "Conocieron la Rueda los Indigenas Mesoamericanos?" Cuadernos Americanos 25, no. 1 (Jan.-Feb. 1946):opposite 207.
[^67] Munro S. Edmonson, Quiche-English Dictionary, MARI 30 (1965), pp. 57-58. Also kieh: horse; kiehebal: steed; kiehem: mounted. Compare The War of Conquest: How It Was Waged Here in Mexico. The Aztecs' Own Story as Given to Fr. Bernardino de Sahagun, Rendered into Modern English by Arthur J. O. Anderson and Charles E. Dibble (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1978): p. 28, "The horses-they looked like deer-neighed and whinnied"; p. 55, "The deer-which-carried-man-upon-their-backs, called horses."
