John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

7

Nephite Life

Our study of the Book of Mormon has concentrated so far on fitting the scripture into a plausible geographical setting. We have found that at point after point the Nephite account describes locations, migrations of peoples, journeys, and settlement patterns that fit consistently into southern Mexico and northern Central America-Mesoamerica, At the same time we have discussed geography, we have caught glimpses of the cultural setting too.

Culture and society among Book of Mormon peoples deserve our closer attention. A people's institutions serve as vehicles, media or mechanisms through which its ideas take their form and are communicated to us. The Book of Mormon is filled with ideas—teachings, principles, meanings. If we wish to grasp them with maximum clarity, we need to understand as well as we can the medium of culture through which they are conveyed to us. We must not expect that Joseph Smith saved us all that trouble by translating the Book of Mormon to English. He aided us, it is true, yet we ourselves still have to seek the true or full meaning from his words, just as we must elucidate the English of Shakespeare. It will help us if we know how and why, in social and political terms, the Nephites prospered and fell, what constraints their economic system imposed upon them, and which folk ideas contradicted the urgings of their prophets. This sort of grasp of a people's way of living comes only by careful study of all we can find out about them. Because there is so much material we could deal with, here we will be able only to introduce topics we cannot treat fully. This chapter will compare scripture and external data on the following: metals, useful animals, secret societies, commerce, kinship, and government. When we finish, each reference in the volume to "cattle" or "merchants" or "kindreds" should take on deeper meaning for the reader. And the civilizational forces that did so much to shape the fate of those ancient people may make new sense to us.

The Use of Metals

Critics of the Book of Mormon have been fond of pointing out that statements in the scripture regarding use of metals by the Nephites and Jaredites run contrary to authoritative pronouncements on the subject by experts. The position of orthodox archaeologists has long been that nowhere in Mesoamerica were metals used before about A.D. 900. Until recently Latter-day Saints were not in a position to reconcile this conflict. In 1954 I published two articles that presented evidence for the existence of metal objects from Mesoamerican archaeological sites well before the accepted date of A.D. 900. [^1] Further finds would be needed, I concluded, before the question of dating could be settled.

Nearly twenty years later I updated the information and included much more data. [^2] Since then additional facts have come out in support of the idea that metal use was much earlier in America than had been thought. One basic lesson we learn from this experience is that the experts were quite wrong. Metals were indeed in use in Book of Mormon times in Mesoamerica.

What kind of evidence is there? The most compelling sort consists of actual specimens found where an early date is positively indicated. Over a dozen of these significantly precede A.D. 900. [^3] The earliest piece so far probably dates back to around the first century B.C. It is a bit of copper sheathing found on top of an altar at Cuicuilco in the Valley of Mexico. [^4] In addition to surely early specimens, other finds, not firmly dated, could be pre-A.D. 900; a late date has been inferred for some of them mainly because metal was found and "everybody knows" that metal occurs only in late sites. When all current information is considered, it appears that archaeologists should now be asking a new question. The old query was, why was there no metal in early Mesoamerica? Now it ought to become, why do we recover so little evidence of the metallurgical skill that was surely there?

Traditional Mesoamerica accounts from various groups have reported use of metals that dirt archaeologists have failed to document. Evidence from language also indicates knowledge in the metallurgical arts beyond the supposed A.D. 900 barrier. Longacre and Millon reconstructed part of the Proto-Mixtecan language of the state of Oaxaca and thereabouts on the basis of words found in its daughter languages. In identifying terms that must have been in use before the descendant tongues split apart, the researchers were puzzled by the fact that a word for "metal" seemed to have existed in the proto-language at about 1000 B.C. [^5] Of course, metalworking is not supposed to have been going on then.

The same linguistic procedure has been applied to Mayan languages. Proto-Tzeltal-Tzotzil dating to perhaps A.D. 500 had a term for metal. But a related term occurs in Huastecan, considered to be the language that first split off the basic Maya stem, supposedly around 2200 B.C. [^6] Even if we arbitrarily reduced this figure to around 1500 B.C., this linguistic evidence indicates that metal was known to Mayan people at a startlingly early date. Yet Kaufman and Campbell, in an influential study of the Mixe-Zoquean language group, added further support. They concluded that Proto-Mixe-Zoquean was likely the language of the Olmecs known to the archaeologists. That early tongue too had its word for metal by around 1500 B.C. [^7] So work in comparative linguistics shows that metals must have been known, and presumably used, at least as early as 1500 B.C. That date extends back to the time of the Jaredites, for which so far we have not a single specimen of actual metal. Does it not seem likely that specimens are going to be found someday?

Arguments from comparative studies support the idea that metals were long known in Mesoamerica. Archaeologists only recently learned that metal was being worked in Peru as early as 1900 B.C., and it was being traded in Ecuador before 1000 B.C. [^8] At the same time, all Mesoamerican scholars agree that intercommunication with Peru and Ecuador occurred over a period of thousands of years. Some definitely believe that it was via these voyages that metalworking reached Mexico and Guatemala. [^9] At the same time, we are asked to suppose that something as valuable as metal waited to be carried north until A.D. 900; then, suddenly, the metal connection finally "took." Such a strange idea of the culture contact process is now impossible to accept. Dudley T. Easby, Jr., one of the most respected experts on ancient American metal technology, wrote in 1960: "The majority of scholars, relying on circumstantial evidence, believe that fine metallurgy in ancient Mexico was limited to a few centuries before the arrival of the Spaniards. Perhaps they are right, but it seems to me that their theory leaves much to be explained." [^10] Now linguistic evidence confirms Easby's suspicions. A new theory of the history of Mesoamerican metalworking is needed. When it has been framed, the references to metals in the Book of Mormon will not seem as strange as they once did.

None of what has been said here means that point-by-point agreement now exists between the scripture and scientific findings. The trend of the evidence is moving toward agreement, but some serious differences remain to be worked out. In order to see what some of them are, let's now look very carefully at some statements about metals in the Nephite volume. But we must not let our preconceptions about the text stand in the way of gaining understanding.

Nephi, the son of Lehi, was a connecting link between the Near Eastern metallurgical tradition and Nephite culture in the New World. In the Arabian wilderness he found ore, refined it, and made tools with which to construct a ship. He required divine guidance for the design of the vessel, but his matter-of-fact description of the smelting indicates that he used his own knowledge to manage that (1 Nephi 17:8-11). What he knew was probably fairly rudimentary—his apparatus certainly was, being little beyond a bellows (verse 11). After all, the Israelites were not highly skilled in those arts. Instead, expertise with metal had been a monopoly of specialist non-Hebrew clans, whose craft secrets were passed down from father to son. [^11] Nephi could have known the basics of the processes, but he probably did not control the full repertoire of skills.

Upon arriving in the promised land, Nephi made a set of plates on which he kept his record (1 Nephi 19:1). Approximately twenty years later he manufactured more plates ("the small plates of Nephi," 2 Nephi 5:28-30). By that time he and his followers had left the Lamanites behind in the Pacific coastal lowlands and settled up in the land of Nephi. There he undertook to pass on what knowledge he did have in these matters. He taught his people "to work in all manner of wood, and of iron, and of copper, and of brass, and of steel, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious ores." (2 Nephi 5:15). This is an impressive list. Unfortunately, the language leaves us uncertain what the Nephites did with these substances. We could infer that practical as well as decorative use was made of some of these (see 2 Nephi 5:16 regarding "precious things"). If so, utility soon took second place. Nephite concern with ores and metals a bit later had come to be with their "precious" quality (Jacob 1:16; 2:12). Only once thereafter, about 400 B.C., was utilitarian metalworking suggested (Jarom 1:8: tillage tools and weapons are mentioned). From that point on in the Nephite history, every reference to metals states or implies that they were strictly precious—a source of wealth. In fact, during the final 400 years of the Nephite account even gold and silver, the only metals mentioned at all, are noted but four times. Perhaps by that period the labor-cheap surface deposits had been exhausted, making ore harder to obtain. One discussion of American metals has suggested that such a difficulty probably arose generally, for it is a geological likelihood. [^12]

Processing ore gets almost no attention in the Book of Mormon. Only a single time are we unmistakably told of smelting. According to the Jaredite account, King Shule "did molten out of the hill, and made swords" (Ether 7:9). One possible Nephite reference to processing states that they did "work all kinds of ore, and did refine it" (Helaman 6:11). Note that Nephi's plates were "plates of ore," where we might expect to read "plates of gold" or such (1 Nephi 19:1). There are puzzles here because what the text means about Nephite operations with metals is simply unclear. Refining could have consisted of as simple a process as heating a piece of rich ore and pounding it. Certainly the Jaredite king who had his "fine gold . . . refined" within the confines of a "prison" (Ether 10:7) would not have been hauling bulky ore to such a place for smelting, although it might have made sense to have workers treat small amounts of less-than-fine gold in order to improve its quality. In short, we remain largely ignorant about the technical procedures employed by the Book of Mormon craftsmen, but there is no reason from the text to think they were very sophisticated technologically. It sounds as if they were within the modest range of skill common in later Mesoamerica.

What about the specific metals cited in the book? Were all the metals mentioned present in Mesoamerica? A total of seven are listed: gold, silver, copper, brass, iron, steel, and "ziff."

Gold and silver specimens are well-known. Some show the "lost-wax" method of casting, known in Mesoamerica, Peru, and also the Near East. However, the only form specified in the scriptures is the flat "plate" on which historical and religious records were kept. It would not be feasible to manufacture those other than by hammering. Thin hammered metal we know well, but metal sheets for record keeping are not yet attested archaeologically in the New World. (A nineteenth-century historian in Oaxaca said that the ancestors of the Mixtecs made very thin gold plates on which were engravings of ancient hieroglyphs, but we do not know the source of his information. [^13])

Copper, too, was well known anciently. The earliest metal artifact yet known in Mesoamerica is the bit of copper already mentioned. But copper was also basic to alloys. One alloy used in many parts of nuclear America was tumbaga, a mixture of gold and copper. Treated properly it had the "appearance of gold" but weighed less and probably was cheaper. R. H. Putnam has argued persuasively that the Book of Mormon plates that were in Joseph Smith's hands were of tumbaga. (Had they been unalloyed gold, they would have been too heavy for a single person to carry. [^14]) A tumbaga specimen from Belize (British Honduras) shows that this material was known in the Maya lowlands no later than the fifth century A.D. [^15]

A different alloy is bronze, of copper with tin. The word bronze does not occur in the Book of Mormon, but "brass" does. The "brass plates of Laban" were brought from Jerusalem by Nephi, as we know. Until a few years ago it was supposed that what we call brass (an alloy including zinc) was developed only in the last few centuries. Yet the Bible speaks of "brass." Bible scholars have dealt with that apparent misstatement by saying that the word translated "brass" was actually bronze. The Hebrew word now known to refer to both copper and bronze was translated in the King James Version of the Bible as several different English words (in Ezekiel 1:4, 27 it comes out as "amber"). [^16] Within the last few years, however, some ancient artifacts from the Mediterranean area have been tested by more sophisticated scientific techniques than before, and the tests reveal that actual brass, with zinc in it, was in use among the Etruscans, probably as early as Lehi's time. [^17] That means that perhaps the brass plates of Lehi's day are neither an anomaly of culture history nor an oddity of linguistic labeling, but of the literal metal.

Bronze was used in Mesoamerica, although its composition (that is, the proportion of tin) was not as standardized as in the Old World. [^18] Interestingly, Ether 10:23 accurately distinguishes brass from copper in one subtle bit of context. The record says that the Jaredites dug up heaps of earth "to get ore . . . of copper." Naturally they would not have got "ore of brass" or bronze, for those metals must be manufactured by alloying. Rather, the same verse says, they "did make" brass. The terminological distinction comes out exactly as it would from a person who wrote with a real knowledge of metallurgy.

It is tempting to see "ziff" as tumbaga, for it is mentioned twice in direct connection with brass and copper (Mosiah 11:3, 8). Several derivations of "ziff" are possible in Hebrew with two general senses—"bright" or "shining" on the one hand and "plated" on the other. Both meanings would be appropriate for an alloy with a gilded surface. But "ziff" could also have been tin, another metal known in Mesoamerica. [^19] In fact, even mercury is a possibility, for it too occurred. [^20]

Iron use was documented in the statements of early Spaniards, who told of the Aztecs using iron-studded clubs. [^21] A number of artifacts have been preserved that are unquestionably of iron; their considerable sophistication, in some cases, at least suggests interest in this metal. [^22] (That is not surprising, since even a culture as simple as the Eskimo found iron—from meteors—valuable.) Few of these specimens have been chemically analyzed to determine whether the iron used was from meteors or from smelted ore. The possibility that smelted iron either has been or may yet be found is enhanced by a find at Teotihuacan. A pottery vessel dating to about A.D. 300, and apparently used for smelting, contained a "metallic-looking" mass. Analyzed chemically, it proved to contain copper and iron. [^23] Linne, the same Swedish archaeologist who made that find, accepted a piece of iron found in a tomb at Mitla, Oaxaca, as probably refined. [^24]

Without even considering smelted iron, we find that peoples in Mesoamerica exploited iron minerals from early times. Lumps of hematite, magnetite, and ilmenite were brought into Valley of Oaxaca sites from some of the thirty-six ore exposures located near or in the valley. These were carried to a workshop section within the site of San Jose Mogote as early as 1200 B.C. There they were crafted into mirrors by sticking the fragments onto prepared mirror backs and polishing the surface highly. These objects, clearly of high value, were traded at considerable distances. [^25] (This archaeologically established mineral processing was taking place within the valley that chapter I identified as the probable Jaredite land of Moron. The Jaredite record, a few centuries before the date of the San Jose Mogote finds, tells of the king who confined craftsmen who refused to pay taxes. There he compelled them to refine "his fine gold"—Ether 10:7.) But perhaps the strangest interest of all in iron materials on the part of the ancients has recently come to light. There is now reason to think that magnetite was used by the Olmecs to make compasses. (They could have rested a sliver of it on a bit of wood in a pot of water; the metal then would have oriented the wood and itself to magnetic north. [^26]) What a mysterious substance such "precious ore" (Helaman 6:11) must have seemed.

This is still not the whole story on iron, however. In the Near East, Akkadian, Hittite, and Egyptian names for iron meant something like "metal from heaven," [^27] for some iron had fallen as meteors. The Egyptians inferred that the sky was made of iron, although smelted terrestrial iron in the Near East was also very early, perhaps 5000 B.C. [^28] When the Spaniards asked the Aztecs where they obtained iron, they pointed to the sky. [^29] Their astronomers had seen and recorded meteors falling. [^30] The amount of iron obtainable from meteors was not trivial. H. H. Nininger, a leading authority on meteoritics, has estimated that 50,000 tons of this material falls on the earth yearly. Much of this is usable iron. [^31] A number of huge chunks have been discovered in Mexico. One of them, the Bacubirito specimen in Sinaloa, is 13 feet long and is estimated to weigh 27 tons. [^32] Rural people in its vicinity have made chunks of it into implements. It would not be surprising if the Nephites included meteoric metal among the "all manner of . . . iron" known to them (2 Nephi 5:15).

"Steel" is another complex problem. Nibley has discussed how uncertain we remain about what might be meant by "steel" in ancient Old World texts. [^33] The King James translators were unclear on the point; several places where they put "steel" now would be translated "bronze." Even experts have a problem, as suggested by a recent technical article entitled "Steel in Antiquity: A Problem in Terminology." [^34] In Mexico we face similar obscurity. The native chronicler Tezozomoc reported that the Tarascans (Mesoamerica's most noted metallurgists at the time of the Spanish conquest) wore "steel" helmets . [^35] Since we know so little about either our Nephite text or the materials and processes in use in prehispanic Mesoamerica, we all would do well not to jump to conclusions about the accuracy or inaccuracy of such a statement. In a recent dispute about the use of tin in the early Near East, J. D. Muhly and T. E. Wertime emphasized that documents that refer to the unexpected use of a metal are more persuasive as positive evidence than the failure of archaeologists to come up with specimens is acceptable as negative evidence. [^36] Caley and Easby make the identical argument regarding pre-Columbian tin in Mexico. After demonstrating that specimens of the metal were there all the time despite the doubts of archaeologists, who had failed to examine the evidence, they end by observing, "The results also show that it is not prudent always to discount or ignore historical accounts as possible sources of technical information; some of the 16th century chroniclers apparently were wiser and more observant in such matters than many of their critics." [^37] Perhaps the Jaredite historian who talked of steel (Ether 7:9) and Tezozomoc with his steel helmets on the Tarascans both knew something that archaeologists will yet document.

We have seen that the metals mentioned in the Book of Mormon can, for the most part, be accounted for in Mesoamerica. So far as there is a significant problem, it concerns dating. But the chronological picture of metal use is changing too, as we saw earlier. What the Book of Mormon says of these substances has its problems still, but it is interesting how different the entire topic looks today than, say, a quarter century ago.

A related line of research is promising too. Comparison of the names of metals in Mesoamerican languages and those of the Near East may tell us something about metallurgical knowledge among Book of Mormon peoples. Hyacinthe de Charency long ago pointed out that a Maya word for gold, nab or naab, parallels Egyptian noub, "gold." [^38] Nobody has paid any attention to this man's work for years, so the possible significance of this name linkage between the hemispheres as a reflection of a particular bit of technological transfer has not been weighed. With the help of colleagues, I have turned up additional suggestive parallels in terminology. Egyptian hmty (copper) compares closely with Zoquean hama-tin (gold or silver). (A prefix was attached to signify which metal was meant. To my knowledge, a Zoquean word for copper has not been recorded.) [^39] Zoquean is, we saw earlier, descended from the language in use among the Olmecs. Also in Zoquean, amachil (lead) could recall Hebrew anak, tin, but a link may be more likely to Akkadian (Babylonian), from which the Hebrew word was borrowed and where annaku was used for tin or lead. [^40] The Akkadian language would have been near in time and location to the Jaredites' homeland. But the earlier Sumerians, too, were near the Jaredite origin point, and one of their terms for gold, GUS.KIN, recalls the general Mayan word for precious metal, ta'kin (kin meaning "sun"). Then, to complete the circle, Sumerian AN.NA.HIA. means "tin," while Zoquean amachil is "lead." (The Maya related the two metals: the word for tin meant, literally, "white lead." [^41]) There are other provocative word links as well. Whether any of them signify historical connections will require more research to determine, but so far the possibilities seem challenging.

Where is the Book of Mormon left by all the metal data? First, both in the Book of Mormon and in what we know from Mesoamerica, metals were used more for decorative, ceremonial, and "precious" ends than for utility. In neither the scriptural account nor the secular record do we discover good reasons why metals were not more fully employed (or why we fail to find more evidence of it if they were). A bit of light is shed on why the Nephites considered some ores "precious." But the questions remaining, both for students of the Book of Mormon and for scholars on Mesoamerica, are vast. The conventional scientific view about the role of metal in Mesoamerica, and particularly about its date, is in the process of major change. Scholarly developments on the topic in the coming decade will be worth watching.

Animals in the Book of Mormon

Just as the Book of Mormon's statements about metals require precise reading and extensive comparison with scientific and historical information if we are to appreciate their significance, so the things said about fauna in Nephite territory have to be carefully analyzed and compared in full awareness of what is known and not known about nature in Mesoamerica as well as the principles known to govern the labeling of natural categories in various cultures.

What sorts of animals are there to consider? Twelve creatures are specified in the Book of Mormon: ass, cow, dog, goat, wild goat, horse, sheep, ox, swine, elephant, "curelom," and "cumom." Some other expressions—calf, cattle, fowl, lamb, fatling—are special cases of the animals just named, we can suppose. It is easy enough to list these names, but what do they signify? The answer is not obvious. Consider for a moment Nephi's statement that upon reaching the promised land they found both "the goat and the wild goat" in the forests of their new-found land (1 Nephi 18:25). How did an untamed "goat" differ from a "wild goat"? The traits distinguishing the categories are not apparent. Then there are those incomprehensible names cumom and curelom (Ether 9:19). In order to make sense of these, we must consider a wide range of historical, linguistic and natural scientific information in a search for clues to interpret the scripture's statements.

Some animals were included in the flocks and herds that the Nephites began to raise (2 Nephi 5:11). In fact, they had "flocks of all manner of cattle of every kind." (Cattle in Hebrew means either large or small quadrupeds.) Still, goats, wild goats, and horses that the early Nephites were said to "raise" were not included in either the flocks or herds (Enos 1:21). Moreover, the Jaredites "had" animals in two categories, those "useful for the food of man" and others merely "useful unto man" (Ether 9:18-19). So far, not so good. The text does not clarify itself. Then when we read of "flocks of herds" (Enos 1:21), we almost despair of understanding the labeling system,

One thing is clear. The terminology the Nephite volume uses to discuss animals follows a different logic than the scheme familiar to most of us whose ancestors came out of western Europe. Anthropologists tell us that the world's peoples have many different models for classifying animals or plants, as they do for labeling geographical directions or dividing up time. [^42] Hugh Nibley has made this point repeatedly. [^43] When the Spaniards reached the Americas, they had trouble labeling the native creatures systematically. Yet the Indians had an even harder time classifying the animals the Europeans brought along.

A good example of the confusion is with the coatimundi (Nasua narica). Landa, the padre who favored us with a detailed description of Yucatan, wrote of the beast, "There is an animal which they call chic, wonderfully active, as large as a small dog, with a snout like a sucking pig. The Indian women raise them, and they leave nothing which they do not root over and turn upside down; and it is an incredible thing how wonderfully fond they are of playing with the Indian women, and how they clean them from lice." The flesh of the coati was also widely eaten, and the animal remains a pet today in some rural Mexican homes. Clearly this was a "useful animal," but it would better be termed tamed than domesticated. (Incidentally, the Book of Mormon never uses a term anything like domesticated.) What ought the coati to be called in English? One common Spanish name is tejon. Unfortunately, tejon is also the Spanish name for badger as well as raccoon. Another name, from the Aztecs, is pisote (Nahuatl pezotli), which means basically glutton. Yet pisote is sometimes applied also to the peccary or wild pig. In regard to the peccary, the Nahuatl terms quauhcoyametl and quahpizotl were developed after the conquest to distinguish the native species from the introduced Castilian pig, so by extension the coati was sometimes termed quauhpezotli, tree-glutton, to distinguish it from the peccary, the ground-glutton. Finally, the Mayan languages labeled the coati for its playful aspect, hence chic, clown. [^44]

What a complicated picture of terminology and zoological classification. It does little good to ask the question, but what is a chic? Our glosses on the Mayan term, whether "creature like a small dog," "sort of a sucking pig," "tree-glutton," or "clown-like pet," help understanding very little. A chic is simply a chic. Obviously, translation of zoological labels across cultural boundaries has to be approached without the presuppositions we are likely to bring to such questions. We are left to assume that the "goat" and "wild goat" discovered running in the forest by Nephi need not have been more than generally similar to the Old World creatures we think of when we hear the term goat.

We must return to the naming problem later, but another issue has to claim our attention first. What animals were actually present in the area where the Nephites and Jaredites lived? Scientists now feel somewhat confident of their ability to identify which species lived in what areas. If they lack evidence that a particular animal was present in Mesoamerica, they believe there is only a limited possibility that evidence to the contrary will still be forthcoming. Yet we must not rule out the possibility that surprises are waiting; thus, a certain caution is justified about the conclusiveness of the picture. Present knowledge of the species in Mesoamerica indicates there were enough of the right sorts of animals in that setting that all twelve of the Book of Mormon's beasts can be plausibly accounted for.

The Book of Mormon is uneven in the frequency of its references to animals. More is said early in both the Jaredite and Nephite accounts than in the later portions. That might be a literary accident, yet there is a logic to it. As population increases and fills up the better quality lands, more people come into competition with animals for space and subsistence, and the animals lose out. There is little room for animals in a place where "The whole face of the land had become covered with buildings, and the people were as numerous almost, as it were the sand of the sea" (Mormon 1:7). Expectably, the text says not a word about the presence or the use of animals among the Nephites at or near the time Mormon made that statement in the fourth century A.D.

Scholars writing on Mesoamerica hold that the number of animals of potential value to the inhabitants anciently was small. There is some truth to that, but too often the statement ignores evidence that substantial use was indeed made of a wide variety of beasts. The late Dennis Puleston of the University of Minnesota concluded a few years ago that the Maya ate the flesh of "semi-domesticated animals" far more often than had been thought. [^45] I have accumulated additional evidence to support Puleston's point. Considering all we now know about animal use in Mesoamerican cultures, it is fair to state that most of what the Book of Mormon says about animals is plausible. Some of the book's statements remain hard to square with present knowledge, but the picture is considerably more acceptable to scientists than a few years ago.

Turkey flocks have long been significant in the domestic economy of the Mesoamerican people. (Photo by Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

The terms flocks and herds are easy to account for. Deer and pigs (peccary) could have fallen under those terms. Fowls in flocks were common. The turkey (Meleagris sp. and Agriocharis sp.) was, after all, an American native. Other domesticated, tamed, or at least caged fowls included the Muscovy duck, Tinamou duck, quail, "pheasant," "partridge," "dove," curassow, cotinga, roseate spoonbill, macaw, chachalaca, and parrot. [^46] The term flocks could have included such smaller animals much used by native peoples in Mesoamerica as hares, rabbits, and the paca and agouti (both rodents the size of small pigs). [^47]

Dogs are mentioned at five places in the Book of Mormon, but nothing is said of their use. Two types (perhaps two species) were common in Mesoamerica. The large, white, humped mastiff (Nahuatl itzcuintepotzotli) was the creature whose noisy descendants plague Mexican villages today. A smaller, hairless sort (Nahuatl xoloitzcuintli) was fattened and eaten as a delicacy. [^48] The Spaniards relished the flesh of these animals at the time of the conquest, although they would have been offended, as most of us would be, at being offered the flesh of the bigger dog. Perhaps Nephite "flocks" included fattened dogs.

The Nephites used the term translated as "flocks" to refer to larger quadrupeds also. Where flocks and herds are mentioned together (Helaman 6:12; Ether 10:12), the distinction seems to come close to ours, in which "herd" is reserved for larger animals, but we are not certain that they made that distinction.

It is with the big quadrupeds that some readers think problems exist with the scriptural text. As we examine the writings about Mesoamerica's large fauna, we find the linguistic problem assails us at every turn. Natives and Spaniards shared the difficulty. The lowland Maya at first named all the big animals of the Spaniards—horse, mule, ass—with the name of the nearest native of equivalent size—the tapir. The Spaniards, however, thought the tapir looked like a pig, although it weighs up to 700 pounds. [^49] Others considered the tapir to resemble the ass; sixty years ago in southern Mexico the beast was called anteburro or "once-an-ass." [^50] The Maya adopted Spanish names for the large creatures the Europeans had introduced (for example, uacax, cattle, from Spanish vacas). The sheep got a whimsically descriptive name, taman, translated as "cotton that you eat," yet the European goat was called by the name of the aboriginal short-horned deer. [^51] Similar confusion and pragmatism prevailed in North America, where the Miami Indians happened to see European cows before the tribe was pushed far enough west to encounter the bison or buffalo, which they then termed "wild cow." The explorer DeSoto called the buffalo simply vaca, cow. Yet the Delaware Indians named the cow after the deer, and the Miami tribe labeled sheep, when they first saw them, "looks-like-a-cow." [^52] Back in Yucatan, Father Landa noted that the tapir, while the size of a mule, had a hoof like an ox, and he considered the small brocket deer a "kind of little wild goat." [^53]

But isn't it obvious that the "cow" of the Book of Mormon was our familiar bovine, straight out without all this hedging? No, it is not at all obvious. First, we are trying to find out what the Book of Mormon really means by the words we have in English translation; we are not trying either to simplify or to complicate the matter, but only to be correct. In the effort to learn the truth, nothing can be assumed obvious. Second, there is a lack of reliable evidence—historical, archaeological, zoological, or linguistic—that Old World cows were present in the Americas in pre-Columbian times. The same is true of some of the other creatures mentioned in the Nephite record, where modern readers may feel they are already familiar with the animals on the basis of the translated names. In these cases we have to find another way to read the text in order to make sense of it.

So what might the Nephite term translated by Joseph Smith as cow actually have signified? When Cortez's party crossed the base of the Yucatan peninsula during their conquest, they observed herds of docile deer that some scholars think were semi-domesticated. [^54] Perhaps they were " cows." Moreover, the Mazahua Indians of El Salvador at the time of the conquest were described as a "pastoral people" who "owned and cared for" herds of deer. [^55] (Any kind of herding of animals in pre-Spanish America surprises most cultural historians, who have generally supposed total absence of that practice. Only recently have scientists demonstrated that a full pastoral tradition based on domesticated llamas existed in pre-Columbian Peru for thousands of years. [^56]) But if deer do not seem satisfactory as cows, then how about bison? They were present as far south as Nicaragua in direct association with inhabitants of the period of the early Nephites. [^57] Or, we might consider the llama or alpaca—American cameloids—as cows. They carried loads and provided food and fiber for the people in Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and beyond. They are not attested by zoologists for Mesoamerica in recent times. (Much earlier, in the Pleistocene, one type of llama definitely lived in North America.) But a Costa Rican archaeologist has discovered an effigy pot in the form of a cameloid, and other such vessels are known there. [^58] A pre-Spanish figurine from Guatemala looks like a laden cameloid. [^59] And on the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in the middle of the last century, alpaca were reported living wild. [^60] A few miles away were the Huave Indians, whose tradition says their ancestors had come anciently from South America, the home of the alpaca and llama. [^61]

Perhaps we have identified enough candidates for the Nephite cow, but what about the horse? True horses (Equus sp.) were present in the western hemisphere long ago, but it has been assumed that they did not survive to the time when settled peoples inhabited the New World. [^62] I recently summarized evidence suggesting that the issue is not settled. Actual horse bones have been found in a number of archaeological sites on the Yucatan Peninsula, in one case with artifacts six feet beneath the surface under circumstances that rule out their coming from Spanish horses. [^63] Still, other large animals might have functioned or looked enough like a horse that one of them was what was referred to by horse. A prehispanic figure modeled on the cover of an incense burner from Poptun, Guatemala, shows a man sitting on the back of a deer holding its ears or horns, [^64] and a stone monument dating to around A.D. 700 represents a woman astride the neck of a deer, grasping its horns. [^65] Then there is another figurine of a person riding an animal, this one from central Mexico. [^66] Possibly, then, the deer served as a sort of "horse" for riding. (That was a practice in Siberia until recently, so the idea is not as odd as moderns might think. Besides, in the Quiche languages of highland Guatemala we have expressions like keh, deer or horse, keheh, mount or ride, and so on. [^67]) As for pulling a vehicle, there are no data to suggest such a function in ancient America (northern Asiatic people did use reindeer in that manner). Thus, we simply do not understand what might have been the nature of the "chariot" mentioned in the Book of Mormon in connection with "horses." (Alma 18 and 20; 3 Nephi 3:22). Anyway, this horse and chariot combination is mentioned in the record in connection with only two geographical locations (part of the land of Nephi, and at a point between Zarahemla and Bountiful). Whatever was involved in the way of animal and vehicle, it may not have been widely used. Obviously, we will want to search for further sound information on "horses." Just a few years ago, nobody could document for Mesoamerican cultures that humans rode on any animal, that burdens were carried by animals, [^68] or that cameloids were present. Discoveries may yet clarify remaining obscurities. At the same time, we need to study the Book of Mormon text with extreme care to be clear about what it does and does not say. For example, the way "horses" are referred to in 3 Nephi 4:4 suggests that their major use was as food, not to carry things. We need constantly to be clarifying our reading of the scripture.

The case of the horse bones, found years ago but ignored by all the archaeologists, tells us that we must constantly scrutinize the adequacy of "current" scientific beliefs. The Eurasian sheep is not supposed to have been in pre-Columbian America either, yet real sheep's wool was found in a burial site at Cholula, Puebla, Mexico, in an archaeological setting that gave no other indication of dating after the Spaniards arrived. [^69] This lone specimen doesn't take us far toward a literal reading of the Book of Mormon term sheep, but perhaps we should keep this door too ajar a little.

No systematic research has been done comparing the names of animals in the Near East and Mesoamerica. Just as we saw with the metals, perhaps also with beasts: clarifying links may appear through linguistic studies. A hint of the possibilities derives from work on the Yuman language group (located around the lower Colorado River, near the U.S.-Mexican border). Reconstructing the protoculture associated with the ancestral Yuman language by comparing the descendant tongues, an investigator reconstructed a word for "horse" on strong evidence. [^70] That is, the indications are that a term for horse was shared by those people long before European horses arrived. The evidence is not foolproof, of course, but it does demand some alternative explanation if we are not to suppose early knowledge of the horse.

"Swine" and "sow" are mentioned in the Nephite portion of the Book of Mormon with a tone of disgust (3 Nephi 7:8; 14:6). That's what we would expect among people who even nominally followed the constraints of the law of Moses on eating pork. But the non-Israelite Jaredites reveal no sensitivity about using "swine" as food (Ether 9:18). The peccary or wild pig was abundantly present throughout most of Mesoamerica, being valued both for its flesh and because it kills snakes in the wild.

What about the Book of Ether's "elephant"? Mastodons and mammoths once lived throughout North America and part of South America. They are unquestionably elephants in the eyes of zoologists. The question is how late they lived. Most experts assume they failed to survive down to the time of the Jaredites. The only place they are mentioned in the Book of Mormon is in the Book of Ether, near the beginning of that record (by my calculations of Jaredite chronology, the date must have been before 2500 B.C.). Experts agree that the mammoth, and mastodon could have survived in favored spots much later than the time normally assigned for their extinction. The mastodon has already been dated as late as 5000 B.C. at Devil's Den, Florida, [^71] and around the Great Lakes to 4000 B.C. [^72] Then there is the remarkable discovery of the remains of a butchered mastodon in Ecuador; pottery associated with the find is said to date to after the time of Christ. [^73] In its light, the radiocarbon date around 100 B.C. of horse, mammoth and mastodon remains at St. Petersburg, Florida, does not seem impossible. [^74] The Jaredite mention of the elephant a single time—very early in their lineage history—hints that the creature became extinct in their area soon thereafter. Perhaps the Jaredites themselves killed off the last of the beasts within their zone. But the Jaredites might not have been the only people to record the presence of the big animal. Some North American Indians have recounted legends of "great stiff-legged beasts who could not lie down" and of an animal with a fifth appendage, which came out of its head. [^75] Possibly, tribes transmitted through oral tradition some vague remembrance of encounters with these "elephants." The later the beasts survived, the easier it is to accept the reliability of the tradition. In any case, it is possible that the mammoth or mastodon hung on in Mexico at least as late as 2500 B.C.

Without going into further detail, we may note that other Pleistocene period animals also might have lasted down into times of Jaredite inhabitation. Perhaps the "cumom" and "curelom" were such. The failure of Moroni, the Nephite translator of the Book of Ether, to translate these names from the original tongue of the Jaredites indicates that the animals were probably extinct by his day. A humanly worked bone of a giant sloth, found in Guatemala, hints at one candidate for such a creature. [^76]

It's time to summarize. A table will do that best. In one column are listed Book of Mormon terms for various animals. In the other are names in modern and scientific nomenclature that could reasonably correspond. Several beasts are possible for each Book of Mormon name. Usually there is no basis for preferring one candidate above another. Take your choice. But the purpose is not to finalize identifications. Instead it is to show that there are plausible creatures to match each scriptural term. The table shows this is so. Scientific research, as well as closer study of the Book of Mormon, may yet shed further light on these matters. In any case, the remaining problems are more modest than a few years ago. Dogmatic dismissal of the Book of Mormon on the ground that its statements about fauna are unsupportable will not do anymore.

Book of Mormon Name Candidate Animal on the Scene

Elephant Mastodon (Mammut americanum)

Mammoth (Mammuthus columbi)

"Curelom" Sloth (Megalonyx sp.), Bison (Bison sp.),

Tapir (Tapirus sp.), Mastodon or

Mammoth

"Cumom" Same possibilities as "curelom"

Cow Deer (Odocoileus sp.), Brocket (Mazama

pandora), Camelidae (Paleolama sp., Lama

sp.), Bison

Horse Deer, Tapir, Horse (Equus sp.)

Ox Tapir, Camelidae, Bison

Ass Tapir, Camelidae

Sheep Camelidae, Paca or Agouti (both

Dasyproctidae)

Goat Brocket, Deer

Swine Peccary (Pecari sp., Tayassu sp.)

Dog Dog (Canis familiaris)

Secret Societies

Few social institutions are of such concern to the Book of Mormon prophets as secret societies, yet they remain unfamiliar to modern readers of the book. What are we to make of this mode of organizing? How do they function, and why did Mormon and Moroni emphasize their threat? Since they are secret, after all, it is difficult to learn much about them, but what we do know could shed crucial light on the scripture.

In the first place, secret organizations have been widespread. They are not an invention of the writers of the Book of Mormon. Scholars have studied such groups in ancient and tribal societies as well as living examples in our society. As a result, we have a profile of what secret groups are often like. [^77] Some recurring characteristics are that they promise power, wealth, and fleshly privilege as recruiting enticements; they use secret signs to allow devotees to fellowship one another without being known to outsiders; they maintain social respectability on the part of participants as camouflage for their radical aims; they initiate recruits via a series of tests until they attain insider status so that the majority, who are in the early stages of induction, do not really know much about the organization.

More than a single form of organization exists. A spectrum of types existed anciently as well as today. College fraternities, organized crime "families," price-fixing cartels, Watergate "plumbers," subversive political movements, and secret police all more or less fit under the same broad, dark umbrella. Some seem innocuous and in fact have little power. Others are obviously dangerous, as Moroni understood clearly (Ether 8:20-26). The mere fact of secrecy—withdrawal from public visibility and accountability—opens any of these units to potential abuse. The trouble stems mainly from the ambitions of hidden leaders. They conceal their desires to dominate behind a relatively innocent organizational mask. A commentator on the Mafia in Sicily has said, "The ideology of the people is the Mafia—to be strong, to be prepotent, to dominate. . . . And the Mafia is first the desire to dominate. To be the lord of the situation." [^78] The publicly-seen group will often publicly espouse very noble-sounding aims—"justice," "equality," "preserving the people's rights"—but behind the facade hidden aims and leaders remain. Webster cites "the constant rule of the secret societies," which is "that the real authors never show themselves." [^79]

While sheer power is one key driving force in these groups, the gratification of material, carnal desires is frequently another. Despite some famous exceptions, most participants in secret organizations somehow hope to be materially better off as a result of their joining, although the rhetoric of the movement may vehemently deny this. We certainly find these key features in the secret organizations of Mesoamerica, one of the areas where this pattern was well-developed.

Father Sahagun, one of the finest sources on life in Mexico before the Spanish conquest, told of the nahualistas: "people like assassins [a famous Near Eastern secret society], daring and accustomed to kill, they carried on their persons pieces of jaguar skin, of the forehead and chest, and the tip of the tail, the claws, the canines, and the lips to make them powerful, brave and fearsome." [^80] Each one had his nahual, a guardian animal spirit that lent its power to the initiated one. To obtain or discover this power, a person had to be trained in black magic after undergoing severe initiation. Sometimes hallucinogenic substances were used to induce visions of an animal guardian spirit. (The Old World secret group known as the assassins, from which our present term is derived, took its name from the hashish drug.) When one's nahual spirit had become accessible by these means, the individual supposedly could actually become that animal. One could, it was claimed, suck the blood of sleeping persons, cause illness, or even eat corpses. The jaguar nahual was the most feared and awesomely admired, for that feline—considered lazy, cunning, and pleasure-loving—was the most subtly terrifying beast to its enemies. [^81] Jaguar symbolism, presumably tied to belief in this nahual or "were-jaguar," goes back thousands of years, well back into Olmec or Jaredite times. [^82]

Later Mesoamerican adherents to this belief formed a semi-priestly order known as nahualteteuctin, "master magicians," or teotlauica, "sacred companions in arms." To enter the order one had to undergo tests of pain and self-denial. The Toltec priest/ruler Quetzalcoatl or Kukulcan (not the original being who bore these names) was claimed by some as master and patron of the order, but other deities were also associated. [^83]

Other Spanish documents tell us that the nahualistas continued into the colonial period. Of course, they remained as secret as possible, so few Spaniards learned about them. Still, the sources taken together allow us to learn a fair amount about their aims and operations. Those believers "formed a coherent association extending over most of southern Mexico and Guatemala, inspired everywhere by detestation of the Spaniards and Christianity." [^84] Members were classified under different degrees or levels, each advancement demanding further initiation rites and revelations to the initiate of new secret knowledge. Local chapters or brotherhoods were organized and dedicated to Judas Iscariot or Pontius Pilate, two obvious enemies to the imported Christian pattern. There were certain recognized centers of the association, particularly in Guatemala and the Mexican states of Chiapas and Oaxaca. The most important dignitaries of the organization resided near those centers. Secret councils of the inner circle were held at strongholds of the cult in caves or rocky recesses, not in artificial structures. Black was symbolic of the association's affinity with the night, caves, and the underworld, a complex of ideas descended from much earlier times. The deity most clearly associated with the nahualistas of the colonial period was Tepeyollotl (an important Aztec god, borrowed by them from older cultures to the South). He was known as the "heart of the earth," symbolized by the jaguar. [^85] Ceremonies, formulas, and procedures were pretty much the same throughout the area. Nor was this merely a "religious" activity, since the leading nahualist priests, whose offices were often passed on through family lines, were organizers and coordinators of a number of anti-Spanish revolts. What the association really represented was the old native beliefs and practices continuing as an underground counterculture to the whole way of life brought by the Spaniards. [^86] There is even reason to believe that at least part of this pattern has continued in isolated areas of Mexico to this very day.

Masks like this one of the Teotihuacan era have been interpreted as evidence for secret societies. (Photo Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society for Early Historic Archaeology.)

In many essentials the nahualistas functioned as a classical secret society. The initiation tests, the secrecy of aim and place, actual or potential subversion of the general social order, and the appeal to power and privilege as a recruiting tactic are giveaways. The leverage of the central dominating clique in a secret society is derived from esoteric knowledge. "In order to acquire influence in a secret society it is always necessary to establish a claim to superior knowledge." [^87] The nahualist priest, just like the gnostic adept of the Mediterranean world, claimed to know the grand secrets of the universe and how to control the powers that make important things happen, but in this context knowledge is considered only a tool or a weapon. It is not desired for itself so much as for the influence it will bring to the holder.

Those who turn to secret groups as a means to power and its worldly rewards usually are those who do not detect or desire legitimate, socially approved ways to the same ends. These groups flourish under conditions of rapid, disruptive social or economic change. Some people with ambitions or grievances that existing institutions are not handling seek extraordinary routes to achieve their aims. [^88] That kind of social stress was occurring among the Nephites in the first century B.C. We have already seen how dynamic the growth and spread of Nephite influence were at that time. Trade and wealth burgeoned, ambitions were stimulated in part of the population (for example, the king-men), and the old system of kin-based relationships, which had served fairly adequately during the time of kings Benjamin and Mosiah, appeared too limited and localized to accommodate the new circumstances. Those who wanted to ride the bandwagon of change, to "get ahead," to run things for their own benefit (like the Jacob of 3 Nephi 7:12), were willing to use whatever organizational tool they could grasp, including conspiracy, to hammer conventional society to the shape of their desires.

All this is typical, not strange. Scholars who have studied the secret groups have been struck by their similar general form across much of the world and over thousands of years. The structural demands of secrecy account for some general similarities, yet very specific characteristics also are widely shared. The question then comes to mind, Is the pattern of the secret organization repeated over the world because of common historical roots? Historian Nesta Webster thinks so: "Even if we deny direct [historical] affiliation, we must surely admit a common source of inspiration producing, if not a continuation, at any rate a periodic revival of the same ideas." [^89] That explanation of the reappearance of secret groups tends to agree with that in Helaman 6:26-29: "Those secret oaths and covenants did not come forth unto Gadianton from the records which were delivered unto Helaman; but behold, they were put into the heart of Gadianton by that same being who did entice our first parents . . . ; and he has brought it forth from the beginning of man even down to this time." According to the Book of Mormon, there definitely was historical continuity from Old to New World in the origin of Jaredite secret societies. They began only a few generations after the immigrants arrived in the new land from the Mesopotamian area. One of the Jaredites who revived the practice said, "Hath [my father] not read the record which our fathers brought across the great deep? Behold, is there not an account concerning them of old, that they by their secret plans did obtain kingdoms and great glory?" (Ether 8:9.) Historian Nesta Webster is more pointed: "The [Near] East is the cradle of secret societies." [^90] When the Jaredite record eventually came into the hands of the Nephite ruler Mosiah, his people were frantic to know about the extinct society that had left behind such impressive, mysterious traces as could be seen around them in the ruins. The king made the story public but withheld any details about the secret groups talked about in Ether's account (Helaman 6:26). Still, simply to have referred to them would whet the concern of ambitious individuals to know more (like telling a child, "Now be careful not to put beans in your ears"). Thus, the stage would be set for a revival of the combinations, however the organizers may have obtained the actual details of rites and organizational forms.

What do secret organizations possess that kinship and community-based groups do not? The answer is, instant credibility. Suppose, for example, that you as a merchant wished to establish trade connections with a location where you were unacquainted. What you would need most is a relationship of trust with somebody influential there. In societies of the kind described in the Book of Mormon, the whole array of quite recent social inventions we resort to for that purpose—corporations, banks, credit, contracts, embassies—had not yet been developed. If you had kinfolk in that place, they might trust you; but it would be as unlikely for kin to get a foothold in the midst of the strange setting as for you. A secret organization with "chapters" spread throughout the land could provide a person with "instant trust." In Europe in former centuries, Templar and Jewish secret groups used these kinds of links in the service of the commercial and financial activities of their members. [^91] Military officers of many modern nations have their relationships smoothed in new locations by membership in a fraternal order. Secret organizations among the Nephites or Jaredites would have performed similar functions for merchants.

Trade, scholars have discovered in recent years, serves as a great engine that can power a growing society to prominence and wealth—for a few of its members. [^92] Those controlling the throttle usually are the kind of people like Gadianton and "king Jacob" (3 Nephi 7:12), driven to possess power and wealth. It is no surprise to find that 4 Nephi 1:46 makes a direct link between the Gadianton secret band and wealth from trade: "The robbers of Gadianton did spread over all the face of the land. . . . And gold and silver did they lay up in store in abundance, and did traffic all manner of traffic." In this light we can grasp the interconnection of factors discussed in Helaman 6. Verse 7 starts by describing a vigorous trade situation and the prosperity that resulted (verses 9, 11). Immediately thereafter (verse 15), the Nephites' chief judge was murdered "by an unknown hand," which turned out to be Gadianton's (verse 18). The link is made in verse 17: "They began to set their hearts upon their riches, yea, they began to seek to get gain that they might be lifted up one above another; therefore they began to commit secret murders, and to rob and to plunder, that they might get gain" (emphasis added). A clear picture emerges of how the secret group motivated its members and gained power in Nephite society. The entire discussion fits the picture of secret societies known from many parts of the world.

The close tie of trade with tightly knit, self-serving groups is illustrated in Mesoamerica by the Aztec pochteca, a kind of guild or society of long-distance traders, with its own rituals, deities and internal discipline, in important ways like the secret societies we have been considering. The pochteca worked hand-in-glove with the Aztec power structure, serving the state as spies when they traveled abroad. In return they enjoyed wealth and many privileges thanks to the leverage they exerted through their unique social function. [^93] But we still know too little about details of the pochteca to be confident that the Nephite "combinations" were more than generically similar.

Another parallel to the Gadianton robbers is evident in the exploitative aims of certain power-hungry groups in Mesoamerica. The entire Aztec (or Mexican) people falls into this class. As a tiny tribe of hunter-gatherers, they moved out of the barren areas of western Mexico into the area occupied by the present-day capital city not many hundred years before the Spaniards arrived. They quickly became ambitious to possess the wealth and comforts they saw among the older, quasi-civilized farming peoples among whom they settled. One of their early leaders, Huitzilopochtli, was a man with "unlimited ambition" who became "the embodiment of Aztec religious and military aspiration." This man claimed to know the secret that would bring them the wealth and power they wanted. By committing themselves to "serving the sun (god), for becoming his people and terrifying others," Huitzilopochtli promised not just luxury but an ever-widening limit to their desires: "nothing will be their bound, nothing will they have to do without." With this sort of heady promise he led them on in ruthless conquests. So exemplary was he as a leader in this materialistic chase that he was later considered a god. The Spanish Christian conquerors viewed Huitzilopochtli as "the devil" and Christ's chief rival. [^94] Precisely the same ambition to exploit others characterized the "Toltecs." They hungered and thirsted after power—especially the power or "franchise" to conquer, take tribute, and "make their fortunes" in a specific territory. [^95]

In this consummately Mesoamerican lust for wealth and creature comforts we are reminded forcefully of the self-serving deceptions of Giddianhi writing to the Nephite chief judge Lachoneus: "I am Giddianhi; and I am the governor of this the secret society of Gadianton . . . deliver up your lands and your possessions, without the shedding of blood, that this my people may recover their rights and government" (3 Nephi 3:9-10). "Yield up unto this my people your cities, your lands, and your possessions, rather than that they should visit you with the sword . . . or in other words, yield yourselves up unto us, and unite with us and become acquainted with our secret works, and become our brethren that ye may be like unto us [in other words, "get a piece of the action"]—not our slaves, but our brethren and partners of all our substance" (verses 6-7).

Manifestly, Book of Mormon and Mesoamerican secret groups were up to the same tricks and operated according to similar rules. But were these practices really ancient in America, or were they late developments? Some researchers think the pochteca groups' origin goes back to Teotihuacan (the early centuries A.D.), [^96] but Professor Coe maintains that a similar institution was vital in Olmec civilization before 1000 B.C. [^97] J. A. Bennyhoff has interpreted masks recovered by archaeologists as indications of the presence of secret societies anciently. [^98] These ritual artifacts are present from about 1200 B.C. to 600 B.C. in the Valley of Oaxaca (Jaredite Moron). [^99] The first mention of secret societies among the Jaredites fell in the third millennium B.C.; the archaeologists have only fragmentary information about that era. But clandestine organizations were revived around 1200 B.C. (Ether 10:33), persisting until the destruction of the Jaredites. So the masks from Oaxaca coincide in time and space with the flourishing of secret societies according to the Jaredite account. (Incidentally, many of the "were-jaguar" nahual carvings of this time period are found at remote spots out in the "wilderness," where we might expect to find the shrines of secret groups.) Masks again are found in large numbers during developed Teotihuacan times, for a few centuries after A.D. 300. This happens to be just the period when Mormon reports the rise of the secret society that was instrumental in the downfall of the Nephites (Mormon 2:8, 10, 27-28; Ether 8:19-21).

We have seen enough to establish these facts: (1) a widespread pattern of secret organizations existed anciently in both the Old World and Mesoamerica, as the Book of Mormon says; (2) these units provided an organizational weapon by which ambitious, scheming men manipulated the less sophisticated to provide the former with wealth, power, and other gratifications; (3) the functions and contexts of the Mesoamerican secret groups make sense if we interpret them as reflections of the "combinations" described in the Book of Mormon, or vice versa; (4) the dynamic changes in society and economy that the Nephite account indicates were in process in the first century B.C. and again in the fourth and fifth centuries A.D. provided a setting that favored the rise of these subversive groups. The rise of Jaredite secret organizations is no doubt to be understood in parallel terms.

The Kinship Basis of Nephite Society

It would be a mistake to suppose that secret organizations were fundamental to societies where Nephites, Lamanites, or Jaredites lived. Rather, they were parasitic growths that flourished only when the main organism was unhealthy. The basic organization pattern among the Book of Mormon peoples was the same as in practically all early societies. Kinship was fundamental to the establishment and regulation of personal and group relationships. In modern urban life we have moved so far from earlier practices that many people today little realize how important kin relationships once were. In Israelite Palestine as well as during the earlier centuries of Nephite existence in the American promised land, kin ties provided the most crucial social connections. The Israelite kin groups of the most widespread significance in Lehi's day was what may be called lineages. Membership in these lineages was determined by virtue of descent from one male ancestor. [^100] In societies emphasizing the lineage unit, one's first tendency in getting one's social bearings is to compare notes with others to try to determine the distance back to some common ancestor. One of the first things Lehi did upon obtaining the Brass Plates from Laban was to check the genealogy, where he discovered that he and Laban shared a male ancestor at a distant level (1 Nephi 5:14, 16). That is, they belonged to a common lineage and as a result wanted possession of the same record. Upon arrival of Lehi's party in the promised land, they continued to follow the lineage principle, as Jacob 1:13 shows: "They were called Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Zoramites, Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites." We saw the principle at work again when Amulek and Alma met as strangers and needed to establish a relationship (Alma 8:20ff.) Of further note is Amulek's effort to orient his listeners to his social (kinship) position in relation to them (Alma 10:2).

Principles and customs of social organization are not fixed and unchanging. Peoples modify rules and preferences governing kin, marriage, family, and other social arrangements to fit new circumstances. For instance, as pioneering groups scattered out to occupy a relatively empty new land, they would de-emphasize certain connections that had made more sense in an old crowded community, while discovering that they needed to reinforce certain other links in order to overcome the effects of distance. Yet, if possible, people hang on to old ways. [^101] So both continuity and change would be expected in the Israelite ways Lehi's party brought with them, once the people began living in the new land. In fact, the former customs might have been largely submerged by patterns they encountered among and borrowed from the Mulekites, for the latter's social arrangements would likely be better adapted to the living conditions of the Zarahemla environment. Interestingly, the social systems of traditional Mesoamerica do not contradict what one might expect from an Israelite background. Some differences are apparent, but they are logical. Nor are the Mesoamerican characteristics surprising in light of the data in the Book of Mormon.

Emphasis on relationships reckoned through the line of the father is clear in both cases. Patrilineal (father-line) descent is clear in the Book of Mormon and among the Maya, as shown in documents from the Spanish colonial period and from interpretation of archaeological and art materials. [^102] Lineage organization that existed in southern Mesoamerica also agrees generally with the Book of Mormon social picture. [^103] For example, a Mayan was a member of a somewhat vaguely defined group (Yucatec Maya ch'ibal) whose members, while living in different locations, considered themselves descended from a common male ancestor. Members bore a name in common, and often they were forbidden to marry another with the same name. [^104] Being a member of the group allowed "individuals to assert claims to one another's protection and hospitality in their movements from one locality to another." [^105] I suggested earlier that Alma on his preaching tour (Alma 5-15) made initial contact with lineage mates in the various cities he visited. Even at Zarahemla kin ties guided him; apparently he preached mainly to a restricted group, probably kin, whose "fathers" had been with his father among the Zeniffites in the land of Nephi (Alma 5:11-13).

A fast-changing society places strain on kin-based units of any type, for it is difficult to adjust economic, residential, and status differences between kinfolk. All of us have seen how fast ties with our relatives can wane when either they or we move away or drastically change social positions. Yet all other organizational forms in society are under even more stress when change is urgent. The Nephites reached a point shortly before the crucifixion of the Savior when conventional government—politically ordered relationships—collapsed. Little was left to take up the slack but kinship or the bonds forged in secret combinations: "The people were divided one against another; and they did separate one from another into tribes, every man according to his family and his kindred and friends; and . . . every tribe did appoint a chief or a leader over them; and thus they became tribes and leaders of tribes. Now behold, there was no man among them save he had much family and many kindreds and friends; therefore their tribes became exceeding great" (3 Nephi 7:2-4). When all else failed, blood ties remained. This event demonstrated how fundamental the pattern of kin organization was among the Nephites. The organizational pattern did not spring up fresh to meet this disastrous occasion; the connections were of long standing. Amulek confirms that (Alma 10:4). It is only that expanded functions were laid on the kin-based structure in the political crisis.

Shoe-horning all the people into these large "tribes" would require a good deal of adjustment in genealogy and history, but this is normal. The anthropological literature is full of descriptions worldwide of how genealogies are modified as necessary in order to bring them into alignment with the political and economic facts of life. For example, the 2.5 million northern Somalians of east Africa "ultimately trace descent from the lineage of the Prophet Muhammad and his 'Companions,' " although "such claims . . . appear to be generally fictitious. But whatever their historical content, their importance lies in the fact that they validate the whole Muslim basis of Somali society." [^106]

In similar fashion, Nephite society seems to have been able to incorporate all the people under its social umbrella into a single "charter" or historical theory featuring seven major branches or super-lineages—Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Zoramites, Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites (Jacob 1:13; 4 Nephi 1:36-38; compare D&C 3:17-18). This list quite omits any "Sam-ites" (potentially from Lehi's son Sam; see 2 Nephi 4:11) and as well lumps together all the sons of Ishmael. Also, it ignores the non-Nephite genealogical background of the numerous "people of Zarahemla." These seven branches remind us of the famous "seven caves" or lineages from which, traditions claim, the inhabitants of Mesoamerica were supposed to have sprung. [^107] A Nephite "tribe" or macro-lineage of the kind referred to in 3 Nephi 7 must obviously have been a social-political segment of the population reputed to have sprung from a common ancestor, but with substantial numbers of other people attached so that all belonged to one "tribe" or another (note the "friends" of 3 Nephi 7:2, 4). Such a tribe would have contained component families and sublineages pyramided from closer to more distant relationships. The senior sub-lineage would normally have been in the position of greatest authority, so its eldest male likely was the one whom the people appointed as tribal leader (3 Nephi 7:3). At least this picture plausibly reconciles the Book of Mormon statements with what we know about Mesoamerican patterns of kinship.

That brings up the related matter of political forms. From Book of Mormon descriptions of Nephites assembling to make political decisions (as in Mosiah 29:39), we might mistakenly imagine that a principle of "one man, one vote" prevailed, but no ancient society followed that concept literally. When they "cast in their voices," the expressions would have come from the senior male of a family or sub-lineage. To be sure, those patriarchs would first assess the feelings of those they represented before presuming to speak for their unit. Thus was the political process carried on over much of the world until very recent times. Nothing hints to us that it was not the pattern in the Book of Mormon.

Another political question is, did the Nephites have a state? (A state is a central organization that holds a monopoly of coercive power in a territory.) The answer appears to be both yes and no. Certainly the system of kings and judges represented an attempt to centralize force in state form, but the arrangement did not work very well. We see no evidence that King Benjamin used force to control deviant behavior among his people. In fact, it is doubtful that he even used authorized agents (except messengers) to conduct the business of government. The title "king" was applied to him, yet of itself that august title meant little (see Alma 47:6; 3 Nephi 7:10). Nor were the chief judges in the later Nephite government much more powerful. Not a word is mentioned of a police force or a standing army. What impresses us is the relative powerlessness of the central government. Only by leaders' raising a militia ("army") could dissidents be controlled (see Alma 2). When the Nephites added formal courts and a code of laws, they were moving in the direction of a state, but the permanent weakness of the apparatus indicates that it never achieved stability.

What unity did exist was based heavily on common values and traditions. When dissident groups arose whose values differed markedly from those of the establishment, they posed a threat to the very existence of the Nephite "nation." No strong "glue" of practical political institutions held the overall system together. Only by constant exhortation, backed up by ceremonial activities dictated by tradition, could leaders like Moroni keep the people more or less together (Alma 43:48; 46:19-21; 54:10). Religion was part of what bound them together, so when religious dissent developed, political disunity was inevitable (Alma 8:11-12; 51:5-6). [^108] Before the full Classic Period (A.D. 200), Mesoamerican political structure stayed mainly at this level, depending for unifying power and control on shared values and ritual. So long as people governed in a single unit agreed to respect common beliefs and deities, internal peace could be maintained. When worship and sacred values failed to do the job, nothing else held a people or "nation" together for long. And even when an incipient state did appear, it remained fragile.

The ultimate fragility of the Nephites was not, however, determined by the central or governmental structures. Families, lineages, and communities were the key organizational forms. Local communities could accommodate a good deal of stress because of their nature. They were able to cope with internal diversity and were flexible in dealing with external pressures. One arrangement aiding in this adaptability was political "wards" or, better, barrios. The idea of these distinct residential sections inside a single town is very old throughout the area. [^109] Each sector tended to have its own local political structure based on some version of the lineage principle. The relations of its people with other barrios was rule-governed and ceremonialized. Different languages and religious practices characterized some barrios. This pattern helps us understand how the Nephites (properly speaking) could deal successfully with the "people of Zarahemla" within the city of Zarahemla. They may well have occupied distinct barrios in different residential areas, each probably having its own inner government. Thus, when Alma spoke to the people at Zarahemla, "they were assembled together in large bodies, and he went from one body to another" (Mosiah 25:15). The seven of these bodies (verse 23) seem functionally equivalent to barrio populations.

Space prevents full examination of any aspect of Nephite life. Far more extensive material, both inside and outside the scripture, invites our attention. For example, social and political arrangements are obviously different among Nephites, Lamanites and Jaredites; we've paid little attention to those distinctions. There are subjects and materials aplenty to keep researchers busy for a long time.

In this chapter we have read portions of the Book of Mormon as a text whose social and cultural forms deserve close study. Particular passages, often frustratingly brief, have shown us something about metals, animal husbandry, secret groups, kinship, and government among the Nephites and other Book of Mormon groups. By calling upon the extensive literature on Mesoamerican culture, we have been able to see scriptural statements in new ways, shed new light on their significance, and color in details. As a result, the scriptural setting opens up along new dimensions. The consistency of fit between the Book of Mormon picture of Nephite life and the external sources confirms that we have found for the book a plausible ancient American setting.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Manuel Maldonado-Koerdell, Geohistory and Paleogeography of Middle America, HMAI 1 (1964), pp. 22-26; Robert C. West, "Surface Configuration and Associated Geology of Middle America," ibid., pp. 42-58, 75-78.
[^2] Felix W. McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography of Southwest Guatemala, SISA 4 (1947), p. 6.
[^3] Maldonado-Koerdell, Geohistory, p. 26.
[^4] Payson D. Sheets, "An Ancient Natural Disaster," Expedition 13 (Fall 1971):27.
[^5] See chapter 3, note 154.
[^6] Joseph Mariano Mozino Suarez de Figueroa, Noticias de Nutka (Mexico: Sociedad Mexicana de Geografia y Estadistica, 1913), pp. 105-10.
[^7] Jorge A. Vivo E., Weather and Climate of Mexico and Central America, HMAI 1 (1964), p. 195. Note the description of an ancient hurricane and its effects given in the record of Ixtilxochitl, in Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland: Kolob Book, 1950), pp. 41, 190-91. Compare A. M. Tozzer, Landa's Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, HUPM 18 (1941), pp. 40-1, 216, about a hurricane that caused fires that "burned down" communities in the center of Yucatan. In central Mexico particularly the god Quetzalcoatl was frequently shown as Ehecatl, the wind aspect of Quetzalcoatl, perhaps pointing to the power of these tempests in that area.
[^8] Vivo, Weather and Climate.
[^9] McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography, pp. 132, 168, 179-80; Samuel K. Lothrop, in Atitlan, CIWP 444 (1933), p. 83, reported waterworn potsherds from the site of Chuitinamit well above the water level of that time; these can only be explained by extensive fluctuations.
[^10] Maldonado-Koerdell, Geohistory, pp. 25-26.
[^11] Robert C. West and John P. Augelli, Middle America: Its Lands and Peoples, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1976), p. 35.
[^12] McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography, p. x; compare "Economy and Technology," in Heritage of Conquest, ed. Sol Tax (Glencoe: Free Press, 1952), pp. 60-62, 74, and Eva Hunt, "Irrigation and the Sociopolitical Organization of Cuicatec Cacicazgos," in The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley, vol. 4. Chronology and Irrigation, ed. F. Johnson (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1972), pp. 193, 203-4.
[^13] Tax, "Economy and Technology," pp. 200-205, 218-31.
[^14] Gareth W. Lowe, "Burial Customs at Chiapa de Corzo," The Archaeological Burials at Chiapa de Corzo and Their Furniture, NWAF 16 (1964), p. 73.
[^15] Ibid., p. 75.
[^16] Miguel Covarrubias, Mexico South: The Isthmus of Tehuantepec (New York: Knopf, 1947), p. 39.
[^17] For example, Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America (Salt Lake City, Deseret Book, 1959).
[^18] Frances F. Berdan, The Aztecs of Central Mexico: An Imperial Society (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1982), p. 165; John L. Sorenson, "Some Mesoamerican Traditions of Immigration by Sea," El Mexico Antiguo 8 (1955):428.
[^19] B. C. Hedrick, "Quetzalcoatl: European or Indigene?" in Man Across the Sea: Problems of Pre-Columbian Contacts, ed. Carroll J. Riley et al. (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971), pp. 255-65.
[^20] Stephan F. de Borhegyi, "Shell Offerings and the Use of Shell Motifs at Lake Amatitlan, Guatemala, and Teotihuacan, Mexico," Actas y Memorias, 36a Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Espana, 1965, vol. 1 (Seville, 1968), pp. 356, 359; Laurette Sejourne, Burning Water: Thought and Religion in Ancient Mexico (New York: Vanguard, 1957), pp. 25, 83-85; idem, "El Simbolismo de los Rituales Funerarios en Monte Alban," Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropologicos 16 (1960):85-90. Rene Millon, in The Teotihuacan Map, vol. 1 (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1973), pp. 55-56, notes that the shell-and-serpent decorated Temple of Quetzalcoatl at Teotihuacan was built no later than A.D. 400 and perhaps soon after 150.
[^21] "Quetzalcoatl: Espiritualismo del Mexico Antiguo," Cuadernos Americanos 105, no. 4 (1959):127-39.
[^22] Sejourne, "El Simbolismo."
[^23] See references in my article in Riley et al., Man Across the Sea, pp. 234-35.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Philip Drucker, Robert F. Heizer, and R. J. Squier, Excavations at La Venta, Tabasco, 1955, Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 170 (1957), pp. 199-200, think they see the flying reptile represented at La Venta in Olmec times, but Ignacio Bernal, Olmec World, op. cit., 61-62, denies that there are feathers on it or other early serpent figures. He places the earliest representation of the feathered serpent only shortly before the time of Christ. What has been interpreted as a "Plumed Serpent" from Chiapas definitely dates several centuries before Christ. Agrinier, Archaeological Burials, p. 18, fig. 23.
[^26] George C. Vaillant, The Aztecs of Mexico (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1950), pp. 160, 174.
[^27] John L. Sorenson, A Chronological Ordering of the Mesoamerican Pre-Classic, MARI 18 (1955), pp. 53-57.
[^28] Joyce Marcus, "The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing," Annual Review of Anthropology 5 (1976):49-55.
[^29] Lee A. Parsons, "An Early Maya Stela on the Pacific Coast of Guatemala," Estudios de Cultura Maya 6 (1976):180. More recently at Abaj Takalik on the coast of Guatemala was found a stela dated A.D. 126, which narrows the "gap."
[^30] Lowe and colleagues refer to the violent breaking up and burying of carved stone monuments at Chiapa de Corzo, Chinkultic, and various sites in Guatemala and El Salvador. Gareth W. Lowe, Thomas A. Lee, Jr., and Eduardo Martinez E., Izapa: An Introduction to the Ruins and Monuments, NWAF 31 (1982), p. 28. At this same time at Chiapa de Corzo, the "Horcones occupation ended with its violent overthrow" accompanied by "an attitude of irreverence for both the dead and for certain conventions." Lowe, "Burial Customs," p. 73.
[^31] Robert J. Sharer, "Chalchuapa: Investigations at a Highland Maya Ceremonial Center," Expedition 11 (Winter 1969):36-38.
[^32] Thought on the problem is surveyed in Robert Wauchope, Zacualpa, El Quiche, Guatemala. An Ancient Provincial Center of the Highland Maya, MARI 39 (1975), pp. 49-52.
[^33] Gene A. Sessions, ed., Mormon Democrat: The Religious and Political Memoirs of James Henry Moyle (Salt Lake City: LDS Church Historical Department, 1975), pp. 90, 163ff.
[^34] Enrique Fiorescano, "La Serpiente Emplumada, Tlaloc y Quetzalcoatl," Cuadernos Americanos 133 (March-April 1964):137-54. Compare David H. Kelley, "The Birth of the Gods at Palenque," Estudios de Cultura Maya 5 (1966):120, on the Mexican cult of Quetzalcoatl imported to this Mayan center no later than A.D. 400-500, and the same phenomenon at Lake Amatitlan, Guatemala, at the same time-Borhegyi, "Shell Offerings," pp. 356, 359, 364-65.
[^35] Lowe, "Burial Customs," p. 75.
[^36] Terrence Kaufman, "Archaeological and Linguistic Correlations in Mayaland and Associated Areas of Meso-America," World Archaeology 8 (1976):106-9.
[^37] Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico, 1517-1521, trans. and annot. A. P. Maudslay (New York: Farrer, Straus and Cudahy, 1956), p. 150.
[^38] Pierre Agrinier, Mounds 9 and 10 at Mirador, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 39 (1975), p. 9.
[^39] Ibid., p. 90.
[^40] Andrew J. McDonald, personal communication.
[^41] Agrinier, Mounds 9 and 10, pp. 99-100.
[^42] Gareth W. Lowe and J. Alden Mason, Archaeological Survey of the Chiapas Coast, Highlands, and Upper Grijalva Basin, HMAI 2 (1965), p. 226; John L. Sorenson, An Archaeological Reconnaissance of West-Central Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 1 (1956), p. 15.
[^43] Kenneth L. Brown, "The B-III-5 Mound Group: Early and Middle Classic Civic Architecture," in The Pennsylvania State University Kaminaljuyu Project-1969, 1970 Seasons, part 1. Mound Excavation, ed. J. W. Michels and W. T. Sanders, PSUO 9 (December 1973), pp. 391-463; Kenneth L. Brown, "The Valley of Guatemala: A Highland Port of Trade," in Teotihuacan and Kaminaljuyu: A Study in Prehistoric Culture Contact, ed. William T. Sanders and Joseph W. Michels, Pennsylvania State University Press Monograph Series on Kaminaljuyu (1977), pp. 205-396.
[^44] William T. Sanders and Barbara J. Price, Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization (New York: Random House, 1968), pp. 166-68, 203-4, Lee A. Parsons and Barbara J. Price, "Mesoamerican Trade and Its Role in the Emergence of Civilization," in Peasant Livelihood: Studies in Economic Anthropology and Cultural Ecology, ed. R. Halperin and J. Dow (New York: St. Martin's, 1976), pp. 205-20.
[^45] William T. Sanders, "A Profile of Urban Evolution in the Teotihuacan Valley," Actas y Memorias, 37a Congreso Internacional de Americamistas, Buenos Aires, 1966, vol. 1 (Buenos Aires, 1968), pp. 100-101.
[^46] Nicholas Hellmuth, "The Escuintla Hoards: Teotihuacan Ceramic Art of the Tiquisate Region," Foundation for Latin American Anthropological Research Progress Reports 1, no. 2 (1975).
[^47] Agrinier, Mounds 9 and 10, p. 100. Furthermore, the codex fragments discovered in the tomb in Mound 10 at Mirador, and which date during the occupation by the intruders (approximately A.D. 400-450), point directly to Guatemala, not to Teotihuacan, for codices are unknown at the northern metropolis.
[^48] Hanns J. Prem, "Calendrics and Writing," in Observations on the Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica, ed. Robert F. Heizer and John A. Graham, UCAR 11 (1971), p. 122.
[^49] Vailliant, The Aztecs of Mexico, p. 76.
[^50] Ibid.
[^51] William T. Sanders, The Cultural Ecology of the Teotihuacan Valley. A Preliminary Report of the Results of the Teotihuacan Valley Project (University Park: Pennsylvania State University, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, 1965), p. 179.
[^52] Fernando de Alva Ixtlilxochitl, conveniently accessible in Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America, p. 383.
[^53] Covarrubias, Mexico South, p. 27.
[^54] The Aztecs labeled the vast, boggy region Chalchihuecan, Place of Lady-Jade-Skirts, the goddess of still waters. Ibid., p. 11.
[^55] For example, see Alma 56:28 as well as frequent reference to the "camp" accompanying an army, as in Alma 48:6. On Mesoamerican practice see, for example, Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America, pp. 383-84, concerning the Tulteca.
[^56] As mentioned in an earlier chapter, the 10,000-man unit under a lineage captain was still the norm when Mexico was invaded by Cortez. Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Bernal Diaz Chronicles, trans. and ed. A. Idell (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1956), p. 106.
[^57] Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America, p. 385.
[^58] David Palmer, In Search of Cumorah (Bountiful, Utah: Horizon, 1981).
[^59] Alfonso Medellin Zenil, "El Dios Jaguar de San Martin," Boletin INAH 33 (September 1968):16.
[^60] Tozzer, Landa's Relacion, p. 169; Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America, pp. 337-38.
[^61] Wallrath, Tehuantepec Region, p. 14.
[^62] Paul S. Martin and H. E. Wright, Jr., eds., "Pleistocene Extinctions: The Search for a Cause," Proceedings of the International Association for Quaternary Research, VII Congress, vol. 6 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1967), pp. 98-104; Robert A. Martin and S. David Webb, "Late Pleistocene Mammals from the Devil's Den Fauna, Levy County," in Pleistocene Mammals of Florida, ed. S. David Webb (Gainesville: University Presses of Florida, 1974), pp. 114-45; Jim J. Hester, "Late Pleistocene Extinction and Radiocarbon Dating," American Antiquity 26 (1960):58-77; Paul S. Martin, "The Discovery of America," Science 179 (March 9, 1973):974.
[^63] Remains of a horse have been reported found in conjunction with human remains in excavations at Loltun Cave in the Maya area. No date is apparent from the report. Miami Museum of Science Institute of Maya Studies Newsletter 7, no. 11 (November 15, 1978):2. More positive is the evidence from Cenote Ch'en Mul, at Mayapan, Yucatan, reported by C. E. Ray. Two lots including horse bones were collected from the bottom stratum almost two meters down. Ray reluctantly concluded that they had to be pre-Columbian ("Pre-Columbian Horses from Yucatan," Journal of Mammalogy 38 [1957]:278.) Mercer had found other horse remains in southwest Yucatan caves in association with artifacts. The Hill Caves of Yucatan (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1896), p. 172.
[^64] A. V. Kidder, "Miscellaneous Specimens from Mesoamerica," Carnegie Institution of Washington Notes on Middle American Archaeology & Ethnology 117 (March 1954):20, figure 4e.
[^65] David M. Pendergast, "The Prehistory of Actun Balam, British Honduras," Royal Ontario Museum Art and Archaeology Occasional Paper 16 (1969):44-45.
[^66] "Conocieron la Rueda los Indigenas Mesoamericanos?" Cuadernos Americanos 25, no. 1 (Jan.-Feb. 1946):opposite 207.
[^67] Munro S. Edmonson, Quiche-English Dictionary, MARI 30 (1965), pp. 57-58. Also kieh: horse; kiehebal: steed; kiehem: mounted. Compare The War of Conquest: How It Was Waged Here in Mexico. The Aztecs' Own Story as Given to Fr. Bernardino de Sahagun, Rendered into Modern English by Arthur J. O. Anderson and Charles E. Dibble (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1978): p. 28, "The horses-they looked like deer-neighed and whinnied"; p. 55, "The deer-which-carried-man-upon-their-backs, called horses."
[^68] In addition to the cameloid figures from Snarskis and Termer, see Termer, "Antiguedades," p. 91, concerning modeled figures of dogs and "jaguars" carrying burdens, whatever they may signify.
[^69] Linne, Mexican Highland Cultures, p. 156.
[^70] Howard W. Law, "A Reconstructed Proto-Culture Derived from Some Yuman Vocabularies," Anthropological Linguistics 3 (1961):54.
[^71] Ibid.; Martin and Webb, "Pleistocene Mammals," pp. 144-45.
[^72] Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, Inc., Report for 1974 (New York, 1975), p. 22, reporting work by Dr. Warren L. Wittry.
[^73] J. Augusta, The Age of Monsters, Prehistoric and Legendary (London: Paul Hamlyn, 1966), pp. 11-12.
[^74] Jim J. Hester, "Agency of Man in Animal Extinction," in Martin and Wright, "Pleistocene Extinctions," p. 185.
[^75] H. P. Beck, "The Giant Beaver: A Prehistoric Memory," Ethnohistory 19 (1972):117; William Duncan Strong, "North American Indian Traditions Suggesting Knowledge of the Mammoth," American Anthropologist 36 (1934):81-88.
[^76] E. M. Shook, "The Present Status of Research on the Pre-Classic Horizons in Guatemala," in The Civilizations of Ancient America, ed. Sol Tax (New York: Cooper Square Publishers, 1967), p. 93. From the southern tip of South America comes a startling bit of information that makes the sloth possibility more believable. In Patagonia around the turn of the century, natural scientists discovered remains of the extinct giant ground sloth with fresh-looking skin and bones having bits of muscle still adhering; in one cave a large section had been walled off as a "stable" where sloth droppings were abundant, and cut grass was piled nearby for food. A. Smith Woodward, "The Supposed Existing Ground-Sloth of Patagonia," Natural Science 15 (1899):351-54. In the 1970s work by archaeologists at the Yucatan site of Coba revealed a walled pen for some domestic animals. Metates found therein suggested that food was prepared for them. No indication was found of what animals might have been kept. Jaime Garduno Argueta, "Introduccion al Patron de Asentamiento del Sitio de Coba, Quintana Roo" (Professional Thesis, Escuela Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Mexico, 1979), pp. 107-8.
[^77] Hutton Webster, Primitive Secret Societies (New York: Macmillan, 1908); Camilla H. Wedgwood, "The Nature and Functions of Secret Societies," Oceania 1 (1930):129-45; Norman MacKenzie, ed., Secret Societies (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1967).
[^78] David Annan, "The Mafia." In Mackenzie, Secret Societies, p. 255.
[^79] Nesta H. Webster, Secret Societies and Subversive Movements, 7th ed. (London: Britons Publishing Society, 1955), p. 188.
[^80] 80. Miguel Covarrubias, Mexico South: The Isthmus of Tehuantepec (New York: Knopf, 1947), pp. 77-78.
[^81] 81. Ibid., p. 76.
[^82] 82. Peter D. Joralemon, A Study of Olmec Iconography, Dumbarton Oaks Studies in Pre-Columbian Art and Archaeology 7 (1971); but other specialists strongly disagree.
[^83] 83. Daniel G. Brinton, "Nagualism: A Study in Native American Folk-lore and History," American Philosophical Society, Proceedings 33 (1894), pp. 17, 12.
[^84] 84. Ibid.
[^85] 85. Ibid., 37-41; Covarrubias, Mexico South, pp. 78-79.
[^86] 86. Brinton, "Nagualism," pp. 38-43.
[^87] 87. N. H. Webster, Secret Societies, p. 157.
[^88] 88. "In traditional China the secret society was the principal instrument for the expression of popular grievances against the superior power of imperial authority. . . . The aggrieved parties would form a society of outlaws or join an already existing one. Proscribed by the law, the men would seek concealment in secrecy and live by their wits and off the land. They would prey upon the countryside and hide in the hills. The popularity so often enjoyed by social bandits stemmed from their actual or imputed identification with the masses, and their opposition to the imposition of imperial authority on local, more or less independent, institutions. In China as elsewhere, social banditry and its attendant agency, the secret society, arose under conditions of stress. . . ." Stanford M. Lyman, "Chinese Secret Societies in the Occident: Notes and Suggestions for Research in the Sociology of Secrecy," Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 1 (May 1964):90. See also Maria Isaura Pereira de Queiroz, "On Materials for a History of Studies of Crisis Cults," Current Anthropology 12 (1971):387-90.
[^89] 89. N. H. Webster, Secret Societies, p. 143.
[^90] 90. Ibid., p. 1.
[^91] 91. Ibid., 60, 178.
[^92] 92. Yehudi Cohen, "The Anthropological Enterprise," American Anthropologist 79 (1977):390, 393; Nibley, Since Cumorah, pp. 399-409.
[^93] 93. Miguel Acosta Saignes, "Los Pochteca," in De Teotihuacan a los Aztecas, ed. Miguel Leon-Portilla (Mexico: Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1971), pp. 436-48; Rudolf van Zantwijk, "Las Organizaciones Social-Economica y Religiosa de los Mercaderes Gremiales Aztecas," Boletin de Estudios Latino-Americanos 10 (1970):1-20.
[^94] 94. Gordon Brotherston, "Huitzilopochtli and What Was Made of Him," in Mesoamerican Archeology: New Approaches, ed., Norman Hammond (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1974), pp. 163-64.
[^95] 95. Munro S. Edmonson, The Book of Counsel, MARI 35 (1971), pp. 215-17; Robert M. Carmack, Toltec Influence on the Postclassic Culture History of Highland Guatemala, MARI 26 (1970), pp. 72-73.
[^96] 96. Lee A. Parsons and Barbara J. Price, in Observations on the Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica, ed. Robert R. Heizer and John A. Graham, UCAR 11 (1971), pp. 169-95.
[^97] 97. Coe, "America's First Civilization," op. cit., 110-11.
[^98] 98. The Preclassic Background for the Emergence of Civilization in the Mexican Highlands (paper delivered at Wenner-Gren Foundation Burg Wartenstein Symposium No. 47, July 4-13, 1970), p. 25.
[^99] 99. Kent V. Flannery, "Contextual Analysis of Ritual Paraphernalia from Formative Oaxaca." In Flannery, ed., The Early Mesoamerican Village (New York: Academic Press, 1976), pp. 338-40.
[^100] 100. I use the term lineage here at a very general level. The anthropological literature defines this and related terms in various ways. A classic discussion is George P. Murdock, Social Structure (New York: Macmillan, 1949), pp. 46ff.
[^101] 101. Harold E. Driver, in "Geographical Versus Psycho-functional Explanations of Kin Avoidances," Current Anthropology 7 (1966):131-82, discusses the relative strength of tradition and of functional adaptation.
[^102] 102. William A. Haviland, Ancient Lowland Maya Social Organization, MARI 26 (1968), pp. 95-117; idem, "Principles of Descent in 16th Century Yucatan," Katunob 8, no. 2 (December 1972):63-73.
[^103] 103. Haviland, "Principles of Descent," p. 64. For some possibilities in northern Mesoamerica, Hugo G. Nutini, "Clan Organization in a Nahuatl-Speaking Village of the State of Tlaxcala, Mexico," American Anthropologist 63 (1961):62-78.
[^104] 104. Haviland, "Principles of Descent," pp. 63-64.
[^105] 105. Ibid., p. 64.
[^106] 106. I. M. Lewis, "Force and Fission in Northern Somali Lineage Structure," American Anthropologist 63 (1961):110. Compare A. I. Richards, "A Problem of Anthropological Approach," Bantu Studies 15, no. 1 (1941):51.
[^107] 107. For example, G. C. Vaillant, The Aztecs of Mexico (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1950), pp. 97-98. Ross T. Christensen has made this point for LDS readers in "The Seven Lineages of Lehi," The New Era 5, no. 5 (May 1975):50-51.
[^108] 108. The Hebrew language provided no word for "religion." Cyrus H. Gordon, Introduction to Old Testament Times (Ventnor, New Jersey: Ventnor Publishers, 1953), p. 55. The Book of Mormon term translated as "religion" is likely to have meant something like "worship of and beliefs about deity."
[^109] 109. Rene Millon, The Teotihuacan Map (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1973), pp. 40-41; Nutini, "Clan Organization," p. 62.
