John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

8

The End of the Nephites

The Nephites set out on the determined road to destruction centuries before Mormon, their last leader, was born. From the time of Samuel, the Lamanite prophet, the Nephites were in rehearsal for extinction. Samuel's dire prophecy recorded in Helaman 13:8-39 is barely conditional. Despite an "except they repent" at the beginning, he turns quickly to language that makes the future clear, such as "when ye shall cast out the righteous from among you" (verse 14) and "the day shall come" (verse 20). Only five years then remained before the birth of the Savior.

The Nephites had already been tried by famine (Helaman 11), but in the end it was not by natural means that they were to be destroyed. Social chaos was the means, as Samuel foretold. They had experienced a sample of it just before Samuel's appearance in the land (Helaman 11:24-37). Materialism and pride among the Nephites drove the entire people to the brink. Teetering on that social precipice, they experienced full force the dramatic signs that accompanied Christ's birth—a night without darkness and a new star in the heavens (3 Nephi 1:13-21). The shock was enough to pull them back—briefly.

Within a decade Nephites and robber bands were again seesawing back and forth in conflict prophetic of what would happen on a total scale three and a half centuries later. "And thus . . . the sword of destruction did hang over them" (3 Nephi 2:19). But a second reprieve and a new chance came 33 years after the star appeared.

The Great Catastrophe

The Book of Mormon story of the destruction that accompanied the crucifixion of Jesus at Jerusalem is most explicit about the physical destruction it produced. Tempest, earthquake, and risings and sinkings of the land are vividly described. Actually, changes in society turned out to be even more significant. Together this wrenching of the established order set back the clock, so to speak. The survivors faced a new environment, emptied by the disaster of much of the overpopulation that had plagued them. They had an opportunity to start over, comparable to the opportunity Nephi's group had enjoyed when they were new in the land six centuries before.

Before we examine the new society that emerged, let us clarify the extent and nature of the environmental changes that took place. As always, we need to ask, exactly what does the scriptural text say? The eighth chapter of 3 Nephi recounts the basic facts. A great storm arose with violent wind, whirlwinds, and unprecedented thunder and lightning. The extent of this storm was vast, for it affected not only the land southward, which was hundreds of miles long, but even more seriously the land northward. A series of sharp earthquakes accompanied the awesome thunder and lightning, "the face of the whole earth" became deformed, and even basic rock strata were cracked. This entire sequence consumed "three hours," although it seemed longer to the miserable victims. A "thick darkness" could be "felt." "Vapor of smoke and darkness" overpowered and suffocated some people, while thick "mists of darkness" prevented fires being lit for three days.

The wide geographical extent of the catastrophe and the drama of the violence notwithstanding, it was mainly the "face of the land" that was affected. The fundamental features of the landscape were not transformed. The toll of damage announced by the voice of the Lord mentions 16 cities by name (3 Nephi 9:3-10). Three of those places are identified elsewhere in the volume as located in the land southward; it is logical that the other four cities listed with them were also in that area. Nine cities are listed together in verses 8 through 10, one of which definitely was in the land northward; those named with it were probably also in the north. Six cities were destroyed by fire. Eight places were buried in the earth or had earth fall on them, but only one sank into the sea (Moroni, known to be near the coast). Another, Jerusalem, was covered by rising "waters."

Reconstruction of a building at Chiapa de Corzo, perhaps Sidom, destroyed around the birth of Christ. (From BYU-NWAF publication no. 8, by Gareth W. Lowe.)

However, "there were some cities which remained" (3 Nephi 8:15); and at Bountiful, near the center of Nephite territory, a "great multitude" survived to assemble around its temple (3 Nephi 11:1). Zarahemla and the other cities that had been burned were soon rebuilt on the same locations as before (4 Nephi 1:7-8). Moreover, basic geographical reference points, such as the narrow neck and pass, the Hill Cumorah/Ramah, and the River Sidon continued important and apparently unchanged. So we need to use restraint in the picture we allow our minds to construct of the totality of the destruction. We should not go beyond what the text declares with measured care.

At Copilco in the Valley of Mexico, a volcanic eruption covered the city around the time of Christ. In this scene the cultural remains are at ground level beneath many feet of lava. (Photo Daniel Bates. Courtesy David A. Palmer and the Society of Early Historic Achaeology.)

These facts in the Book of Mormon should fit the Mesoamerican scene. The same types of natural destructive forces at work in the 3 Nephi account should be familiar in southern Mexico and thereabouts. After all, it was the intensity of nature's rampage that impressed the Nephite recorder, not the novelty of the phenomena (3 Nephi 8:5, 7). All these kinds of destruction evidently had happened before in the land, but never with such terrifying effect. Not surprisingly, the sorts of natural forces unleashed in that fateful three hours are familiar on the Mesoamerican scene.

That area lies in a zone of intense earthquake activity—the edge of the Pacific basin, along which periodic violent quakes are a fact of life. [^1] Scores of volcanoes are scattered along this particular zone of instability from north-central Mexico to Nicaragua. Many of them have been active within historical times. [^2] Antigua, the former capital city of Guatemala, was utterly destroyed by an earthquake in 1773 and hit heavily again in 1917. The great damage done in Guatemala in 1976 by another series of earthquakes is typical of many previous experiences. Traditions and the presence of hieroglyphic signs signifying earthquakes demonstrate the profound effect they had on the pre-Columbian peoples. [^3]

A description of the eruption of Conseguina volcano in Nicaragua in 1835 hints at the terror and destruction that resulted from the powerful disaster at the time of Christ. A dense cloud first rose above the cone, and within a couple of hours it "enveloped everything in the greatest darkness, so that the nearest objects were imperceptible." Fear-struck wild animals blundered into settlements, adding to the terror. Then came quakes, "a perpetual undulation." Volcanic ash began to fall, like "fine powder-like flour." The thunder and lightning "continued the whole night and the following day." Dust thrown up into the atmosphere combined with heat from the volcano to trigger the storms. Still later the worst tremor of all hit, strong enough to throw people to the ground. Darkness again came on and this time lasted forty-three hours. [^4] These conditions, multiplied in both intensity and territory covered, sound much like 3 Nephi.

In chapter 3, citations were made to scientific literature reporting evidence of volcanism right around the time of Christ. Probably the most spectacular was in El Salvador. Archaeologist and geologist Payson Sheets has worked to clarify the date and extent of the eruption there at "about the time of Christ." One volcano apparently devastated a 3,000-square mile area; ash falls up to 40 feet deep buried settlement after settlement. [^5]

Of course, the story in 3 Nephi involved more than volcanoes and earthquakes. The power of the thunder and lightning particularly impressed the Nephite writer; he said they were powerful enough to contribute to deforming "the face of the whole earth" (3 Nephi 8:17). One's first response to such a statement is wonder; how could these atmospheric phenomena possibly "deform" the surface of the earth? Yet the assertion recalls Don Joseph Mozino's report on the 1793 eruption in the volcanic Tuxtla mountains of Veracruz. It all started with a build-up of towering clouds over the mountains, then "grand thunderclaps, but underground." Later "it sounded like all the artillery in Veracruz going off," some of the more than 400 underground claps being heard hundreds of miles away. [^6] Thus, the "thunder" was probably of two kinds, one resulting from the exceptionally violent storms caused by heat and dust from the eruptions and the other from the fracturing of the strata underground due to seismic action. Both Mozino and the Nephite writer had trouble distinguishing the one from the other.

In addition to the disastrous results of simultaneous volcanism, earthquakes, and local storms, landslides and mudflows are often triggered by the torrential rains that accompany volcanism. It seems likely that part of the burying up of cities "in the depths of the earth" (3 Nephi 9:6, 8) would have resulted from slides, as well as from volcanic ash fall. Also, winds developed by certain meteorological patterns sometimes blow south over the Gulf of Mexico to "pile up" water against the ("east") coast, inundating areas of low elevation. [^7] Either this effect of a normal storm or the more profound result from a tropical hurricane sweeping across the Gulf of Campeche could well have caused "that great city Moroni" on that coast to be "sunk in the depths of the sea" (verse 4). If a hurricane followed the normal storm track through the gulf, its center would hit the coast of our land northward; [^8] significantly, we are told in the scripture that "the tempest" caused more destruction in the north than in the south (3 Nephi 8:12).

We located Jerusalem in Guatemala on the shore of Lake Atitlan (Alma 21:1). The level of this lake has fluctuated as much as 40 feet due to subterranean shifts in the volcanic material that plugs its exit, according to geologists. [^9] Earthquakes and eruptions could have stirred the base of the lake to make water "come up in the stead" of Jerusalem (3 Nephi 9:7). The nearby land or valley of Middoni, today probably the location of Antigua, former capital of Guatemala, has been fiercely shaken many times. [^10] The entire fault system and volcanic chain extending through highland El Salvador, Guatemala, and Chiapas [^11] must have been involved simultaneously to create the vast havoc described in the scripture. Other volcanic- and earthquake-prone areas lie in a northern system in the Mexican states of Veracruz, Oaxaca, Puebla, and Mexico.

Unquestionably the kinds of natural forces that produced the devastation reported in 3 Nephi are thoroughly characteristic of Mesoamerica. Nothing is surprising about the story except the scale. That was unprecedented. Our archaeological sources, meanwhile, provide us with some hints that a landmark disaster did in fact occur around the time of Christ. As years go on, we may learn more about it.

The New Order

Perhaps we convey the wrong idea when referring to the social order that followed the great disaster as "new." Inevitably the result of disaster is to force people to return to their fundamental principles. Many of the "new" ways of the post-catastrophe "Golden Age" would have been like those that had prevailed in the simpler days of rural agrarian life before the rise of social classes, cities, and the trade/secret society complex. Historically throughout Mesoamerica, land has often been owned "in common." [^12] Available land was distributed to be used according to need, no one family having more than temporary control over resources beyond their needs. The contrary tendency arose periodically when the old kinship-based system of life was distorted by the growth of an exploiting class.

The social system among the Cuicatec Indians of southcentral Mexico at the conquest has been described in a way that provides insights into how Nephite society probably worked. The role of the rulers among the Cuicatec was in some ways superfluous. Beneath them was a fundamental structure of units based on kinship and other immediate factors. The local people found the ruling stratum valuable, for, as intrusive "foreigners," they could ignore local biases in fulfilling their administrative duties. These included reallotting lands annually, organizing defense, and resolving disputes. For doing these chores they received the right to a parcel of the communal lands, which the people cultivated for them. While in a formal sense these chiefs might "possess" or "own" the land (compare Mosiah 9:6, Alma 53:2), it was not theirs to do with as they pleased, for they would always act within a defined role as a symbol of the whole society. [^13] Rulers in the Book of Mormon, like Zeniff, probably functioned in about the same manner as the Cuicatec nobles. However, shortly before the great catastrophe, central government had collapsed, and the kinship-based system was left to manage public life. Such a scheme could work well as long as the population was relatively small. Then came the great destruction, followed by the visit of Jesus Christ and the establishment of Christian communitarianism. Reduction in the number of people as a result of the devastation allowed even simpler governmental and social forms to function effectively again, as during King Benjamin's time. With the fear of war eliminated and disputes few or absent because people faithfully adhered to the same righteous values, the typical administrative role of political ruler became unnecessary. That seems to be what happened (4 Nephi 1:2-3).

Archaeological remains tend to confirm that the society existing in Mesoamerica during the first and second centuries A.D. was marked by minimum social distinction. For example, at Chiapa de Corzo, which we know better than most other sites, the 54 burials of this (Istmo) period contained either no offerings at all or only very modest tokens. The excavators could see "no great social differentiation implied." [^14] This was in sharp contrast to the rich tombs of both the preceding and following periods. Generally similar conditions prevailed elsewhere in Mesoamerica at this time. In short, from soon after the time of Christ to around A.D. 200, dignified simplicity prevailed in burial practices, and, presumably, this reflected a "subdued" social order. [^15] The heavy casualties from the great destruction would also have solved some of the economic difficulties the Book of Mormon people had got themselves into earlier. With reduced population, the crowding of resources that had caused dissensions would have been eliminated. There would be adequate land for all, at least for a few generations, until crowding would again cause stress. Moreover, a normal social response must have been manifest among those people anciently, just as in modern times—when disaster hits, a sense of solidarity and mutual help tends to arise out of the very trouble. Starting over with a clean slate frequently brings out the best in people, even were they without a new faith. All these tendencies provide background to help us appreciate the change that took place, but the sharp turn taken by the Nephites and Lamanites is reported in the scripture to owe to acceptance of the gospel more than to any social or economic factors. The power of the message borne to part of them in person by the resurrected Jesus changed their hearts; that was why the new life was possible. "Every man did deal justly one with another" because "the people were all converted unto the Lord" (4 Nephi 1:2). And "there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people" (verse 15).

The resurrected Lord appeared to the survivors at the city of Bountiful, where some 2,500 persons were assembled in the aftermath of the destruction (3 Nephi 17:25). On the day following his first appearance, a still greater body of people, to whom the marvelous account of the first day's happenings had spread overnight, experienced his presence (3 Nephi 19:2-5). (They would have constituted the population of the "land" of Bountiful, distances being too great for others to get there on short notice.) Two reasons seem to have dictated this location for the momentous event of the Savior's appearance. First, as we have seen (as in Alma 22:29-30), Bountiful was very near the line dividing the land northward from the land southward; thus, it was symbolic of "the whole land." Second, it was apparently a center of religious orthodoxy; from there a reformation had been launched by Nephi a few decades before the birth of Christ (Helaman 5:14), and there dwelt all the 12 disciples chosen by the Lord to lead his church.

Quetzalcoatl

Many Latter-day Saints know a little about the ancient Mesoamerican figure known by the name Quetzalcoatl ("Precious Serpent"), who bears some striking resemblances to Christ as reported in the Book of Mormon. For instance, his home ground was reputed to be the Coatzacoalcos area—our Bountiful (Coatzacoalcos means "sanctuary of the serpent"). [^16] By some accounts, Quetzalcoatl wore a long white robe. The "white robe" worn by the resurrected Christ is unique, a garment not otherwise mentioned among the Nephites (3 Nephi 11:8; compare I Nephi 8:5). A number of books and articles addressed to Mormon readers have discussed this being, citing evidences from traditional native accounts written down by the Spaniards, art representations, folklore, and analyses of ancient names. [^17] These document a widely held belief in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, as well as in many other parts of the New World, that a sacred being, described as a bearded white man, appeared long ago, taught a demanding set of spiritual principles, then departed mysteriously with the promise that he would return someday. The success of Cortez in conquering Mexico stemmed in part from Aztec hesitancy to oppose him whom they believed to be that returning Deity. [^18]

Symbols of Quetzalcoatl on the facade of a temple in honor at Teotihuacan, from the early centuries A.D. (Photo by James C. Christiansen used by permission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

This native belief has misled some Latter-day Saints into trying to connect all references to "Quetzalcoatl" to the visit of Christ as related in the Book of Mormon. After nearly 2,000 years of legend making, things are much more complex than that. A number of beings bore the title Quetzalcoatl; certain traditions and symbols refer to some bearers of the name and some to others. Distinguishing when a given statement points to the god Quetzalcoatl and when to subsequent humans who bore his title is a complex, uncompleted task. Furthermore, a great deal of mythology with perhaps no basis in history also came to be attached to the various Quetzalcoatls. Confusion attending this subject has gone so far that one historian claims that no ancient sacred being is referred to at all in the Mesoamerican sources, but only Post-Classic priest figures around whom deifying legends grew up. [^19] However, that extreme position ignores a large body of evidence that demonstrates that a divine being was known and worshipped as the god Quetzalcoatl for many centuries, perhaps from before the time of Christ's birth. [^20] This deity was identified with certain sacred symbols whose use is testified to by archaeological material going back thousands of years. The being to whom the symbols refer is often distinguished from any of the later priests who took his name. Miguel Leon-Portilla, one of the great scholars on the traditional literature of Mexico, believes most of the sources agree that the original Quetzalcoatl was the founder of an "elevated spiritualism, a vision of the world that led to ancient Mexico's greatest cultural achievements." [^21]

Among the symbols of Quetzalcoatl were marine shells, the quetzal bird, and the serpent, particularly in feathered or flying form. The shell has been interpreted as signifying the concept of resurrection from the dead. [^22] Why Quetzalcoatl/Christ would be connected to the concept of resurrection is obvious to Christians, even though the reason for the shell as a symbol may not be clear. The green quetzal bird, still Guatemala's national symbol today, was allied with the coveted green stone, jadeite, by virtue of its "precious" color; both the bird and the gem signified life-giving water or rain. Jehovah or Yahweh, the God of Israel, was thought of anciently as a controller of rain and life-giving water in general. [^23] The Lord brought on a great drought to humble the Nephites (Helaman 11). There is no apparent reason why he would object to being associated with either the lovely green bird or the precious, cool jadeite stone (note Matthew 21:42; Jacob 4:15). Both symbols recall his control over "the first rain and the latter rain" (Deuteronomy 11:14).

The second half of the name Quetzalcoatl is the word for serpent in the language of the Aztecs. This creature, too, was associated in the Mesoamerican mind with the idea of moisture, hence fertility, but also with wisdom and power. [^24] The Savior applied the symbol of the serpent to himself: "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up" (John 3:14). The occasion for Moses' action was when Israel in the wilderness suffered from stings or bites from "flying, fiery serpents" (Numbers 21:9). Commanded to do so, Moses raised a bronze figure of a serpent on a pole; it had power to heal those with sufficient faith to raise their eyes and look at it. The ceremony obviously stood for the Savior's being lifted up on the cross to save those who look to him in faith as their Redeemer. In their teachings to the Nephites both Alma and Nephi connected the serpent image with Jesus (Alma 33:19; Helaman 8:14-15). The serpent symbol had been a potent one long before then, however. The Jaredites were impressed by it (Ether 9:31-33), and it appeared in Olmec art very prominently. [^25] Clearly, serpent symbolism would be appropriate in connection with Jesus or Quetzalcoatl.

The early centuries A.D. saw a proliferation of the symbols of Quetzalcoatl. [^26] Later, many cycles of myth and ritual derived from the original figure, modifying the original exemplar and his teachings in many ways. The Book of Mormon, in 4 Nephi, paints exactly that picture of the influence of Christ on religious life throughout Nephite and Lamanite lands during the early A.D. centuries. Some of the same symbolic motifs are connected with the Savior, and the worship of Christ became modified and distorted as time went on. It does not surprise us, therefore, that over the centuries, strange, apostate characteristics and symbols would have derived from the original pattern of belief. This much comparison is on sound ground, but to go far beyond this to compare extensive details about the two great religious figures without careful analysis would go beyond plausibility, even though the subject invites careful research.

The Church of Christ

At the time of his ministry at Bountiful, the resurrected Christ ordained disciples to carry on his work through the "church of Christ" (3 Nephi 11:18-22; 26:17, 21). They spread the religion to "all the lands round about" until all were "converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land, both Nephites and Lamanites" (4 Nephi 1:1-2). This could mean that essentially all the Mesoamerican culture sphere as it then existed received and practiced the worship of Christ/"Precious Serpent"; or the distribution may have been more strictly limited to the areas specifically dominated by Nephite and Lamanite lineages, no doubt a smaller portion of Mesoamerica (north of the isthmus, mainly in central and southern Veracruz, I would guess). Because of linguistic, cultural and social differences that undoubtedly prevailed from place to place, and also because of difficulties in routine communication, we would not expect a high degree of administrative and ritual uniformity to prevail throughout all that area. The phrasing of 4 Nephi 1:1 (they "formed a church of Christ in all the lands round about") could suggest that each region or land may have had its own organizational structure, benefiting from only limited central guidance, as had been the case in the time of Alma (see Alma 5, 7, 8, and 15). The communication problems facing centralized administration would have been rather similar to those Peter and Paul and their colleagues faced in the eastern Mediterranean—very difficult. Still, we ought to be able to detect new religious practices in the Mesoamerican materials around the mid-first century A.D. And we can.

A shift in ritual equipment and practices is seen at about the time of Christ. Some old practices quite suddenly were given up. Certain old incense burners went out of use or changed form, and the use of the little clay figurines, which probably had some sort of religious significance, was abandoned in many places. [^27] Both those features, the burners and the figurines, had parallels in Palestine, where they represented religious practices either of a folk nature or connected with Mosaic orthodoxy. It is logical that some of Lehi's people brought knowledge of these features and adapted preexisting Mesoamerican forms of them to their purpose. These would have continued for centuries, at least among the folk. These artifacts may have had to do with the official Nephite rites under "the law of Moses" (Alma 30:3), or perhaps not. In any case they were so entrenched both in Mesoamerica and in the Near East that people hardly have given up such customs except under the impact of powerfully felt beliefs such as were incorporated in "the church of Christ."

Another shift in religious practice at the same time was giving up the carving of dated stone monuments. This practice had just built up momentum; examples known at Chiapa de Corzo, San Isidro Piedra Parada, Tres Zapotes, and El Baul had started near 35 B.C. [^28] The series ends with one whose date is either A.D. 36 or 16 (the reading is unclear). Then nothing new occurs for many years. This "enigmatic gap in dated monuments" [^29] seems to have begun at about the time when many earlier carved stones were battered and some intentionally buried, as if a religious revolution of some sort had taken place. [^30] At Chalchuapa, El Salvador, one of these inscribed monuments was said to be smashed in a "ritual of destruction" at the moment of the great volcanic eruption near the time of Christ. Its fragments are covered by the ash fall. [^31] Among the sites where vigorous monument smashing is in evidence are Kaminaljuyu/Nephi and Chiapa de Corzo/Sidom. The Book of Mormon provides a possible explanation for this behavior. It could have been a reaction by the enthusiastic new church against the old worship under the law of Moses or against cults of "idols" (Helaman 6:31). Of course other explanations are possible.

The period that follows these events in Mesoamerica is known to many experts as the Protoclassic, roughly from A.D. 50 to 200. (I prefer the more descriptive label Initial Classic.) At many Mesoamerican locations there then appeared certain characteristic sorts of vessels that have been interpreted as showing intrusion of a new people, or of a group of leaders, a cultural complex, or perhaps a new set of rituals. [^32] Since the archaeologists cannot agree what to make of these materials, we may suggest that the complex represented a new religious custom, perhaps the sacrament of bread and wine that Jesus instituted (3 Nephi 18:19, 28-32; 20:3-9). Book of Mormon Christians put great emphasis on this ceremony, which continued in modified form once the original church began to break up (4 Nephi 1:27-28). This is as plausible a treatment of the enigmatic Protoclassic complex as a number of suggestions by archaeologists. Of course, it could be wrong.

One thing becomes very clear about Mesoamerican life during the first three centuries: It was theocratic in structure. Religion was the center, the driving force, of society at that time. Priests occupied the key positions of leadership. This, too, agrees with the Book of Mormon, which says not a word about "government" or such matters throughout the same centuries. According to the Nephite record (as in 4 Nephi 1:34), religious leaders dominated public affairs.

We see that the scriptural story of the appearance of Christ and its social results in some ways fits into our picture of Mesoamerican culture history. Noteworthy parallels between the scripture and the external records are visible. Further, the events told by the Nephite writers take on consistency and broadened meaning when we view them in terms of Mesoamerican patterns.

The Second Revolution in Nephite Society

The social peace that had prevailed from about A.D. 30 to near the year 200 began to waver well before that tipover date. By around A.D. 180 a few dissidents broke away formally (4 Nephi 1:20), but we must suppose that unorthodox ideals and actions had started to develop still earlier than that. By the last quarter of the second century, some of the young could have been as much as seven biological generations removed from the appearance of Christ, and all the eyewitnesses except the three miraculously preserved disciples ("the Three Nephites") were long since gone. The intervening 150 years constituted about the same interval as from the founding of the restored church in 1830 to today. For Lehi's descendants it was then time for the inevitable crisis of faith that prosperity was bound to trigger (4 Nephi 1:23). The social structure began to come apart at the seams. Perhaps it did not seem as dramatic a change to participants at that moment as it does to us in historical retrospect. The process may have been like that at Orderville, Utah, in the late nineteenth century. Those Latter-day Saints then too were trying to possess "all things common," but they found that not quite enough sacrifice and self-control could be mustered. More and more Orderville people chafed under restrictions on what they considered their "individual privileges." Finally they crossed a threshold, and the communal system failed. According to James Moyle, generally the same phenomenon took place among the Latter-day Saints throughout Mormon country after about 1890. Within a three-year period, contracts, "deals," franchises, lawsuits, debts, social clubs, class differences, and all the other social and economic paraphernalia of "modern civilization" sprang up among at least urban Mormons. [^33] The new ways immediately overwhelmed the pattern of economic cooperation and Church dominance that had prevailed for two generations.

One could expect the same among the Israelites in Mesoamerica. Suddenly, upon reaching 200 years after the birth of Christ, the Book of Mormon Saints "did have their goods and their substance no more common among them. And they began to be divided into classes" (4 Nephi 1:25-26). Pent-up ambition to get ahead in the world resulted in a surge of business activity, just as in nineteenth-century Utah. Among the Nephites, the dramatic changes bore bad fruit because, the scripture says, the peoples' hearts had turned to "pride" and "iniquity, "and they came to "harden their hearts" (verses 24, 28, 31). Throughout this transition most of the Book of Mormon people seem to have remained good churchgoers. They did not turn away from public religion as such, only against key Christian beliefs and practices. Priests and prophets were the chief leaders in the society (verse 34). Numerous cults ("churches") split off from the original church to follow unorthodox leaders. Elaborate ceremonies and architecture in the ritual centers attempted to make up for spiritual impoverishment (verse 41).

Mexican scholar Enrique Fiorescano has characterized the changes in religious architecture and activity that took place at Teotihuacan at this time. The picture he draws is strikingly like that in the scripture. He finds that in the period from A.D. 150 to 200, before the general apostasy from the "church of Christ," the "Plumed Serpent," Quetzalcoatl, was clearly the central divinity. Deity was of much greater importance than priests. The theology was well adapted to the people's real world, and they could understand the teachings directly. But this simplicity and integrity held only briefly, for by A. D. 250 the Temple of Quetzalcoatl had been partially destroyed, then covered with a new, larger structure; the deity Tlaloc had come to the fore, bearing some of the attributes that had formerly been Quetzalcoatl's. Great elaboration in the system of beliefs and religious activity went on in the third century A.D., new symbols being attached by the priests to Tlaloc and to other re-introduced deities. The priesthood now took on heightened power, particularly because the "extraordinary complexity" of the new religious system demanded priests to interpret the intricate ritual, beliefs, and myths to lay worshippers. Tlaloc became an "intellectualized god of the priests," as Quetzalcoatl fell from his leading position. [^34] Fiorescano's reconstruction of history agrees remarkably well in nature and timing with the account of apostasy from 4 Nephi and Mormon.

A similar shift in the orientation of society and religion can be seen in Chiapas. At Chiapa de Corzo, the Istmo period of the first A.D. centuries—"subdued" and lacking in social differentiation—was followed after about A.D. 250 by the brief Jiquipilas phase, a time of "extravagant" imports of goods for elite class use, of "pomp and ceremony in keeping with the tradition common elsewhere in Mesoamerica at the time," and of a "restive socio-politico-religious situation" that would result a century later in "the almost total abandonment of Chiapa de Corzo." [^35]

The Finale and Its Geography

The conflict that was to result in extermination of the Nephite lineages began in the same place as the earlier wars—where expanding Lamanite power on the south rubbed against the Nephite political presence. "The war began to be among them in the borders of Zarahemla, by the waters of Sidon" (Mormon 1:10).

As we noted earlier, southeast Chiapas formed a boundary between speakers of Maya languages and other groups, particularly the Zoqueans, who had been among the bearers of the Olmec/Jaredite tradition. Our glimpses of ethnic history before the time of Columbus indicate that the Maya speakers occupied nearly all the lands we have identified as included in the greater land of Nephi. The mass of folk governed by the Lamanite lineage of rulers probably spoke one or another Mayan tongue. The tendency of the speakers of those languages, as shown by linguistic reconstruction, has been to expand in a northern and western direction into Chiapas. [^36] It seems almost historically inevitable that the Mayan/Lamanite movement would crowd the southern edge of the Nephite domain. The renewed conflict in the fourth century at that particular point adjacent to the Sidon and to Zarahemla fits in as a logical continuation of the process begun centuries before.

The Nephites had already pushed northward themselves, under this pressure from the south on the one hand and the opportunity to exploit less heavily occupied territory toward the north on the other. As we noted earlier, the migrations reported in the book of Helaman (3:8) were part of the movement. Bountiful's replacing Zarahemla as the leading Nephite center at the time of the Savior is indication that the process was continuing. By the time the final era opened, young Mormon, who was to be a central figure in it, was growing up in his native land northward, probably not far from where the last battles were to be fought. By the time of his first journey southward into Zarahemla as a youth, the isthmus and the land of Zarahemla had become densely populated (Mormon 1:7). Young Mormon came to maturity in the midst of a society revolutionizing itself (Mormon 1:13-14, 18-19). Because of his lofty priestly connections (verses 2-6; compare 4 Nephi 1:19, 21, 47-49), his noble lineage (Mormon 1:5), and the consequent high degree of literacy he must have commanded, he was thrust into a leadership role with which no average sixteen-year-old would ever have been entrusted. He was given command of the Nephite forces in the battle area south of Zarahemla. But the situation was hopeless from the first, and retreat was inevitable (Mormon 2:3). The time was about A.D. 325.

The nature of the Nephites' organizational problem is described in the phrasing of the fourth verse of Mormon 2: "We did come to the city of Angola, and we did take possession of the city, and make preparations to defend ourselves against the Lamanites." This statement is remarkable because Angola was already part of the greater land of Zarahemla. Why would Mormon's forces have to "take possession" of it? The key point about the Nephite political structure has already been made several times: there was no unitary Nephite state. What we see in Mormon's appointment and in the affair at Angola is the system of lineage leadership in the political arena. Leaders held power on the basis of the loyalty given to them by kin or "friends" who had made a commitment to ally with a powerful major lineage. Smaller units had to link themselves with others in order to survive in a dog-eat-dog world of tests of power. That had been true just before the Savior's appearance (3 Nephi 7:2-6), and it was true again now. Each lineage tended to occupy certain areas and communities. Each was tied with others through interpersonal bonds—distant shared ancestry, trade alliances, friendship, intermarriage, shared religion, and so on—as these connections were cultivated by their leaders. Thus, combined armies would be put together according to the political weather of the moment.

We can get a glimpse of how such a system worked at the time of Cortez's conquest, twelve centuries after Mormon. The essentials of the pattern had changed little in between. We saw earlier how, when Cortez first encountered the Tlaxcalans, who eventually became his allies against the Aztecs, he found a fragmented leadership. "These same Caciques [leaders] . . . came out to receive us, and brought with them their sons and nephews and many of the leading inhabitants, each group of kindred and clan a party by itself." [^37] Among the Nephites similar fragmentation surely prevailed, the military commander using powers of persuasion and diplomacy about as often as he used his limited authority.

Obviously, Mormon's father would not likely have moved to Zarahemla from his residence in the land northward unless a network of kin- and class-based relationships had paved the way. But nobody was related to everybody! Some groups would not be persuaded. At Angola, a stopping place in the Nephite flight out of central Zarahemla, Mormon's alliance of lineage militias found the locals unenthusiastic about getting involved. The Angola residents probably felt they would sooner avoid choosing sides in a quarrel that they thought they could ride out quietly. But, of course, like it or not, they would have to provide great quantities of supplies. It is no wonder Mormon's armies had to "take possession" of the city.

As the Nephite forces retreated still farther, they repeated this process over and over, forcing local people to cast their lot with the retreating lineages and their armies. All the political and military means available to Mormon and his people they used to "gather in our people as fast as it were possible, that we might get them together in one body" (Mormon 2:7).

From Angola they back-peddled to David but were driven from there also. Since Angola and David appear as stopping places on the way from Zarahemla to the west coast near the narrow neck (Mormon 2:4-6), they would lie northwestward, in Nephite terms, from Zarahemla. From central Chiapas the normal way to reach the Pacific coast leads west from the upper Grijalva/Sidon River through the Cintalapa Valley to the passes over the wilderness mountain strip above Arriaga. (The Lamanites had followed the same route in reverse in their early attacks on Ammonihah and Noah—Alma 16:2; 49:1-14). Angola and David were probably along that route somewhere, although the brevity of Mormon's record denies us enough information to pin down the places definitively.

The city of Angola likely was at or near the site of Mirador, identified as Ammonihah in chapter 5; a name or site change would not be surprising over the centuries since Alma's day. David was a land for which no city was mentioned; it could have been westward along the Cintalapa Valley from Mirador. At length the Nephites fell back to "the land of Joshua, which was in the borders west by the seashore" (Mormon 2:6). The Arriaga-Tonala coastal zone was heavily settled in those times. The text's requirements for Joshua are met there. The temporary success of the Nephites in stemming the Lamanite attack at that point (verse 9) can be explained by their holding the two major passes over the mountains above the land of Joshua, so that the enemy could not reach the coastal strip. (See map 13.)

Map 13. Plausible Locations of the Final Battles.

A "complete revolution" had been going on throughout the land of Zarahemla (verse 8), Mormon observed. Archaeological evidence in Chiapas seems to reflect it. For the Mirador site, archaeologist Agrinier has reported on the brief Jiquipilas (Early Classic) phase, which lasted only from roughly A.D. 250 to 350.

The Jiquipilas phase "was ended by an intense fire that totally destroyed" the structure of the largest sacred building at Mirador. "It seems that the temple had been thoroughly cleaned of its contents prior to its burning." This suggests either a scorched earth policy on the part of retreating inhabitants or looting by the invader, or both. [^38] Tombs at the site were sacked at the same time. [^39] After the destruction of the temple, a period of temporary abandonment followed, perhaps as little as a single year. (Ocozocuautla, our suggestion for the earlier city of Noah, was probably abandoned at the same time and never reoccupied. [^40]) When Mirador was settled anew, it was by a new people. The buildings suggest "shoddier construction" by "a transitory elite . . . more concerned with quickly-secured grandeur than with long-range durability." [^41] That sounds like what we could expect from the Lamanite invaders who followed on the heels of Mormon's retreating people.

The cultural connections of the Chiapas area since A.D. 50 had been primarily to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and beyond to south-central Veracruz. That would tie our Zarahemla area to Bountiful, and also to Desolation and Cumorah, Mormon's homeland. The Book of Mormon's statements and implications agree with that picture. It was northward to those areas that the Nephites finally retreated (Mormon 2:16-17, 28-29). On the contrary, practically no connections are evident in early A.D. times between the Chiapas sites and Maya-speaking areas to the south and east. Since that is what we have considered Lamanite territory, this cultural differentiation again fits the Book of Mormon situation. When the Early Classic Chiapas people did disappear from their settlements, it was a wholesale abandonment. Many archaeological sites of that once-crowded area were simply left empty and not reoccupied for many generations. [^42] A sprinkling of intruders is evident, but the next occupation didn't amount to much.

We know that fourth-century Lamanites came out of highland Nephi, from the south, to attack the Nephites. A dozen campaigns by the Lamanites before the Christian era had moved in the same direction, from the same source. At the date in question the site of Kaminaljuyu in the Valley of Guatemala was regaining its former glory. It was already coming under the influence of the sprawling metropolis of Teotihuacan in central Mexico, at that moment the most impressive of all Mesoamerican centers. [^43] Several explanations have been offered for the developing tie between the two centers. They emphasize Kaminaljuyu's function as a southern trade center for Teotihuacan through which to exploit valuable obsidian deposits nearby. [^44] Whatever the material motivation for the connection, it was a fact.

The Teotihuacan people were real organizers, controlling the population in their home area by the firmest of measures—they "ran a tight ship." [^45] The Lamanite elites at Nephi/Kaminaljuyu probably learned a lot from their sophisticated northern colleagues about how to dominate their neighbors. In fact, it looks as if the Guatemalan connection of Teotihuacan, not the central Mexican metropolis itself, was the source of much of the widespread influence in southern Mesoamerica that has until now been credited to the northern center. [^46] The Lamanites who attacked Mormon's forces in Zarahemla/Chiapas could well have been bearers of highland Guatemalan culture under Teotihuacan stimulation. Moving northward from their base in our land of Nephi, the Lamanite lineage chiefs must have had big ideas about power, their eyes having been opened to the possibilities for conquest by their Teotihuacan teachers and exemplars. They would have been organized and equipped better than former Lamanites had been in their attacks on the hereditary enemy, the Nephites. This picture gets support from the archaeological data at Mirador. It turns out that the invaders who looted and burned there, arriving on the heels of the populace abandoning the site, displayed a mixture of Guatemalan and Teotihuacan traditions. Agrinier notes, "Affinities of . . . [the Teotihuacan-style ceramics at Mirador] with Highland Guatemala seem to point out this area as a major source of influence at Mirador." [^47] The date for this Guatemalan-Teotihuacanoid presence is at the end of the Early Classic Chiapas VIII period, about A.D. 350, as I analyze the chronology.

Tehuantepec Pass, rising from the Pacific Coast toward the 800-foot summit. Nephite and Lamanite armies, as much as Aztec and other units of later time, often marched up and down this defile. (Courtesy Kirk Magleby.)

The archaeological picture in Chiapas in the Early Classic period shows a strikingly close correspondence to the Book of Mormon account of the Nephites' final years in Zarahemla. The inhabitants of Zarahemla in Chiapas in the first two centuries A.D. had lived in a society showing little internal social difference. This condition had changed by around the year 250. A local version of the Theocratic or Classic tradition then developed in that priests manipulated a complex set of religious symbols and rituals, and social classes sprang up amid burgeoning trade and wealth. Less than a century later, aggressive, determined people from the old Lamanite center in Nephi/highland Guatemala started northward expansion that soon destroyed or depopulated most sites in the central depression of Chiapas. Lamanite/Teotihuacan-like culture in a Guatemalan mold thereupon took over in Chiapas, but the new rulers could produce only a weak version of their culture on the new scene, perhaps because of the high cost in human and material resources consumed by the continued warfare of the Middle Classic period (compare Moroni 1:1-2).

Nearing the End

Holding the line in a series of bloody encounters allowed the Nephites to stay on for fourteen years in the land of Joshua. Finally their defense collapsed. They fled headlong across the narrow neck and into the land northward all the way to the land of Jashon.

That was not far from Mormon's original home (Mormon 2:17 and 1:2-3). Nearby was the place where Ammaron had buried the Nephite records for safekeeping, in the hill Shim in the land of Antum. He had charged the boy Mormon to recover them when he was grown. (Apparently it took Mormon some eleven years longer to get back to the area to finish his assignment with the plates than Ammaron had anticipated.)

The brief scriptural statements about these lands do not allow us to coordinate the places mentioned with precise localities on today's map, but we can guess intelligently about them. The Book of Ether tells us that the hill Shim was between the Jaredite land of Moron and the hill Ramah (the Nephites' Cumorah). Not far beyond the hill Cumorah was the east seashore (Ether 9:3). We saw in chapter 1 that these hills would be located in southern Veracruz state. Hills prominent enough to deserve being named as landmarks on an itinerary, as Shim was, are in the southern part of the Tuxtlas mountain mass or, less likely, in the foothills of the Sierra Madre 80 miles to the southwest. Most likely locations for Jashon and Shem (Mormon 2:17, 20), although no geographical details are provided, would be on the strip around Acayucan and Hueyapan, south and west of the Tuxtlas, or else in the 50-mile sector from San Juan Evangelista in the direction of Tuxtepec (see map 13). All these places were in the eastern, lowland sector of the land northward. According to the text's account of the final wars, there are no "ups" nor "downs" in the geography of the Nephite lands north of Bountiful.

A very important point made by the story of the Nephite military maneuvering is that they battled for the next 35 years, right to the bitter end, within a very restricted region in south-central Veracruz. Probably no part of the embattled territory was more than 100 miles from where Mormon had grown up as a boy.

Remarkably, the Nephites sprang back from the defeats that drove them to Jashon. In a fast campaign they actually regained "possession of the lands of our inheritance," including Zarahemla (Mormon 2:27). But they were aware they lacked the power to defend all that territory. They hadn't been able to hold it in the first place, and by now they were even weaker. So they bargained their momentary advantage for what they hoped would be security. They negotiated a treaty with their enemies, "the Lamanites and the robbers of Gadianton" (Mormon 2:28-29). The boundary was to be right on the old Desolation-Bountiful line, where land southward joined land northward.

It may seem strange, looking at a map, that the Nephites did not concern themselves with the highland mass constituting the western half of the land northward, which had included the Moron of the Jaredites. The reason is probably simple: few if any Nephite or allied lineages were located there. Those who did inhabit it would have been mainly unrelated in lineage and probably also in language. We know from linguistic and archaeological study that it was occupied by groups descended in part from Jaredite times. (At least it is quite certain that the Zapotecs and various language relatives of theirs were already established in the highlands, although that point is not settled.) [^48] Nowhere in the Nephite record is there any indication that they occupied that zone. The retreat the Nephites had been forced to make would obviously be to areas inhabited by their own folks, not by strangers.

After the treaty had been signed, years passed, while the Nephites prepared for an inevitable renewal of the war. Mormon, their leader, no doubt wrote his abridgment of the plates of Nephi at this time. His people could quite easily have fortified the few tortuous routes by which the Lamanites could cross their border. Only one spot was critical. There they concentrated most of their forces—at the "narrow pass," that gravelly ridge leading through barrier swamps, about which we talked in the first chapter. The base for the Nephite forces defending the pass was the city of Desolation. It would have been near the modern city of Minatitlan. They knew that was where the attack was bound to come. Finally, "the Lamanites did come down to the city of Desolation" (Mormon 3:7) in great force, out of highland Guatemala and Chiapas. The battle must have been at the ford across the Coatzacoalcos River, a dozen miles up from its mouth. First one and then a second Lamanite attack was unsuccessful; their dead "were cast into the sea" (verse 8), presumably by way of the river.

Soon afterward the Nephite armies again tried to knife southward all the way to Zarahemla (Mormon 4:1-2), as they had succeeded in doing a few years before. Not only did this foray fail, their wearied armies were double-teamed by a fresh Lamanite force. The result was that they lost their base at Desolation. Remnants of their armies found refuge at Teancum "in the borders by the seashore." That could be around Pilapan, some dozen miles away on the Gulf coast.

Ensuing bloody combat seesawed one way and then the other. In the "three hundred and seventy and fifth year" after the birth of Christ, the scales tipped decisively to the Lamanites because of their vast numerical superiority. Mormon could see "that the Lamanites were about to overthrow the land" (Mormon 4:23). Finally the time had come of which Ammaron had told him, so he took the books of his people out of the hill Shim.

The enemies of the Nephites at this time practiced the sacrifice of women and children prisoners (and no doubt men also) to "their idol gods" (Mormon 4:15, 14). Later Mesoamerican history saw a fuller development of this bloody practice, along with the ritual cannibalism that Mormon reported among his own depraved followers (Moroni 9:9-10). Among the Aztecs at the time of the Spanish conquest, "ceremonial cannibalism was sometimes practiced in the belief that the eater could absorb the virtues of the eaten." [^49] For late Teotihuacan times (around A.D. 600), excavation has revealed clear evidence of human sacrifice, with a meal made of the victims. [^50] Sanders has reported earlier data on the same practice from a site near Teotihuacan dating between A.D. 450 and 550. [^51] If Teotihuacan culture elements were as deeply involved in the life of the Guatemalan Lamanites as it appears, these despicable rites are not surprising among the Lamanites.

The great swamp and lagoon system of central Veracruz would serve as the "waters of Irreantum" that blocked the retreat of the Jaredites armies. (Photo by James C. Christiansen used by permission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.)

The Nephite retreat was now irrevocable; they made no further counterattacks. Despite the loss of more local lands and cities to Lamanite advances (Mormon 5:4-5), they managed to maintain a defense line that saved some of their base areas. But things had gone so far that only one further move was open to the Nephites. In a desperate gamble, Mormon made an appointment with the enemy for a showdown battle, in a land where he "had hope to gain advantage over the Lamanites" (Mormon 6:4). (Later Mexican practice attests that making a date for battle was an established custom. [^52])

Cumorah must be part of the northern or western extremity of the Tuxtla Mountains, some 90 miles from the narrow pass and near the huge site of Tres Zapotes. The Tuxtla ("place of the macaws") region has been described by artist-author Miguel Covarrubias as "a land of unprecedented fertility, watered in all directions by streams, water falls, and lakes." [^53] Mormon called it "a land of many waters, rivers, and fountains" (Mormon 6:4). A thousand years before, that area had been key in the late Olmec settlement system, no doubt for the same reason. This zone, exceedingly fertile because of rich volcanic soil and abundant rainfall, could probably supply by itself the food needs of the concentrated Nephite forces. (Food was an increasing problem, due to the social and military turmoil, Moroni 9:16 tells us.) The "advantage" the Nephites thought they might enjoy there could have been due to the broken terrain, which Mormon must have known intimately. Or possibly the Nephites thought the place would be fateful for the Lamanites because of superstitious beliefs or traditions concerning the end of the Jaredites on that very spot. But why would the Lamanites allow a period of years for the Nephites to get ready? In the first place, they would understand from their knowledge of regional geography that the Nephites had no place to retreat beyond Cumorah, for behind them lay only the huge estuary of Alvarado (the Ripliancum of the Jaredites) and the tangle of rivers and swamps known in modern times as "La Mixtequilla." [^54] So both sides knew this would be a decisive battle between the ancient rivals. Another reason the Lamanites would be agreeable to this place and appointed time may have been that they needed a period to build up their own forces for the climactic clash, for they were a long distance from their home base. In any case, the agreed site was deeper into the now-limited territory under Nephite control, so the Lamanites had nothing to lose.

A valid question is "Why didn't the Nephites continue retreating farther and farther north and so escape the Lamanites altogether?" In the first place, we must realize that rarely if ever is there any decent land that does not already contain a sizable population, so they would have had to dispossess other people first. Besides, moving farther on, they would have entered ecologically new territory, and the prospects would be slim that they could successfully feed their numbers in a new environment with no time to learn how to exploit the land. Farther north also lay another military threat. Beyond the big swamps they would come nearer and nearer to the territory of Teotihuacan proper, the powerful state allied culturally if not militarily with the Lamanites on their other side. The Teotihuacan domain of control apparently did not extend quite as far as the Tuxtlas by A.D. 380, but any move farther north by Mormon's people would have encountered this great power, standing in the wings but uninvolved directly in the present conflict. Yet the real key to the Nephites' standing fast could simply be that the lands they were defending were their own already; they felt they had a right to them and were motivated to defend them if at all possible. For many people, life lived as a refugee far from what one thinks of somehow as home is hardly worth living (compare Jacob 7:26 and Mormon 8:5). So, caught between the millstones of Lamanites on the south and Teotihuacan itself on the north, the Nephites willingly defended their shrunken core of lands because they had to.

Cerro El Vigia, the best candidate for the Hill Cumorah and the Hill Ramah. The battles of the Nephites and Jaredites would have taken place on the plains, beyond the hill in this view. (Courtesy Richard Jones.)

Four years of preparation had given the Nephites as good a military position as they could hope for. Then finally came the awesome climax. Since they had left God behind, there remained only their own muscles and heads to fight against the Lamanite horde that came upon them at the hill Cumorah (Mormon 6:7). As in most major Mesoamerican and Book of Mormon military campaigns, the families of the soldiers were present. So the outcome was to be genocide, not merely military defeat. [^55] Twenty-three 10,000-man armies made up the Nephite force. All were wiped out on that one grim day. [^56]

Could Mesoamerica have been the scene for a war on the impressive scale the Book of Mormon relates? The central Mexican chronicler, Ixtlilxochitl, reported of the Tultecas around A.D. 1060 that in a three-year war, 5,600,000 were slain on both sides. [^57] Even allowing him considerable room for exaggeration, we are left with little doubt that the battle at Cumorah was within the realm of the plausible in Mesoamerican terms.

Two dozen Nephite stragglers survived among the corpses. In the night they made their way to the top of nearby hill Cumorah, from which they could look down on the slaughter-ground. Upwards of 600,000 must have lain dead there (counting the women and children of the Nephites, plus Lamanite casualties). The most likely candidate for that hill is Cerro Vigia, over 3,000 feet high, and lying at the northwestern extremity of the Tuxtlas. At its base are plains of the required scale where the armies could have been located. David A. Palmer in 1975 made a list of requirements for the hill Cumorah that he thought the text imposed: it had to be big enough that around its base on the order of a million people could be arrayed in battle; it must be high enough that the wounded survivors would be safe on top from being spotted by the Lamanites below; yet it must not be so elevated that wounded men could not climb it during the night, and so on. Palmer later made a trip to Cerro Vigia, which I had suggested as the best candidate for the hill Cumorah/Ramah of the final battle(s). He could discover no reason why this could not be the hill; it met every requirement in the Nephite account. [^58] If we are correct, then somewhere within it (perhaps in a cavern) Mormon had once hidden the Nephite archive (Mormon 6:6). His own set of plates, on which he had written his abridgment and to which he had appended the small plates of Nephi, he gave to his son Moroni (Words of Mormon 1:2, 5-6). The latter in turn added to them and eventually delivered them to Joseph Smith.

The "land of many waters, rivers, and fountains" where the final battle took place was too attractive to settlers to be left empty. It wasn't long before the surrounding zone was again occupied. It looks as if a Teotihuacan stronghold was built in those hills after the Nephites vanished. Successor populations to modern times have continued superstitions about the hills and the ancient monuments. [^59]

Were there Nephites left after that battle? Some, yes. The scripture makes that clear. Only they were no longer called Nephites. Mormon noted that "a few. . . had escaped into the south countries, and a few. . . had dissented over unto the Lamanites" (Mormon 6:15). Naturally, large numbers of people of Nephite descent had never consented to flee their lands in the first place (Mormon 2:7-8), but had switched allegiance and renounced their old beliefs and allegiance rather than move out (Moroni 1:2). Mormon observed to his son that "many of our brethren have dissented over unto the Lamanites" (Moroni 9:24). The Doctrine and Covenants says that modern descendants of not only the Nephites but also the major lineages allied with them, the Jacobites, Josephites, and Zoramites, will yet be identified (D&C 3:17-20; 10:48).

Many Latter-day Saints have been fascinated over the years with "white Indians." They have interpreted sensationalistic reports of such rumored groups as referring to remnants of the Nephites. When we examine the Book of Mormon, we find no hint that any "white Nephites" were to be preserved. Mormon and Moroni repeatedly made clear before the Cumorah battle took place that there was no significant difference in the degree of unrighteousness of Nephites and Lamanites, unless it was that their own people's "wickedness doth exceed that of the Lamanites" (Moroni 9:20; also Mormon 5:15). Descendants of the pre-Columbian peoples vary considerably in the degree of their pigmentation, as chapter 2 pointed out. Some groups among them are relatively light-skinned. It appears there have long been Mesoamericans who could be termed at least light-skinned ("pure" or "delightsome" could be quite different concepts). But no reproducing groups of dramatically "white" natives are reliably known to have existed in the New World when the Spaniards arrived. Mormons would do well to give up the romantic pastime of searching for mysterious bands of "white Indians."

The disappearance of the Nephites did not cause any revolutionary culture shift in central Mesoamerica. The people who filled the gap they left were bearers of the same basic civilizational pattern, the Second Tradition of our discussion on culture history. The continued rise of Teotihuacan to dominance over most of Mesoamerica north and west of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec is well documented for the period after Cumorah. By A.D. 400 their militarism was widespread, and during the early Middle Classic period (approximately A.D. 400 to 550) this great city just off the Valley of Mexico formed an axis with Kaminaljuyu/Nephi and Pacific coastal Guatemala. Their joint influence and dominion proved to be the most powerful in Mesoamerica, as measured by raw power. But the aging system of religion and ideology on which this virtual "empire" was based deteriorated progressively. After A.D. 600, only second-rate successors quarreled over the bones of the once impressive civilization.

With the extinction of the Nephites, lineage records were still kept by others. They would, of course, give a very different version of history than the Nephite one. Throughout Mesoamerica thousands of books in all were kept, many of them resembling Mormon's record in certain respects. [^60] However, none of them contained material quite like the Book of Mormon, just as the thousands of documents from the ancient Mediterranean and Near Eastern area shared much of the form but little of the substance of the scriptures we know as the Bible.

We have seen how the Book of Mormon is simultaneously different from yet like other documents from Mesoamerica. We have also learned that the story fits into and is illuminated by a knowledge of its setting. It appears to connect in many ways with pre-Columbian civilization in Mexico and northern Central America. These pages have shown a way by which we can learn a new dimension of what the volume has to say. It remains for Latter-day Saints, and others as well, to read the Book of Mormon in the several ways it can be read—to extract from it all the light it holds for us.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Manuel Maldonado-Koerdell, Geohistory and Paleogeography of Middle America, HMAI 1 (1964), pp. 22-26; Robert C. West, "Surface Configuration and Associated Geology of Middle America," ibid., pp. 42-58, 75-78.
[^2] Felix W. McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography of Southwest Guatemala, SISA 4 (1947), p. 6.
[^3] Maldonado-Koerdell, Geohistory, p. 26.
[^4] Payson D. Sheets, "An Ancient Natural Disaster," Expedition 13 (Fall 1971):27.
[^5] See chapter 3, note 154.
[^6] Joseph Mariano Mozino Suarez de Figueroa, Noticias de Nutka (Mexico: Sociedad Mexicana de Geografia y Estadistica, 1913), pp. 105-10.
[^7] Jorge A. Vivo E., Weather and Climate of Mexico and Central America, HMAI 1 (1964), p. 195. Note the description of an ancient hurricane and its effects given in the record of Ixtilxochitl, in Milton R. Hunter and Thomas Stuart Ferguson, Ancient America and the Book of Mormon (Oakland: Kolob Book, 1950), pp. 41, 190-91. Compare A. M. Tozzer, Landa's Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, HUPM 18 (1941), pp. 40-1, 216, about a hurricane that caused fires that "burned down" communities in the center of Yucatan. In central Mexico particularly the god Quetzalcoatl was frequently shown as Ehecatl, the wind aspect of Quetzalcoatl, perhaps pointing to the power of these tempests in that area.
[^8] Vivo, Weather and Climate.
[^9] McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography, pp. 132, 168, 179-80; Samuel K. Lothrop, in Atitlan, CIWP 444 (1933), p. 83, reported waterworn potsherds from the site of Chuitinamit well above the water level of that time; these can only be explained by extensive fluctuations.
[^10] Maldonado-Koerdell, Geohistory, pp. 25-26.
[^11] Robert C. West and John P. Augelli, Middle America: Its Lands and Peoples, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1976), p. 35.
[^12] McBryde, Cultural and Historical Geography, p. x; compare "Economy and Technology," in Heritage of Conquest, ed. Sol Tax (Glencoe: Free Press, 1952), pp. 60-62, 74, and Eva Hunt, "Irrigation and the Sociopolitical Organization of Cuicatec Cacicazgos," in The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley, vol. 4. Chronology and Irrigation, ed. F. Johnson (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1972), pp. 193, 203-4.
[^13] Tax, "Economy and Technology," pp. 200-205, 218-31.
[^14] Gareth W. Lowe, "Burial Customs at Chiapa de Corzo," The Archaeological Burials at Chiapa de Corzo and Their Furniture, NWAF 16 (1964), p. 73.
[^15] Ibid., p. 75.
[^16] Miguel Covarrubias, Mexico South: The Isthmus of Tehuantepec (New York: Knopf, 1947), p. 39.
[^17] For example, Milton R. Hunter, Christ in Ancient America (Salt Lake City, Deseret Book, 1959).
[^18] Frances F. Berdan, The Aztecs of Central Mexico: An Imperial Society (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1982), p. 165; John L. Sorenson, "Some Mesoamerican Traditions of Immigration by Sea," El Mexico Antiguo 8 (1955):428.
[^19] B. C. Hedrick, "Quetzalcoatl: European or Indigene?" in Man Across the Sea: Problems of Pre-Columbian Contacts, ed. Carroll J. Riley et al. (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971), pp. 255-65.
[^20] Stephan F. de Borhegyi, "Shell Offerings and the Use of Shell Motifs at Lake Amatitlan, Guatemala, and Teotihuacan, Mexico," Actas y Memorias, 36a Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Espana, 1965, vol. 1 (Seville, 1968), pp. 356, 359; Laurette Sejourne, Burning Water: Thought and Religion in Ancient Mexico (New York: Vanguard, 1957), pp. 25, 83-85; idem, "El Simbolismo de los Rituales Funerarios en Monte Alban," Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropologicos 16 (1960):85-90. Rene Millon, in The Teotihuacan Map, vol. 1 (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1973), pp. 55-56, notes that the shell-and-serpent decorated Temple of Quetzalcoatl at Teotihuacan was built no later than A.D. 400 and perhaps soon after 150.
[^21] "Quetzalcoatl: Espiritualismo del Mexico Antiguo," Cuadernos Americanos 105, no. 4 (1959):127-39.
[^22] Sejourne, "El Simbolismo."
[^23] See references in my article in Riley et al., Man Across the Sea, pp. 234-35.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Philip Drucker, Robert F. Heizer, and R. J. Squier, Excavations at La Venta, Tabasco, 1955, Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 170 (1957), pp. 199-200, think they see the flying reptile represented at La Venta in Olmec times, but Ignacio Bernal, Olmec World, op. cit., 61-62, denies that there are feathers on it or other early serpent figures. He places the earliest representation of the feathered serpent only shortly before the time of Christ. What has been interpreted as a "Plumed Serpent" from Chiapas definitely dates several centuries before Christ. Agrinier, Archaeological Burials, p. 18, fig. 23.
[^26] George C. Vaillant, The Aztecs of Mexico (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1950), pp. 160, 174.
[^27] John L. Sorenson, A Chronological Ordering of the Mesoamerican Pre-Classic, MARI 18 (1955), pp. 53-57.
[^28] Joyce Marcus, "The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing," Annual Review of Anthropology 5 (1976):49-55.
[^29] Lee A. Parsons, "An Early Maya Stela on the Pacific Coast of Guatemala," Estudios de Cultura Maya 6 (1976):180. More recently at Abaj Takalik on the coast of Guatemala was found a stela dated A.D. 126, which narrows the "gap."
[^30] Lowe and colleagues refer to the violent breaking up and burying of carved stone monuments at Chiapa de Corzo, Chinkultic, and various sites in Guatemala and El Salvador. Gareth W. Lowe, Thomas A. Lee, Jr., and Eduardo Martinez E., Izapa: An Introduction to the Ruins and Monuments, NWAF 31 (1982), p. 28. At this same time at Chiapa de Corzo, the "Horcones occupation ended with its violent overthrow" accompanied by "an attitude of irreverence for both the dead and for certain conventions." Lowe, "Burial Customs," p. 73.
[^31] Robert J. Sharer, "Chalchuapa: Investigations at a Highland Maya Ceremonial Center," Expedition 11 (Winter 1969):36-38.
[^32] Thought on the problem is surveyed in Robert Wauchope, Zacualpa, El Quiche, Guatemala. An Ancient Provincial Center of the Highland Maya, MARI 39 (1975), pp. 49-52.
[^33] Gene A. Sessions, ed., Mormon Democrat: The Religious and Political Memoirs of James Henry Moyle (Salt Lake City: LDS Church Historical Department, 1975), pp. 90, 163ff.
[^34] Enrique Fiorescano, "La Serpiente Emplumada, Tlaloc y Quetzalcoatl," Cuadernos Americanos 133 (March-April 1964):137-54. Compare David H. Kelley, "The Birth of the Gods at Palenque," Estudios de Cultura Maya 5 (1966):120, on the Mexican cult of Quetzalcoatl imported to this Mayan center no later than A.D. 400-500, and the same phenomenon at Lake Amatitlan, Guatemala, at the same time-Borhegyi, "Shell Offerings," pp. 356, 359, 364-65.
[^35] Lowe, "Burial Customs," p. 75.
[^36] Terrence Kaufman, "Archaeological and Linguistic Correlations in Mayaland and Associated Areas of Meso-America," World Archaeology 8 (1976):106-9.
[^37] Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico, 1517-1521, trans. and annot. A. P. Maudslay (New York: Farrer, Straus and Cudahy, 1956), p. 150.
[^38] Pierre Agrinier, Mounds 9 and 10 at Mirador, Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 39 (1975), p. 9.
[^39] Ibid., p. 90.
[^40] Andrew J. McDonald, personal communication.
[^41] Agrinier, Mounds 9 and 10, pp. 99-100.
[^42] Gareth W. Lowe and J. Alden Mason, Archaeological Survey of the Chiapas Coast, Highlands, and Upper Grijalva Basin, HMAI 2 (1965), p. 226; John L. Sorenson, An Archaeological Reconnaissance of West-Central Chiapas, Mexico, NWAF 1 (1956), p. 15.
[^43] Kenneth L. Brown, "The B-III-5 Mound Group: Early and Middle Classic Civic Architecture," in The Pennsylvania State University Kaminaljuyu Project-1969, 1970 Seasons, part 1. Mound Excavation, ed. J. W. Michels and W. T. Sanders, PSUO 9 (December 1973), pp. 391-463; Kenneth L. Brown, "The Valley of Guatemala: A Highland Port of Trade," in Teotihuacan and Kaminaljuyu: A Study in Prehistoric Culture Contact, ed. William T. Sanders and Joseph W. Michels, Pennsylvania State University Press Monograph Series on Kaminaljuyu (1977), pp. 205-396.
[^44] William T. Sanders and Barbara J. Price, Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization (New York: Random House, 1968), pp. 166-68, 203-4, Lee A. Parsons and Barbara J. Price, "Mesoamerican Trade and Its Role in the Emergence of Civilization," in Peasant Livelihood: Studies in Economic Anthropology and Cultural Ecology, ed. R. Halperin and J. Dow (New York: St. Martin's, 1976), pp. 205-20.
[^45] William T. Sanders, "A Profile of Urban Evolution in the Teotihuacan Valley," Actas y Memorias, 37a Congreso Internacional de Americamistas, Buenos Aires, 1966, vol. 1 (Buenos Aires, 1968), pp. 100-101.
[^46] Nicholas Hellmuth, "The Escuintla Hoards: Teotihuacan Ceramic Art of the Tiquisate Region," Foundation for Latin American Anthropological Research Progress Reports 1, no. 2 (1975).
[^47] Agrinier, Mounds 9 and 10, p. 100. Furthermore, the codex fragments discovered in the tomb in Mound 10 at Mirador, and which date during the occupation by the intruders (approximately A.D. 400-450), point directly to Guatemala, not to Teotihuacan, for codices are unknown at the northern metropolis.
[^48] Hanns J. Prem, "Calendrics and Writing," in Observations on the Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica, ed. Robert F. Heizer and John A. Graham, UCAR 11 (1971), p. 122.
[^49] Vailliant, The Aztecs of Mexico, p. 76.
[^50] Ibid.
[^51] William T. Sanders, The Cultural Ecology of the Teotihuacan Valley. A Preliminary Report of the Results of the Teotihuacan Valley Project (University Park: Pennsylvania State University, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, 1965), p. 179.
[^52] Fernando de Alva Ixtlilxochitl, conveniently accessible in Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America, p. 383.
[^53] Covarrubias, Mexico South, p. 27.
[^54] The Aztecs labeled the vast, boggy region Chalchihuecan, Place of Lady-Jade-Skirts, the goddess of still waters. Ibid., p. 11.
[^55] For example, see Alma 56:28 as well as frequent reference to the "camp" accompanying an army, as in Alma 48:6. On Mesoamerican practice see, for example, Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America, pp. 383-84, concerning the Tulteca.
[^56] As mentioned in an earlier chapter, the 10,000-man unit under a lineage captain was still the norm when Mexico was invaded by Cortez. Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Bernal Diaz Chronicles, trans. and ed. A. Idell (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1956), p. 106.
[^57] Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America, p. 385.
[^58] David Palmer, In Search of Cumorah (Bountiful, Utah: Horizon, 1981).
[^59] Alfonso Medellin Zenil, "El Dios Jaguar de San Martin," Boletin INAH 33 (September 1968):16.
[^60] Tozzer, Landa's Relacion, p. 169; Hunter and Ferguson, Ancient America, pp. 337-38.
