John L. Sorenson, Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon ( 1985)

Epilogue

This book has not attempted to provide a definitive map that could lead readers to the precise spot where Nephi landed or where Mormon fought. Nor did it aim to prove that the events of the Book of Mormon took place in a particular way or in specific archaeological phases.

What has been done, first of all, is to show that the Book of Mormon story could have had a concrete setting—that it is plausible to treat it as a history in a particular geographical and cultural context. The geographical setting identified meets the criteria set out unintentionally by the Book of Mormon as it tells its story. Dimensions, climate, topography, configuration of land and water, and cultural levels exhibited in scriptural statements were found to agree with characteristics of central and southern Mesoamerica. Cultural, historical, and archaeological data substantiate the geographical correlation. In the interest of space, much available data was omitted; still, the agreements have been consistent and arresting.

The comparisons have had two thrusts. First, as already indicated, agreements between the scriptural account and the external materials show that the former is plausible in terms of the latter. The Book of Mormon shows so many striking similarities to the Mesoamerican setting that it seems to me impossible for rational people willing to examine the data to maintain that the book is a mere romance or speculative history written in the third decade of the nineteenth century in New York State. If in the eyes of some this is "proof" of the authenticity of the volume, they are free to draw that conclusion. The correlations pointed out are probably not yet detailed enough to satisfy everyone on that point, but the issue is at least on new ground.

The second thrust has been illumination of the record. Our knowledge from scholarship on life and culture in Mexico and Central America in early times allows us to envision concretely how Book of Mormon armies fought, dissenters dissented, and farmers farmed. We also begin to see some of the whys of the ancient situation: secret societies, kinship and tribes, trade and conquest, migration and missions. In my view, in the long run this light could be the most significant contribution. As a result of this explication of the setting, readers ought to become convinced that the Book of Mormon is an extremely complex record that deserves far more careful study than it has received in the past.

Whatever else this work may have done, it lays a foundation. Though it does not contain all the answers, it improves the quality of our questions. Serious students of the Book of Mormon, as well as scholars investigating Mesoamerican civilization, should take this as an invitation to press on. I am painfully aware of how preliminary the data are that I have presented. But one step at a time serves best.

Yet the Book of Mormon is not merely a historical volume or lineage record to be studied by "value-free" scholars. Hundreds of lineage histories were compiled in ancient Mesoamerica. This one is unique. As a record of God's dealings with one unusual people, it constitutes scripture, invaluable for its powerful spiritual teachings, whatever scholars may say about it as history. Because of the book's importance, if understanding the setting for the book contributes to a clearer grasp of its message, then my effort has been justified.

Key to Abbreviations

CIWP Carnegie Institution of Washington, Papers (Washington, D.C.)

HMAI Handbook of Middle American Indians, ed. Robert Wauchope

(Austin: University of Texas Press, 1967-1976)

HUPM Harvard University, Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and

Ethnology, Papers (Cambridge)

MARI Tulane University, Middle American Research Institute, Publications

(New Orleans)

NWAF Brigham Young University, New World Archaeological Foundation,

Papers (Provo, UT)

PSUO Pennsylvania State University, Department of Anthropology,

Occasional Papers in Anthropology (State College, PA)

SISA Smithsonian Institution, Institute of Social Anthropology, Publications

(Washington, D.C.)

UCAR University of California, Archaeological Research Facility,
