Open PDF

“It’s scripture time!” Lila said.

Lila loved reading to her little sister, Ánika, and her baby brother, Svetan. Soon Lila would be getting baptized! To be ready, she wanted to read the scriptures every day.

Lila opened the scripture storybook to the first page. Ánika and Svetan snuggled close so they could see the pictures.

“Listen carefully because I’m going to ask you questions after,” Lila said. Then she started reading the first chapter.

“Before we were born, we lived in heaven,” Lila read. “We didn’t have bodies yet. We were spirits.”

Lila, Ánika, and Svetan looked at the pictures of people dressed in white.

“Ready for your first question?” Lila turned to Ánika. “Where did you come from before you were born?”

Ánika clapped her hands. “Heaven!”

“That’s right,” said Lila. “And where did Svetan come from?”

“He came from heaven too,” Ánika said. Svetan giggled and put his fist in his mouth. Lila and Ánika laughed. Svetan was the cutest one-year-old in Argentina!

“Our whole family came from heaven,” Lila said. “Jesus did too. He came to help us so we can live with Heavenly Father again.” Lila pointed to the picture of Jesus on the page.

After she finished reading, Lila kept thinking about what it must have been like to live with Jesus in heaven. She wanted to be like Him. She wanted to always choose the right!

The next day at school, Lila’s tummy rumbled as she waited in line for breakfast. She could almost taste the empanadas as Señora Ruiz slid them onto her plate. They smelled so good!

Then Señora Ruiz poured Lila a cup of milk. Uh oh, Lila thought. The milk looked darker than usual. Sometimes her school added coffee or tea to the drinks.

“Is there any coffee or tea in the milk today?” Lila asked.

Señora Ruiz waved her hand. “A little coffee,” she said. “You won’t even taste it.”

Lila thought for a moment. She remembered how she wanted to be like Jesus and choose the right. She knew drinking coffee was something the prophets said not to do.

“No, thanks. I won’t have milk today,” Lila said. She gave Señora Ruiz a smile. Then she sat down to eat.

That night, Lila helped Papi wash dishes in the kitchen. She was still thinking about the scripture story. She was thinking about the milk too.

“Papi?”

“Yes?” Papi said.

“Why did Heavenly Father want us to have bodies?”

Papi thought while he rinsed another plate. “Well, He gave us bodies so we could become like Him,” he said. “Your body is a home for your spirit. That’s what we mean when we say our bodies are temples.”

Lila nodded. She sang a song about that in Primary sometimes! “So that’s why Heavenly Father wants us to take care of our bodies?”

“Exactly,” Papi said.

“Today at school, they put some coffee in the milk,” Lila said. “I didn’t drink it, though. I’m trying to take care of my temple.”

“I’m proud of you,” Papi said. He dried his hands on a towel and gave Lila a hug.

Lila hugged Papi tight. She was happy to take care of the body Heavenly Father had given her.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="143606367" id="aside1_p1">The family in this story lives in Argentina. Read the <a class="cross-ref" href="/study/liahona/2020/07/friend/hello-from-argentina?lang=eng">next article</a> to learn more about their country.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
