Wilford Woodruff, Leaves from My Journal: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 3 ( 1881)

CHAPTER VII

AFTER leaving Memphis, I traveled through the country to Benton County and preached on the way as I had opportunity.

I stopped one night with an Esquire Hardman, an Episcopalian.

Most of the night was spent by the family in music and dancing.

In the morning, at the breakfast table, Mr. Hardman asked me if we believed in music and dancing.

I told him we did not really consider them essential to salvation.

He said he did and therefore should not join our Church.

On the 4th of April, 1835, I had the happy privilege of meeting Elder Warren Parrish at the house of Brother Frys. He had been preaching in that part of Tennessee, in company with David W. Patten, and had baptized a number and organized several small branches.

Brother Patten had returned home, and Brother Parish was laboring alone. I joined him in the ministry, and we labored together three months and nineteen days, when he was called to Kirtland.

During the time we were together, we traveled through several counties in Tennessee for the distance of seven hundred and sixty miles, and preached the gospel daily as we had the opportunity. We baptized some twenty persons.

By the counsel of the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Elder Parrish ordained me an Elder, and left me to take charge of the branches that had been raised up in that neighborhood.

As soon as I was left alone, I extended my circuit and labors. For a season I had large congregations; many seemed to believe, and I baptized a number.

On the 15th of August I had an appointment at the house of Brother Taylor, the step-father of Abraham O. Smoot.

I had to cross Bloody River, which I had to swim in consequence of heavy rains. While crossing, my horse became entangled in a tree top, and almost drowned; but I succeeded in getting him loose.

We swam to the shore separately. He reached the shore first, and waited until I came out. I got into the saddle, and went on my way in good spirits, and had a good meeting.

On the 20th of October I baptized three Campbellites, one of whom was a deacon. I then rode twelve miles to Mr. Greenwood's, who was eighty years old, and had been a soldier under General Washington. His wife, who was ninety-three years old, I found quite smart, and busy carding wool. I preached at their house, and baptized both of them.

On the following day I preached at the house of Benjamin L. Clapp and baptized seven Campbellites and one Baptist.

On the 16th of November I preached at Brother Camp's and baptized three. On the day following, it being Sunday, I preached again at Brother Clapp's and baptized five. At the close of the meeting I mounted my horse to ride to Clark's River, in company with Seth Utley, four other brethren and two sisters. The distance was twenty miles.

We came to a stream which was so swollen by rains, that we could not cross without swimming our horses. To swim would not be safe for the females, so we went up the stream to find a ford. In the attempt we were overtaken by a severe storm of wind and rain, and lost our way in the darkness, and wandered through creeks and mud. But the Lord does not forsake His Saints in any of their troubles. While we were in the woods suffering under the blast of the storm, groping like the blind for the wall, a bright light suddenly shone around us and revealed to us our dangerous situation on the edge of a gulf. The light continued with us until we found the road; we then went on our way rejoicing, though the darkness returned and the rain continued.

We reached Brother Henry Thomas' in safety about nine o'clock at night, having been five hours in the storm and forded streams many times. None of us felt to complain, but were thankful to God for His preserving care.

On the following day I preached in Damon Creek and organized a branch called the Damon Creek Branch, and ordained Daniel Thomas a Teacher.

On the 19th of December I again preached at the house of Brother Clapp, and baptized five persons: one was a Campbellite preacher.

On the following day I preached at the house of Brother Henry Thomas, when a mob of about fifty persons collected, headed by a Baptist preacher, who, after asking one question, advised the mob to not lay hands on any man on account of his principles.

The advice was good and well taken.

At the close of the meeting I baptized three persons, one seventy-eight years old.

This brings the year 1835 to a close—the first year of my mission, during which time I had traveled three thousand two hundred and forty-eight miles, held one hundred and seventy meetings, baptized forty-three persons—three of whom were Campbellite preachers—assisted Elder Parish to baptize twenty more, confirmed thirty-five, organized three branches, ordained two Teachers and one Deacon, procured thirty subscribers for the Messenger and Advocate, one hundred and seventy-three signers to the petition to the governor of Missouri for redress of wrongs done the Saints in Jackson County, had three mobs rise against me—but was not harmed, wrote eighteen letters, received ten, and finally closed the labors of the year 1835 by eating johnny-cake, butter and honey at Brother A. O. Smoot's.
