Wilford Woodruff, Leaves from My Journal: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 3 ( 1881)

CHAPTER XII

WE CONTINUED to labor, preaching and baptizing, and organized a branch of the Church upon each island, and, finally, on the second of October, we parted from the Saints on the North Island to return to Scarboro for a short time.

We walked from Thomaston to Bath, a distance of forty-six miles, in one day, and at the latter place attended a Baptist convention. I also preached there to a large congregation in the evening, and the people gave good attention and wished to learn more about our doctrines.

On the following day we walked thirty-six miles to Portland, and the next day to Scarboro. Here I again met with my wife and her father's family.

The time had come for me to give the parting hand to Brother Jonathan H. Hale. We had traveled during the season over two thousand miles together, with our hearts and spirits well united.

He felt it his duty to return to his family in Kirtland, but duty called me to return to my field of labor upon the islands.

On the 9th of October I accompanied Brother Hale one mile upon his journey. We retired to a grove and knelt down and prayed together, and had a good time, and, after commending each other to God, we parted, he to return to Kirtland, and I to Fox Islands.

I spent fourteen days visiting the Saints and friends, and holding meetings among them, and on the 28th of October I took leave of Father Carter and family, and in company with my wife rode to Portland, and spent the night with my brother-in-law, Ezra Carter.

A severe storm arose, so we could not go to sea until November 1st, when we took steamer to Owl's Head, carriage to Thomaston and sloop to Fox Islands.

My second visit to these islands was made under very different circumstances to the first. On my first visit I was an entire stranger to the people, and they were strangers to the gospel, but upon my second I met many Saints who had received the gospel, and who hailed me, and my companion also, with glad hearts.

On Sunday, the 5th of November, I met with a large assembly of Saints and friends, and again commenced baptizing such as would receive my testimony.

After visiting the North Island and holding meetings with the Saints there, and baptizing two after meeting, I embarked on board a sloop, with Captain Coombs, for another island, called the Isle of Holt. We arrived at noon, and I preached to the people at night in their schoolhouse, and had an attentive audience. I spent the night with John Turner, Esq., who purchased a copy of the Book of Mormon.

On the following day we returned to Fox Islands, and as St. Paul once had to row hard to make the land in a storm, we had to row hard to make it in a calm.

After preaching on the North Island again, and baptizing two persons at the close of the meeting, I returned again to the mainland in company with Mrs. Woodruff and others, where I spent fifteen days, during which time I visited among the people, held twelve meetings and baptized several persons.

On the 13th of December I returned again to the North Island, where I held several meetings, and then crossed over to South Island.

On the 20th of December I spent an hour with Mr. Isaac Crockett in clearing away large blocks of ice from the water in a cove, in order to baptize him, which I did when the tide came in. I also baptized two more in the same place on the 26th, and again two others on the 27th.

On the 28th I held a meeting at a schoolhouse, when William Douglass, the Methodist minister, came and wanted me to work a miracle, that he might believe, and otherwise railed against me.

I told him what class of men asked for signs, and that he was a wicked and adulterous man, and predicted that the curse of God would rest upon him, and that his wickedness would be made manifest in the eyes of the people. (While visiting these islands several years afterwards, I learned that the prediction had really been fulfilled, and that he was serving out a fourteen years' term of imprisonment for a beastly crime.)

Mrs. Woodruff crossed the thoroughfare in a boat and walked ten miles, the length of the island, to meet me, on the last day of the year. I held a meeting the same day in the schoolhouse, and at the close of the meeting baptized two persons in the sea, at full tide before a large assembly.

January 1st, 1838, found me standing upon one of the islands of the sea, a minister of the gospel of life and salvation unto the people, laboring alone, though blessed with the society of Mrs. Woodruff, my companion. I had been declaring the word of the Lord through the islands many days, the Spirit of God was working among the people, prejudice was giving way, and the power of God was manifest by signs following those who believed.

I spent this New Year's Day visiting the Saints and their neighbors, and met a congregation at Captain Charles Brown's, I spoke to them for awhile; and at the close of my remarks led three persons down into the sea and baptized them. Two of these were sea captains, namely Charles Brown and Jesse Coombs, and the third was the wife of Captain Coombs. After confirming them, we spent the evening in preaching, singing and praying.

I held meetings almost daily with the Saints up to the 13th, when I crossed to the North Island. Here I found that the seed I had sown was bringing forth fruit. Six persons were ready for baptism.

But my mission upon these islands was not an exception to the general rule; success did not come without many obstacles presenting themselves. Those who rejected the word were frequently inspired by the evil one to make an attempt at persecution.

Some of those who felt to oppose me went down to the harbor and got a swivel and small arms, and planted them close by the schoolhouse, near the seashore, and while I was speaking, they commenced firing their cannon and guns. I continued speaking in great plainness, but my voice was mingled with the report of musketry.

I told the people my garments were clear of the blood of the inhabitants of that island, and asked if any wished to embrace the gospel. Two persons came forward and wished to be baptized, and I baptized them.

On the following day when I went down to the seaside to baptize a man, the rabble commenced firing guns again, as on the previous night. I afterwards learned that notices were posted up warning me to leave the town, but I thought it was better to obey God than man, and therefore did not go.

The next day I baptized three persons, and two days subsequently a couple of others.

I had ample evidence of the fact that lying spirits had gone out into the world, for three persons whom I had baptized had been visited by Mr. Douglass, who told them that I denied the Bible and could not be depended upon; and they yielded to his insinuations until the devil took possession of them and they were in a disaffected condition and sent for me.

When I met them they were in great affliction, but when I instructed them in regard to the principles of the gospel, and administered to them, they were delivered from the evil influence and rejoiced.
