Donald W. Parry, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Guide to Scriptural Symbols ( 1990)

Introduction

A simple definition of symbol is recorded in Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language. A symbol is "something that stands for or represents another thing" (p. 1442). Bullinger, in Figures of Speech Used in the Bible, explains that a symbol is "a material object substituted for a moral or spiritual truth" (p. 769). The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible defines a symbol as "a representation, visual or conceptual, of that which is unseen and invisible" (4:472).

Why Symbols?

Symbols are the most articulate of all languages. Indeed, symbols are the universal tongue. Birth and death, night and day, the sun and clouds, the moon and stars-these are known to all, as is the need for water, the taste of salt, and the warmth of fire. Thus these and countless things like them become symbols of timeless truths. Symbols bring color and strength to language, while deepening and enriching our understandings. Symbols enable us to give conceptual form to ideas and emotions that may otherwise defy the power of words. They take us beyond words and grant us eloquence in the expression of feelings. Symbolic language conceals certain doctrinal truths from the wicked and thereby protects sacred things from possible ridicule. At the same time, symbols reveal truth to the spiritually alert.

Symbols are teaching devices. Symbols are the language in which all gospel covenants and all ordinances of salvation have been revealed. From the time we are immersed in the waters of baptism to the time we kneel at the altar of the temple with the companion of our choice in the ordinance of eternal marriage, every covenant we make will be written in the language of symbolism. Some are uncomfortable with the temple experience because they are not familiar with the language of symbolism. The better we understand the language, or ritual, or symbol, the richer the experience we have in the mountain of the Lord's house.

As some are uncomfortable with the ceremony and ritual of the temple, so some are uncomfortable with the language of scripture. The language of both is foreign to them. Learning that language is richly rewarding. Let us illustrate: Joseph Smith received a revelation which is a prophetic description of the events of the last days and which begins with the injunction "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord" (D&C 133:5). The language is that of Isaiah (Isa. 52:11) and the imagery, that of the temple. Those who bore the "vessels of the Lord" were the priests who ministered in the holy place. Before they could bear the vessels, that is, before they could represent the Lord on his errand, it was necessary for them to be washed, anointed, and clothed in the garment of the priesthood. This ritual preparation was poignant with meaning; the washing obviously represented the necessity of their being clean both physically and spiritually in order to represent the Lord. The anointing with oil represented the outpouring of the Spirit. It naturally follows that if people are to properly represent the Lord, they must be filled with his Spirit, the requisite for which is that they be clean. Only then could they be clothed in the garments of the priesthood, for only then would they be worthy of the mantle or authority of the Lord.

Similarly, one might wonder why a bride and groom kneel facing each other across an altar when they are married in the temple. It carries great meaning to know that anciently the altar was always built on raised ground; thus, approaching the altar involved a ritual ascent. Further, the altar was the place of covenant, the place of sacrifice, and the place of the divine pres-ence-each purpose being essential to an eternal marriage. Every gospel ordinance must answer the type; that is, symbolically it must reflect the principles it was ordained in heavenly councils to teach. Baptism must be by immersion because it is a type for the death and burial of the old man of sin and his coming forth from the grave in a newness of life in the morning of the resurrection. Joseph Smith taught: "Abel offered to God a sacrifice that was accepted, which was the firstlings of the flock. Cain offered of the fruit of the ground, and was not accepted, because he could not do it in faith, he could have no faith, or could not exercise faith contrary to the plan of heaven. It must be shedding the blood of the Only Begotten to atone for man; for this was the plan of redemption; and without the shedding of blood was no remission; and as the sacrifice was instituted for a type, by which man was to discern the great Sacrifice which God had prepared; to offer a sacrifice contrary to that, no faith could be exercised, because redemption was not purchased in that way, nor the power of atonement instituted after that order; consequently Cain could have no faith; and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin." (Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 58.)

The Lord told Enoch that "all things have their likeness" and that "all things" were created and made to bear record of him (Moses 6:63). To understand the language of symbolism is to hear and comprehend that testimony.
