Joseph Fielding McConkie, Answers: Straightforward Answers to Tough Gospel Questions ( 1998)

TO HONEST SEEKERS OF TRUTH

YOU ARE NOW IN THE PRESENCE of the Holy Ghost," Elder Hugh B. Brown of the Quorum of the Twelve testified to the large group of young missionaries who sat before him. "And when you go back to your digs tonight, I want you to write your parents and tell them that you have felt his presence."

The moment Elder Brown told us we were in the presence of the Holy Ghost, we knew it and could say in our hearts, "Yes, I know that I am." Yet, most of us, inexperienced in the things of the Spirit, would not have known what it was that we were experiencing without the help of an able and experienced guide. It is a wonderful blessing, as we seek to grow in the things of the Spirit, to have an experienced mentor at our side. That has been my blessing at various periods of my life and one for which I am very grateful. I think particularly of my father, grandfathers, and mission president. They were visionary men who knew how to pray and how to get answers. From them I learned the most important lessons of my life. This volume seeks to share the lessons and the principles I learned from them. They were master teachers, and to the extent that this work reflects light and truth, the credit is theirs. As to anything that does not measure up to that standard, the responsibility is mine and the shame is that I was not a better student. Of greater importance, however, is that I am still a student and revel in the opportunity to improve my views and increase my understanding. Whether student or teacher, our obligation is to discover truth and to share the truth we discover.

WITH REAL INTENT

To find the truth we must first desire to find the truth. Far too often we ask questions to seek confirmation for something we have already chosen to believe or a course of action we are unwilling to change. Often we keep refining and re-asking our questions until we hear what we want to hear. Contrast such a course with this statement by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

"I often think as I go around the Church and preach in various meetings that it just does not make a snap of the fingers difference to me what I am talking about. I do not care what I talk about. All I am concerned with is getting in tune with the Spirit and expressing the thoughts, in the best language and way that I can, that are implanted there by the power of the Spirit. The Lord knows what a congregation needs to hear, and he has provided a means to give that revelation to every preacher and every teacher.

"We do not create the doctrines of the gospel. People who ask questions about the gospel, a good portion of the time, are looking for an answer that sustains a view they have expressed. They want to justify a conclusion that they have reached instead of looking for the ultimate truth in the field. Once again, it does not make one snap of the fingers difference to me what the doctrines of the Church are. I cannot create a doctrine. I cannot originate a concept of eternal truth. The only thing I ought to be concerned with is learning what the Lord thinks about a doctrine. If I ask a question of someone to learn something, I ought not to be seeking for a confirmation of a view that I have expressed. I ought to be seeking knowledge and wisdom. It should not make any difference to me whether the doctrine is on the right hand or on the left. My sole interest and my sole concern would be to find out what the Lord thinks on the subject" ("Foolishness of Teaching," 8).

Speaking at the funeral of Elder McConkie, Elder Boyd K. Packer observed: "He could not measure what ought to be said and how it ought to be said by [asking], `What will people think?' Would his sermons leave any uncomfortable? Would his bold declarations irritate some in the Church? Would they inspire the critics to rush to their anvils and hammer out more `fiery darts' as the scriptures call them?

"Would his manner of delivery offend? Would his forthright declarations, in content or in manner of presentation, drive some learned investigators away? Would he be described as insensitive or overbearing?

"Would his warnings and condemnations of evil undo the careful work of others whose main intent was to have the world `think well of the Church'? Perhaps it was given to other men to measure their words in that way, but it was not given to him.

"We have talked of this. And when he was tempted to change, the Spirit would withdraw a distance and there would come that deep loneliness known only to those who have enjoyed close association with the Spirit, only to find on occasion that it moves away. He could stand what the critics might say and what enemies might do, but he could not stand that.

"He would be driven to his knees to beg forgiveness and plead for the renewal of that companionship with the Spirit which the scriptures promise can be constant. Then he would learn once again that what was true of Holy Men of God who spake in ancient times applied to him as well. He was to speak as he was moved upon by the Holy Spirit. What matter if it sounded like Bruce R. McConkie, so long as the Lord approved. I knew him well enough to know all of that" (Salt Lake City, Utah, 23 April 1985, 6-7).

In the realm of gospel answers, we generally find what we want. If we want justification for a particular course of action, we often will search until we find it. If we want to defend some idea, we may filter out anything that does not sustain it. And if we want to discover the mind and will of the Lord, we generally find that also. We cannot inquire of the heavens with real intent and a sincere heart if we have already determined what we will accept as an answer. What must be understood is that it is "counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such" (Moro. 7:9).

BE BELIEVING

The pattern of scripture is that God reveals that which those to whom the revelation is initially given are willing to believe. When Nephi sought to see the vision shown his father, the angel who acted as his mentor asked, "Believest thou that thy father saw the tree of which he hath spoken?" (1 Ne. 11:4). Only Nephi's affirmative response allowed him to proceed. Before the Lord manifested himself to the brother of Jared, He asked, "Believest thou the words which I shall speak?" (Ether 3:11). It was clearly expected that the commitment to believe preceded the explanation of what he was to believe. We find this same spirit in the story of Aaron teaching Lamoni's father. When Aaron asked, "Believest thou that there is a God?" the king responded, "If now thou sayest there is a God, behold I will believe." And again the king said, "I will believe thy words" (Alma 22:7, 11). Still again we find this spirit in Alma's often quoted discourse in which he likens the word of God to a seed: "Blessed is he that believeth in the word of God, and is baptized without stubbornness of heart, yea, without being brought to know the word, or even compelled to know, before they will believe" (Alma 32:16; emphasis added).

The idea that we are expected to accept and believe doctrines, or divine answers in any form, even before we have heard them, does not make good sense to the world. Upon examination, however, it makes perfect sense to those of the household of faith. It is simply the commitment to accept truth, without attempting to color or fashion it to our own liking. If an answer comes from the Lord, from holy writ, from one of his servants, or by the quiet whisperings of the Spirit, we accept it without having to be argued into submission. The instruction and promise given those of the household of faith is to "trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths" (Prov. 3:5-6). "Despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him" (Morm. 9:27).

BEWARE OF THE PRECEPTS OF MEN

Every truth of salvation, that is, every doctrine or principle that we must accept and live in order to be saved, was taught to us before we were born. We came into this life knowing but having forgotten these sacred truths. When these truths are declared to us we are expected to remember and respond to them. This singular truth is announced in a variety of ways in scripture. For instance, consider these words from the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning [known to us in the premortal life] is plainly manifest unto them [the recall is powerful and clear], and they receive not the light. And every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation" (D&C 93:31-32). Well might it be asked, What is it that blurs spiritual recall or the recognition of truth? To which this revelation responds: "Light and truth forsake that evil one. . . . And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers" (D&C 93:37-39).

The two great opponents of light and truth are thus identified as "disobedience" and "the tradition of their fathers." To communicate with the Spirit, we must be in tune with the Spirit. The experience of anyone who has served as a missionary will attest that there are many who "desire to know the truth in part, but not all," for as the Lord said, "they are not right before me and must needs repent" (D&C 49:2). These people love the spirit that the missionaries bring into their homes. They thrill at the truths of the plan of salvation as they are unfolded to them. They enjoy that sweet spirit of recall as the elders or sisters restore to them knowledge and feelings long lost to them. Yet they struggle to find the courage or the necessary discipline to accord their lives with gospel standards, and so they seek excuses and act as if they are uncertain about the truthfulness of the principles presented to them. They remind us of Amulek when he said: "I never have known much of the ways of the Lord, and his mysteries and marvelous power. I said I never had known much of these things; but behold, I mistake, for I have seen much of his mysteries and his marvelous power; yea, even in the preservation of the lives of this people. Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was called many times and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would not know; therefore I went on rebelling against God, in the wickedness of my heart" (Alma 10:5-6).

Leaving the matter of disobedience as one of the two great blocks to spiritual understanding, let us turn our attention to the second, "the tradition of their fathers." In the First Vision the Lord described apostate Christendom, saying, "They teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof" (JS-H 1:19). Neither salvation nor any of the truths of salvation have their origin in the mind of man. In his description of the false churches of the last days, Nephi warns of those who teach with their own learning while denying the Holy Ghost. "They wear stiff necks and high heads; yea, and because of pride, and wickedness, and abominations, and whoredoms, they have all gone astray save it be a few, who are the humble followers of Christ; nevertheless, they are led, that in many instances they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men" (2 Ne. 28:14). Having considered the havoc that such a course plays with the principles of truth, Nephi warns, "Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Ne. 28:31).

Two simple keys unlock understanding where gospel truths are concerned. The first is the verity that every revelation from heaven carries within itself the evidence of its own origin. That is the spirit of truth. President Marion G. Romney stated the principle thus: "No person is, nor can he be, justified in rejecting these teachings and commandments, which have been revealed by the Lord, on the basis that he does not know they are true, because everything the Lord does or says has within itself the evidence of its own authenticity, and every person is divinely endowed with the means to discover that evidence and know for himself that it is true" (in Conference Report, April 1976, 120-21). Teaching this same principle, Joseph Smith said that truth tastes good. "I can taste the principles of eternal life," he said, "and so can you. They are given to me by the revelations of Jesus Christ; and I know that when I tell you these words of eternal life as they are given to me, you taste them, and I know that you believe them. You say honey is sweet, and so do I. I can also taste the spirit of eternal life. I know it is good; and when I tell you of these things which were given me by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, you are bound to receive them as sweet, and rejoice more and more" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 355).

The second key by which we obtain a sure knowledge of gospel truths is in applying, or living, those truths. A true testimony of any principle comes only from living it. A testimony of tithing comes by paying tithing, a testimony of the Word of Wisdom comes by living the Word of Wisdom, and so forth. Teaching this principle, the Savior said, "If any man will do his [the Father's] will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:17).

SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES

"Be careful that you teach not for the word of God the commandments of men, nor the doctrines of men, nor the ordinances of men, inasmuch as you are God's messengers," stated Brigham Young. "Study the word of God, and preach it and not your opinions, for no man's opinion is worth a straw. Advance no principle but what you can prove, for one scriptural proof is worth ten thousand opinions" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:395-96).

It hardly needs to be said that the search for spiritual answers centers in the thoughtful and prayerful study of the scriptures. What is not as well understood, however, is that all scripture is not of equal worth. The voice of God to modern prophets must of necessity supersede that which he said to those of an earlier day. We read both the Old and New Testaments by the light of modern revelation. To refuse that light is to read in the dark and to place ourselves and those we teach under condemnation. "And your minds in times past have been darkened," the Lord said, "because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received [namely the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the priesthood, and some eighty-three other revelations now found in the Doctrine and Covenants]—which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation. And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all. And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I have written—that they may bring forth fruit meet for their Father's kingdom; otherwise there remaineth a scourge and judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion" (D&C 84:54-58). In contrast, there is a special endowment of spiritual knowledge promised to those who place their trust in the revelations of the Restoration (see D&C 5:16; 18:2).

It is popular to say that we should read scripture and not commentaries on scripture. Certainly the scriptures should be the focal point of our study, yet there is not a soul alive whose understanding of scripture will not be enhanced by helpful commentary on it. Were this not the case we would not have Sunday School classes, Relief Society lessons, and quorum instruction for priesthood bearers. We would not have the seminary program, nor would we have institutes of religion. Much that we have in the scriptures is prophetic commentary on other scripture. The instruction of scripture is that we teach each other in both the spoken and written word. "As all have not faith," the Lord said, "seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). We are to seek learning from both the best books and the best people. As the wisdom of heaven ought to dictate what books we read, so it ought to dictate what people we listen to when we seek understanding of heaven-sent principles. We don't have to agree with everything in a book for it to be a good book, and a man doesn't have to be right on everything to be worth listening to. There is much we can learn from each other. The commandment is that we teach one another the doctrines of the kingdom (see D&C 88:77). The rule of thumb here is that you "trust no one to be your teacher nor your minister, except he be a man of God, walking in his ways and keeping his commandments" (Mosiah 23:14).

ASK, AND IT SHALL BE GIVEN

When Nephi's brothers said they could not understand the things their father had told them, Nephi asked if they had inquired of the Lord. They said they had not because "the Lord maketh no such thing known unto us." "Do ye not remember," Nephi responded, "the things which the Lord hath said?—If ye will not harden your hearts, and ask me in faith, believing that ye shall receive, with diligence in keeping my commandments, surely these things shall be made known unto you" (1 Ne. 15:9, 11). We assume the text he quoted came from the brass plates. The fact that it has no counterpart in the Old Testament suggests that it was among the plain and precious things taken from that record. In the Sermon on the Mount, Christ, directing himself to his disciples, said, "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened" (Matt. 7:7-8).

James repeated this same injunction, telling us that if we seek wisdom, we should ask God, who "giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not," meaning they would not be reproached for so doing because God is a generous giver (James 1:5). Other texts make it clear that though God is anxious to bless his earthly family with light and knowledge, he will not give unto dogs that which is holy nor cast pearls before swine (see Matt. 7:6). The invitation to ask of God with the promise of an answer is given frequently in scripture. It is common, however, for this promise to contain appropriate modifiers. It was not intended that the blessings or wisdom of heaven be given to those who would misuse them or who have not properly prepared to received them. We are told to ask only for that which is "expedient" (D&C 88:64), "good" (Moro. 7:26), or "right" (Mosiah 4:21). We are warned against asking for that which might be "amiss" or for that which we wish to consume upon our lusts (James 4:3). We are told we must pray with an honest heart, real intent, and faith (see Moro. 10:4). Further, we are to "keep [God's] commandments" (1 Jn. 3:22), be believing (see Enos 1:8, 15), and pray always to the Father in the name of the Son (see Moro. 10:4; 3 Ne. 18:19-20).

"The best way to obtain truth and wisdom," Joseph Smith said, "is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 191). As Latter-day Saints, we have no doctrine that is not rooted in the principle of revelation. All true religion is revealed religion. Thus if a principle or doctrine does not come by way of revelation, that principle or doctrine is not a part of our religion. It may be a good principle, and it may be a great blessing to us, but if revelation is not its source, it is not a matter of faith with us.

The principle of revelation must be immediate and personal with each member of the Church. No one can be saved by a revelation given to someone else. That is not to suggest that every principle must be revealed anew to each member of the Church. It is, however, to say that the truthfulness of the doctrines of salvation must be learned and confirmed by the same Spirit by which they were originally given. All faithful Saints are expected to share that experience. Prayer is not an option to a Latter-day Saint; it is a commandment. We are also commanded to have the Spirit of revelation. After our baptism, hands were laid upon our head and the command given: "Receive ye the Holy Ghost." We cannot receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations (see Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 328).

Having thus received the gift of the Holy Ghost, we have also received the responsibility to grow up into it. Thus the scriptures speak of our receiving "a fulness of the Holy Ghost" (D&C 109:15). To do so is to develop the power of discernment. That is what Moroni was speaking of when he said that "by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Moro. 10:5). That is why the Lord, when asked if we should study the Apocrypha, responded: "The Spirit manifesteth truth; and whoso is enlightened by the Spirit shall obtain benefit therefrom; and whoso receiveth not by the Spirit, cannot be benefited" (D&C 91:4-6).

IN RIGHTEOUSNESS AND IN TRUTH

To what tests can we subject an answer to a gospel question or a revelation to assure that it is correct?

First, we should ask, "What is its purpose?" Let me illustrate. Missionaries meet many people who profess to have had spiritual experiences. How do we determine which are genuine and which are counterfeit? The answer is surprisingly simple. If their experience justifies them in rejecting the message of the Restoration—including our testimony that Joseph Smith is a prophet, the Book of Mormon is true, that the authority to baptize has been restored again to the earth, that living prophets are necessary, and that it is necessary to receive the sealing blessings of the temple—we need not hesitate in concluding that their experience has come from an untoward source. On the other hand, if their experience opens their hearts to the message of the Restoration and the covenants, obligations, and sacrifices that are associated with it, we can know for a surety that it is of God. True revelations or spiritual experiences do not place a person in opposition to the doctrines, purposes, or objectives of the Church and kingdom of God. "He that is not with me is against me," the Lord has said (Matt. 12:30; Luke 11:23).

Second, we should ask further, "Does it edify?" "That which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness" (D&C 50:23). Again, let me illustrate. In stake leadership meetings, my father, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, used to enjoy question-and-answer sessions with priesthood leaders. Any appropriate gospel question was welcome. I remember one such session in which someone sought support for an idea that is not good doctrine and yet is still a popular part of Latter-day Saint lore. In responding to the question, my father asked, "What good could possibly come from teaching such a thing?" His question establishes a standard for sound doctrine—its spirit and purpose must be positive.

The Spirit of the Lord and all doctrines that trace to it must edify. The principles of salvation have no kinship with hopelessness, depression, or grief. They are not dark, cold, or unfeeling. Truth always sustains the idea of a just and merciful God. If a principle does not lift, encourage, inspire, or edify it certainly does not come from God and cannot be considered doctrine. Perhaps the two most often used words to describe the presence of the Holy Ghost are "peace" and "joy." In scripture the gospel is often referred to as "glad tidings," or "glad tidings of great joy" (Mosiah 3:3; Alma 13:22; D&C 31:3; 128:19). Good doctrine will always carry a positive and uplifting spirit.

Third, we should ask, "Is it born of obscurity?" Our understanding of the principles of salvation will never depend on an obscure scriptural text or some little-known discourse by one of the Brethren. The principles of salvation are taught plainly and repetitiously in the scriptures. There are no hidden or private doctrines that are the exclusive providence of an inner circle of faithful souls. There is but one plan of salvation. Its doctrines and ordinances are the same for all.

It is true that some things are more sacred than others and are thus spoken of with greater constraint and care. Yet, the Prophet explained, "God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149).

Fourth, we should ask, "Does it require obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel?" In the early history of the Church, at a time when Church members were often troubled by false spirits, the Lord gave the following instruction: "I will give unto you a pattern in all things, that ye may not be deceived; for Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving the nations—wherefore he that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of me if he obey mine ordinances. He that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances" (D&C 52:14-16). The word ordinance, as used in this text, refers to all the laws, statutes, and covenants associated with the restored gospel. It is not confined to our compliance with such prescribed rituals as baptism and eternal marriage.

Finally, we should ask, "Is it in harmony with scripture and with the voice of our living prophets?" The Lord gave this instruction in the Doctrine and Covenants: "And again, he that trembleth under my power shall be made strong, and shall bring forth fruits of praise and wisdom, according to the revelations and truths which I have given you. And again, he that is overcome and bringeth not forth fruits, even according to this pattern, is not of me. Wherefore, by this pattern ye shall know the spirits in all cases under the whole heavens" (D&C 52:17-19).

Paul told us that "no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed" (1 Cor. 12:3). That is to say, it is absolutely impossible for a man to enjoy the companionship of the Spirit of the Lord or the Holy Ghost and at the same time speak against Christ or his doctrines. Expanding on that principle, we could say in like manner that no one could speak against Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon, or the revelations of the Restoration and at the same time enjoy the companionship of the Spirit. Thus we find Moroni saying, "He that will contend against the word of the Lord, let him be accursed; and he that shall deny these things, let him be accursed" (Ether 4:8).

LET EVERY MAN BEWARE

Years ago I read a book about a man who had been a prominent leader in the Church. In doing so I was quite surprised to learn about his attitude on a number of things. His feelings on these matters were not in accord with what I understood the standards of the Church to be. I mentioned the matter to my father, from whom I then learned a valuable lesson. Everyone, he explained, is responsible for what he believes and for what he chooses not to believe. That someone in a position of leadership made some poor choices in what he believed or did in no way excused the same kind of choices on my part. Each of us, my father reminded me, will stand alone at the Day of Judgment.

"We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction," Joseph Smith taught, "and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 51). It is a personal journey of which the Prophets speaks, one not necessarily associated with positions of leadership or other forms of prominence. Indeed, every member of the Church has an equal responsibility to know and understand the truth. Similarly, each one has equal access to it. We were all taught the gospel long before we were born, we all receive the same promise of direction and companionship when we receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and we all receive the same endowment of power from on high when we go through the temple. Further, we all have the same right to approach our Father in Heaven in prayer, and we have all been given the same scriptures. Wearied by my endless questions, my father once said to me, "Look, Junior, you have the same sources available to you that I have available to me." The promise of the Lord to reveal the mysteries of heaven has nothing to do with office, position, station in society, or gender. It has everything to do with the desires of our hearts and our willingness to love and serve the Lord (see D&C 76:5-10). Thus in a revelation warning that there will be both false doctrines and hypocrites in the Church, the Lord charged "every man" to "beware lest he do that which is not in truth and righteousness before me" (D&C 50:9).
