The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the December 2005 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “I Am Grateful for Many Things” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1. This year we celebrate the 200th anniversary of the birth of Joseph Smith. Post or a draw a large map of the eastern United States on a chalkboard. Identify the following places important in the Prophet’s life: Sharon, Vermont; Palmyra, New York; Harmony, Pennsylvania; Fayette, New York; Kirtland, Ohio; Far West, Missouri; Nauvoo, Illinois; and Carthage, Illinois. (This could also be presented using a time line; see “Important Places in the Life of the Prophet Joseph Smith,” pp. F10–F11 of this issue.) Prepare the following pictures and written references to teach about the life of Joseph Smith and put them in paper bags: Bag 1—Birth: Picture of Joseph Smith’s family from Primary picture packet 3-7, JS—H 1:3–4, “We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet” (Hymns, no. 19); Bag 2—First Vision: Gospel Art Picture Kit 403, JS—H 1:15–20, “Joseph Smith’s First Prayer” (Hymns, no. 26); Bag 3—Moroni: Gospel Art Picture Kit 404 and 406, JS—H 1:29–35, 59; Bag 4—Translating the Book of Mormon: Gospel Art Picture Kit 416, JS—H 1:61–67, “The Golden Plates” (Children’s Songbook, 86); Bag 5–Priesthood: Gospel Art Picture Kit 407 and 408, JS—H 1:68–72, a song or hymn about the priesthood. Divide the children into four groups, and give each group a bag. Have the groups find and discuss the scripture references. Invite each group to post the picture on the map or time line, role-play or give a brief summary of the event, lead the song or hymn, and express how this event helps build their testimony that Joseph Smith was the prophet of the Restoration.

For younger children: Invite an adult member of the ward or branch to portray the Prophet Joseph. Using the map, pictures, and songs, share these major events in the life of Joseph Smith. Bear testimony of the Restoration and the role of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

2. How do we express our gratitude to the Lord? If possible, invite the children to look up thanks or thanksgiving in the Topical Guide or Guide to the Scriptures. Give them time to find a reference and choose a verse or simple story to share. Accept a few responses. Explain that one of the purposes of prayer is to give thanks. In your own words, tell the story of Nephi as he relied on his father and the Liahona to find food and then gave thanks (see 1 Ne. 16:21–32). Have the children find and read 1 Ne. 16:32. Explain that you can also express gratitude by the way you live or with a song of praise. Write the titles of a number of hymns or Primary songs of praise or gratitude on pieces of paper. Post them on the board print-side down. On strips of paper, write case studies. For example: “You are not prepared for the math test, but you know the person you sit by always does well on tests. You can show you remember the Savior by …”; or “You are watching your favorite television show. Your father asks you to come to family prayer. You can express gratitude to the Lord by …” (see Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 161–62). Put the case studies in a basket, and pass it around as you sing a song about gratitude. Stop the music, and invite a child to choose a paper from the basket, read the case study, and answer the question. They can then either pick one of the papers off the board or invite a friend to choose. Sing the song as an expression of gratitude to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. Repeat as time permits. Express your gratitude to the Lord, and encourage the children to remember the Savior and express their thanks in word and deed.
