R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

Preface

President Spencer W. Kimball said, "The sad simple truth is that when we do not act preventively in the earlier years, we must later on act redemptively but with much less efficiency and fewer and more labored results!" [^1] Effectively teaching children the gospel prevents problems and builds a foundation of gospel truths that will help them throughout the eternities.

The purpose of this book is to provide parents with ideas about ways to both simply and enjoyably teach their children the gospel. Each of the twenty-eight chapters begins with an introductory vignette or story based on a real-life experience, written in the first person, and designed to illustrate specific principles. The rest of the chapter contains counsel and examples from priesthood leaders, parents, and authorities in the field. Where appropriate, the names and some of the facts have been changed to insure anonymity.

This book began as a result of a priesthood assignment from our stake presidency. They asked us to write a training manual for the members of our stake on how to teach the gospel in the home. That initial manuscript, supplemented by interviews and additional research, provided the foundation for material contained herein.

In presenting the material in this book, we openly acknowledge our personal bias. If there are both enjoyable and miserable ways of doing something, and they produce equal results, we prefer to take the enjoyable routes. Since those whom we interviewed consistently reported how much they enjoyed teaching their children the gospel, we felt a need to share what we had learned.

Now a word of caution. This volume contains many ideas on teaching children. Some parents, therefore, may have unrealistic expectations of themselves and may become discouraged because they aren't doing everything we suggest. However, it would be impossible for a family to implement every idea contained in this book. Some ideas may be relevant to current circumstances; others may not. Other suggestions may need to be adapted to fit individual personalities and family relationships. It is helpful to remember that teaching children the gospel is a process, not an event. The needs of family members continuously change; thus, the need for flexibility in parenting to meet those changing needs.

We do not suggest that this book contains everything parents need to know about teaching children the gospel. One of the frustrating aspects of this project was the space limitations, which forced us to exclude relevant information about many important topics.

We also do not claim to be authorities on rearing children. We have our challenges, like other parents. We have made mistakes, and so have our children as they have exercised their agency. That is also true for everyone we know. Rearing children in light and truth is one of the most challenging assignments given to mankind. Indeed, we are continually humbled by the magnitude of that assignment, and we feel a need for all the help we can get.

In the course of doing our research, we interviewed people who we believed were effectively teaching their children the gospel. When we asked them what they did that helped their children understand gospel principles, all responded that they had a great deal to learn about the subject and hardly considered themselves to be experts. Most said that they wouldn't be able to tell how good a job they had done until their children were grown. One father said, "I suppose I won't know how effectively I have taught my children the gospel until I see how well my grandchildren turn out." There may be a great deal of truth in both statements.

In gathering our information, we are grateful for the contributions of many people. Specifically, we would like to thank Kathleen Ammon, Robert and Jackie Ammon, John and Michelle Ammon, Jeff and Gayle Ammon, Stacia Ammon, David and Edna Allan, LeRoy and Larita Alldredge, Mark and Marie Alldredge, Bill and Lola Ruth Anderson, Mark and Marilyn Angus, David and Marlynn Angus, Stan and Helen Barrett, Leonard and Agnes Bishop, Chester and Aileen Boss, Lola Boss, Adam Dunford, Benjamin Dunford, Dan Dunford, Helen Dunford, Mitchell Dunford, Kelly and Wendy Ericson, John and Karen Foster, Kimberly Ann Foster, Jeffery Foster, Wade Foster, Adam Foster, Cheryl Gerdy, Richard L. Gunn, Revere and Blanche Hansen, Rashel Harrop, Cletus and Phyllis Hoer, Gordon and Claudia Holmstead, Kay and Mellie Holmstead, Lynn and Merica Hutchings, Dean and June Jessee, Donald and Katherine Jessee, Bonnie and James Johnson, Janice Johnson, Janece Johnson, Jared Johnson, Jason Karp, Dean and Laura Kunz, Jim and Nona Knighton, Jenna Langer, John and Caryol Linford, Matt Maxfield, Tom and Judy Maxfield, Mary Ann McConkie, Jerry and Janet McCoy, Dennis and Barbara Packard, Crystal Prentice, Angela Pulver, Melinda Pulver, Jonathan Rayback, Mike and Jeanne Rayback, Kathy Schlendorf Smith, Alex Spong, Stephanie Stearns, J. Delos and Trilva Thompson, Odell and Edna Mae Thompson, Merrill and Melba Wassom, Darren Wilhoit, Kathy Yorgason, Brenton and Margaret Yorgason, Jim and Elizabeth Ann Young, Brad Young, Greg Young, Kristy Young, Heather Young, David Young, and Eric Young. We also thank those who specifically requested that their names not be mentioned.

We wish to thank Blaine M. Yorgason for his encouragement and helpful suggestions at various stages of this project. Mark L. McConkie, Franklyn W. Dunford, and Don Norton also provided numerous helpful suggestions on various drafts of this manuscript. Margie Bonnes provided essential clerical support and made valuable contributions at every stage of the project.

We also appreciate the assistance and encouragement of Eleanor Knowles, Sheri Dew, Richard Tice, and the other members of the Deseret Book Company editorial staff.

In addition, we express our appreciation to our children—Scott Russel, Alan Dennis, Erin Camille, and David Spencer—for their patience, their love and support, and their insight on how we can more effectively teach them the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Most of all, we thank our parents, Russel and Beth Boss and Ken and Ione Swendsen, who taught us most of what we know about teaching the gospel in the home.

This is not an official church publication. Even though many people assisted in its preparation, we alone are responsible for the final product.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Spencer W. Kimball, address given at the MIA June Conference Closing Session, June 23, 1974, 7.
