R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

Introduction

1

Why Teach the Gospel in the Home?

The prophet's voice rang out clearly. "Make no mistake about it, you are a marked generation. . . . There has never been more expected of the faithful in such a short period of time than there is of us. . . . Never before on the face of the earth have the forces of evil and the forces of good been so well organized."

We sat spellbound. Over eight thousand five hundred seminary and institute students had gathered to hear President Ezra Taft Benson. I looked at my seven home-study seminary students and felt proud of the lives they were living. "While our generation will be comparable in wickedness to the days of Noah, when the Lord cleansed the earth by flood, there is a major difference this time: God has saved for the final inning some of His stronger and most valiant children, who will help bear off the kingdom triumphantly. . . . You are the generation that must be prepared to meet your God." [^1]

Suddenly my thoughts turned to my own three children. If the wickedness of today was comparable to that of Noah's time, I had drastically underestimated the seriousness of the problems facing our family. A feeling of urgency came over me, and I wondered if my husband and I had sufficiently prepared our children to face the tribulations that lay ahead.

Why Teach the Gospel in the Home?

From the very beginning of time, the Lord commanded parents to teach the gospel to their children. [^2] At the beginning of this dispensation, the Lord revealed the following:

Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized.

And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands. And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord. . . .

Now, I, the Lord, am not well pleased with the inhabitants of Zion, for there are idlers among them; and their children are also growing up in wickedness; they also seek not earnestly the riches of eternity, but their eyes are full of greediness. These things ought not to be, and must be done away from among them. (D&C 68:25-32.)

The Lord reinforced this sobering counsel eighteen months later by reminding the Saints, "I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth."(D&C 93:40.) He then promptly called Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams, who constituted the First Presidency, and Newel K. Whitney, the first bishop of the Church, to repentance for not properly teaching their children the gospel. To Frederick G. Williams, for example, the Lord said, "You have not taught your children light and truth, according to the commandments; and that wicked one hath power, as yet, over you, and this is the cause of your affliction." (D&C 93:42.)

Thus, the responsibility for teaching children the gospel rests with their parents. Fortunately, as President Benson explained, we have adequate time to fulfill this obligation, since "'power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable.' . . . The period of childhood and unaccountability was given to children so that 'great things may be required at the hand of their fathers.'" (See D&C 29:47-48.) President Benson then admonished parents, "Teach your children to understand principles of truth. . . . The Lord states that Satan 'cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers' (D&C 93:39). The 'tradition of their fathers' refers, of course, to the bad examples and teachings of fathers." [^3]

Elder Marion G. Romney provided additional insight on this point:

Satan, our enemy, is making an all-out assault upon righteousness. His well-marshalled forces are legion. Our children and youth are the targets of his main thrust. They are everywhere subjected to wicked and vicious propaganda. Every place they turn, they are buffeted with evil, cunningly devised to deceive and to destroy every sacred thing and every righteous principle. . . . If our children are to be sufficiently strengthened to stand against this satanic onslaught, they must be taught and trained in the home, as the Lord has directed. [^4]

There are a multitude of reasons why we need to teach the gospel in the home to our children. As Elder Romney clearly pointed out, children must understand the truth and have testimonies of the gospel so they can withstand the adversary. We also know that a knowledge of and faith in the saving principles of the gospel are necessary for exaltation. Children need to also gain a testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ and his church.

Another compelling reason for us to teach our children the gospel is that by doing so, we are freed from the condemnation that would otherwise come. President Joseph F. Smith explained, "The parents in Zion will be held responsible for the acts of their children, not only until they become eight years old, but, perhaps, throughout all the lives of their children, provided they have neglected their duty to their children while they were under their care and guidance, and the parents were responsible for them." [^5]

Great benefits will come to us and to our children when we teach the gospel of Jesus Christ in our homes. President David O. McKay said, "The Creator of the world ordained man and woman for the home, and He is seeing to it that they may search the whole world over but will never find the sweetest joys of life anywhere but in the home." [^6] By teaching the gospel in the home, Latter-day Saint parents can say, as did John of old, that "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.' (3 Jn 1:4.) That joy can be achieved only by obeying the commandments and keeping our covenants and obligations.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] DeLynn Decker, "'You Are a Marked Generation,' President Benson Tells Students," report of address given at the Southern California Student Devotional, Anaheim Convention Center Arena, 8 February 1987, Ensign, April 1987, 73.
[^2] 2. For example, see Gen. 18:19; Deut. 6:5-7; 1 Sam. 3:13; Prov. 22:6; Eph. 6:4; 2 Ne. 4:3; Mosiah 4:14-15; Alma 35:16; Moses 6:41, 56-58; 8:27.
[^3] 3. Ezra Taft Benson, "Great Things Required of Their Fathers," Ensign, May 1981, 34-35.
[^4] 4. Marion G. Romney, "Home Teaching and Family Home Evening," Improvement Era, June 1969, 97.
[^5] 5. Joseph F. Smith, Conference Report, April 1910, 6.
[^6] 6. David O. McKay, "Seeds of Happiness in the Soul," Instructor, October 1960, 322.
