R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

2

The Power of the Family

"But Mom," my twelve-year-old son pleaded, "they'll make fun of me because of the things I can't do and because of how I am!"

"No one will make fun of you," I replied. "I won't let that happen. I promise you that we'll only have feelings of love for you."

"I don't want to do it!"

"That's fine. You don't have to. But rather than give me an answer now, why don't you think about it overnight and then let me know what you decide?"

John, the second youngest of our children, had not adjusted well to the seventh grade. He had no friends, strongly disliked school, and got straight Fs on his first-quarter report card. Predictably, his self-esteem had dropped to almost zero. When I suggested that we have a family fast day in his behalf, everyone agreed except John. He didn't want his brothers and sisters to laugh at him. Fortunately, he believed what I told him, and the next day he agreed to a family fast day.

At 5:00 P.M. on the day of the fast, we met in the living room, dressed in our Sunday clothes. I related a true-life experience about a family who had faced serious difficulties and, through fasting and prayer, received great blessings from the Lord. My husband and I each bore testimony that Heavenly Father would also help us as a family if we worked together. We told the children that anyone who wanted to could offer a prayer, but we didn't want them to feel pressured to do so.

We then knelt together, and Rick, our youngest, said he wanted to go first. That little boy offered one of the sweetest prayers I have ever heard. All the others in turn offered wonderful prayers in behalf of John.

At first, John was embarrassed. I had my arm around him, and I could feel how tense he was. Whenever others mentioned his name, he giggled nervously. However, by the time that Glen, the third person to pray, offered a prayer, John had become much more serious and comfortable. When his turn came, he offered a sincere and touching prayer pleading with the Lord for help.

My husband then gave John a blessing. When he finished, John hugged his dad; the two of them stood for several minutes, arms around each other, crying. Our son then hugged and kissed every family member. The Spirit was as strong as I have ever felt it.

The details of the later counseling sessions, the meetings with teachers, the homework assignments, and the hours spent trying to help our son feel good about himself are all important, but what is most important is the strength that experience brought into our family. We now realize that our family can experience great spiritual power when we combine our faith and work together in unity, love, and harmony.

The Power of the Family

Regarding the importance of the family, President Joseph Fielding Smith gave us this instruction: "The family is the most important organization in time or in eternity. . . . Love each other with all your hearts. Keep the moral law and live the gospel. Bring up your children in light and truth; teach them the saving truths of the gospel; and make your home a heaven on earth, a place where the Spirit of the Lord may dwell and where righteousness may be enthroned in the heart of each member." [^1]

Parents who work to make their homes a heaven on earth are creating families with unlimited spiritual potential. Indeed, few forces can equal the power of righteous, united families. For this reason alone, we can understand why Satan wants to destroy families.

Of all the tools at Satan's disposal, few more potently destroy family unity and love than criticism, which is a deadly poison that decreases self-esteem, damages family relationships, and fosters resentment, antagonism, and contention. Criticism is also depressing and discouraging. Our children may readily accept our critical comments as facts and actually begin to see themselves as worthless and incapable of succeeding. They may also become defensive and unmotivated, and eventually they stop listening to us. If we want healthy relationships with our children, based on mutual trust and communication, we need to stay as far from criticism as possible. Indeed, we can learn much from watching how well computers help children to learn. Computers never criticize! For good reason, then, the Lord commanded us to "cease to find fault one with another." (D&C 88:124.)

Of course, there are times when children need to be corrected. In fact, children require constant teaching and correction. But the tone and intent of that teaching need to be positive rather than critical or destructive. There is a big difference between criticizing children in ways that destroy self-esteem and drawing attention to their negative behaviors.

On the other hand, few things contribute to family unity and strength quite so much as concentrating on our children's positive behaviors. In connection with this, President David O. McKay said, "I do not know of anything that will contribute more to unity . . . than for [family] members to see the good . . . and to speak well of each other." [^2] A father recounted the following example:

It almost seemed as if our kids had a contest to see who could tell the worst story, in terms of complaining about all the terrible things that happened to them each day. That negative attitude spilled over into everything they did, including their interaction with family members. It was awful.

Six months ago we decided to concentrate on the positive things. Since the dinner table was the only place we were all together as a family, we started there. Each evening as we ate, I asked, "What is the best thing that happened to you today?" At first I was met with dead silence. None of my four children could think of a single positive thing that had happened to them. They had concentrated so much on the negative that they were oblivious to the positive. However, over the next few weeks that slowly changed, until now they regularly take the initiative and delight in sharing with us their success experiences. If I forget to ask the question, they often raise it. Concentrating on the positive has helped make a major transformation in our home.

In order to have unity in our homes, family members need to feel valued, accepted, and appreciated. That can't happen when children constantly fight and put one another down. Rude and abrasive behavior rapidly destroys family unity. Therefore, we need to teach our children from infancy that discourteous and disrespectful outbursts will not be tolerated.

Fortunately, we can do a great deal to build cohesiveness and unity in our homes. To do so, however, we must be willing to make harmonious family life a high priority. A mother of four teenagers described how they addressed the issue of building self-esteem in their family:

To establish a positive environment in our home, we agreed to the following rule: We don't say or do anything that undermines the self-esteem of another family member. That means we don't belittle, demean, or make fun of each other. We don't call each other names, and we don't put each other down. We take this rule very seriously because it's a matter of survival for us. Our kids get knocked around enough on the outside without having that kind of nonsense in their own family.

Some parents maintain that "fighting like cats and dogs" is normal for children. I disagree, and we don't permit our children to do it. The Lord commanded us to not let our children "fight and quarrel one with another." Rather, "teach them to love one another, and to serve one another." [Mosiah 4:14-15.] When they feel loved, they learn to trust others, to serve others, and to accept others for who they are. Feeling truly loved and valued will help them blossom and achieve their potential. Children don't flourish in an environment where they are always having to watch their flank.

Building self-esteem in children is essential for them to have emotionally healthy and productive lives; and nobody can help them develop self-esteem better than we can. A father noted:

As far as I'm concerned, a high level of self-esteem is one of the most important gifts I can give my children. It is a gift from me that will last a lifetime. When children have self-esteem, they feel lovable and feel worthwhile. Therefore, it isn't enough just to love them. My job is to help them feel loved, and I can't start that process early enough. The more important I can help them feel, the better off they will be.

Some parents believe that their kids will grow up to be conceited if they tell them they're wonderful. That's hogwash! If kids don't feel important in their own home, they will have a tough time filling that void in school or other settings. I consistently tell my own children how wonderful they are, and I carefully reinforce those observations by identifying specific things they do well. That builds self-confidence. When they have confidence, they are less fearful of challenges. When they feel important, they are also more inclined to behave like somebody of value, which means that they are more inclined to live gospel standards.

One of the reasons significant changes take place in the lives of new converts to the Church is that they have been taught the gospel and have come to understand who they really are. They know they are sons and daughters of God; and that makes loving the Lord easier. The same is true for children, as the following example illustrates:

One night, as I was putting my three-year-old daughter to bed, I asked, "Alice, what do you think Jesus would say if he walked into your bedroom right now?"

"Daddy, he'd say, 'Who is that beautiful little girl in the pretty pink pajamas?' Then he'd come over here and hold me and kiss me good night." That little girl clearly understood her relationship with her Father in Heaven and his Son. Little wonder, then, that she has grown up wanting to keep the commandments.

As much as ninety percent of our behavior is designed to make us feel important. Understandably then, we are drawn like a magnet to people who help us feel good about ourselves. We want to be around them. We want to work for them. We want to live with them. We also trust them and believe what they tell us. It is not surprising, then, that teaching the gospel to our children is much easier when it is accompanied by praise, listening, understanding, acceptance, respect, and admiration—all of which are ways of letting them know how valuable they are. Such conditions foster family unity and cohesiveness.

As the Lord knelt in the upper room before he went to Gethsemane, he offered the great intercessory prayer in which he prayed for unity, "That they may be one, even as we are one." (John 17:22.) This unity can be brought about in several ways. For example, doing things together as a family binds family members together. As a father of three explained, "Something happens to the family when everyone participates, particularly if one of the children is performing. When the whole family takes the time to go to a piano recital, a baseball game, or a school activity, they have clearly made a statement about the child's importance. When the entire family does things together, they draw upon the powers of heaven as they can in no other way."

The Savior said, "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.) This has implications for how we work together as a family and how much everyone is involved. A father of four teenagers described the impact of including all the family members in problem-solving meetings.

We have continuously involved all our family in problem-solving meetings. When the children were younger, we were tempted to withhold information from them because of their inability to understand what was going on. However, we wisely chose not to do that. As a result, some of our most spiritual family experiences have happened when one of us had a problem.

By including every family member in the serious matters affecting us, we have become stronger as a family. The adversity we feel binds us together, and we have spiritual experiences that we could have in no other way. We feel loved and supported by each other. We are more unified, and the process provides each of us the opportunity to experience the application of the gospel. We have memories of these experiences that are sweet.

Working together also provides a training ground for our children and gives my wife and me an opportunity to see how they respond when things become difficult. Our children have gained skills in dealing with difficulties and in resolving problems. We have come to better understand how much our Heavenly Father wants to help us with our problems. In the process, our children have learned how to call upon the powers of heaven to bless them in their lives.

President David O. McKay said, "The poorest shack in which love prevails over a united family is of greater value to God and future humanity than any other riches. In such a home God can work miracles and will work miracles." [^3] A mother of five described the fulfillment of that promise:

Several years ago, our only daughter was diagnosed with an incurable disease. We called a family council, and everyone attended, including our three- and five-year-old sons. Because of their tender ages, we weren't sure if they could understand, but we were surprised at their sensitivity. We decided during that meeting to hold a family fast in our daughter's behalf.

At the conclusion of our fast, we knelt together as a family, and each of us offered a fervent prayer for her. Our little boys offered sweet, sincere prayers for their sister—they prayed so hard that she would be all right. The spirit was strong in our home.

After we finished, my husband called another Melchizedek Priesthood holder, and they administered to our daughter. She was instantly healed of her affliction. In the process, we learned more about the power of the combined faith of family members and the Lord's statement, "Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 19:14.)

Miracles, of course, come in countless ways, but the important thing to remember is to create the unity and love in the family that allow the Lord to operate in our homes. Under these conditions, blessings will be poured out upon family members. As the Lord declared, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (1 Cor. 2:9.)

---
Notas:
[^1] DeLynn Decker, "'You Are a Marked Generation,' President Benson Tells Students," report of address given at the Southern California Student Devotional, Anaheim Convention Center Arena, 8 February 1987, Ensign, April 1987, 73.
[^2] 2. For example, see Gen. 18:19; Deut. 6:5-7; 1 Sam. 3:13; Prov. 22:6; Eph. 6:4; 2 Ne. 4:3; Mosiah 4:14-15; Alma 35:16; Moses 6:41, 56-58; 8:27.
[^3] 3. Ezra Taft Benson, "Great Things Required of Their Fathers," Ensign, May 1981, 34-35.
