R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

Creating the Climate for Teaching the Gospel in the Home

Footnotes

3

Creating Opportunities for Spiritual Experiences

I admired her courage. As a single parent with four children, she was doing her best to care for her family, hold down a part-time job, and keep up on the requirements of two college classes. Given the strain on her finances, the chances of her family having a Thanksgiving dinner two days later appeared remote.

After she left my office, I called my wife, told her of the woman's plight, and suggested that we do what we could to help. My wife responded enthusiastically, and that evening six bags of groceries sat on our kitchen table.

Steve, my oldest son, who was eight at the time, went with me to deliver the foodstuffs. We carefully placed them on the doorstep and then quickly drove away to avoid being seen. After returning home, Steve called the woman and, without identifying himself, suggested that she open the front door. We then drove past their house to make certain that the groceries had been taken inside.

On the way home, I noticed tears running down Steve's cheeks. "Is anything the matter?" I asked.

"Dad, is this what it's like to feel the Holy Ghost?"

"Yes, Son, this is exactly what it feels like."

"I've always wondered what it was like to feel the Holy Ghost. I won't forget this feeling as long as I live." I silently thanked my Father in Heaven for the witness he had given my son of the importance of serving others.

Can Spiritual Experiences Be Created?

Spiritual experiences cannot be created. However, we can create a climate in which spiritual experiences can occur. In fact, the programs and meetings of the Church are designed to create such opportunities.

The secret to having spiritual experiences is to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost, "which is the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him." (1 Ne. 10:17; italics added.) Implicit in that statement is the message that if we are to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost, we must diligently seek the Spirit. As a father of nine recently explained,

If you are sitting around, waiting for spiritual experiences to happen to your children by accident, you're wasting your time. They won't. Spiritual experiences are never accidental. Our business is to create a climate in which they can take place. That's why in our meetings we sing hymns, preach, pray, and bear testimony. That's also why we have family home evening and family prayer and why we go to the Lord in our private closets. These activities are designed to bring the Holy Spirit into our lives.

A lot of people complain because they never have spiritual experiences, but they don't do anything to foster them. We have to work for spiritual experiences. Joseph Smith prayed that his faith would be increased, [^1] and he taught that spiritual power can be obtained by fasting and prayer. [^2] Keep in mind that Joseph said these things after he experienced the First Vision, after he saw Christ and the prophets in the Kirtland Temple, and after he received the revelation describing the three degrees of glory. Even with those experiences, he fasted and prayed that his faith would be strengthened. If fasting and prayer helped Joseph increase his faith, it will certainly help me increase mine.

If we want blessings from God, we must prepare ourselves to receive them. If we want spiritual experiences, we must diligently try to keep the laws upon which those blessings are predicated. We must plan for them, and we must work hard to earn the right to receive them. In short, we must do everything within our power to gain the blessings we seek.

Why is it that some people have more spiritual experiences than others? A grandfather of twenty-seven gave the following explanation:

First, they seek spiritual experiences. They want them badly, and they ask the Lord for them. Throughout the scriptures, the Lord frequently tells us, "Ask and ye shall receive." One of the reasons people don't have more spiritual experiences is because they don't bother to ask for them.

Second, they fully expect to have spiritual experiences. They take the Lord at his word when he said, "Whatsoever things ye shall ask the Father in my name shall be given unto you." [3 Ne. 27:28.] When they pray, they fully expect that their prayers will be answered.

Third, they create an environment in which spiritual experiences occur. That is done by obeying the commandments. They also participate in Church programs, attend their meetings, study the scriptures, kneel in prayer, and do everything in their power to "live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God." [D&C 84:44.]

Fourth, they are personally worthy to receive the blessing they seek. They follow the Lord's direction and prepare themselves "by doing the things which [he has] commanded [them] and required of [them]." [D&C 78:7.] They must not only be good, but also do good.

Finally, they go to those places where the Holy Ghost is present. That is one of the reasons the Lord has commanded us to meet together often in church meetings—so he can bless us with his Spirit. That is one of the reasons why the temple is called the House of the Lord—because it is the best environment on the earth for having spiritual experiences. Temples are the purest places on earth: they have been dedicated and set apart as places where the Lord will manifest himself to his people. [See D&C 109:5.]

However, temples and other church buildings are not the only places where the Holy Ghost is present. One of the most sacred places on earth can be the home, and those who enter righteous homes feel the influence of the Spirit. As one young man explained:

One of the reasons I love to bring my friends to our home is to give them a chance to feel the Spirit that we have there. Almost without exception, everyone who comes through the front door stops, looks around, and says, "Wow. This is really neat." They don't know what they are feeling, but they like it. After the senior prom, my date and I, along with two other couples, came back to our home to spend the rest of the evening. I still remember my girlfriend sitting in the rocking chair in our living room and saying, "I really feel comfortable in your house. There is something here that I really like." Little did she know that what she was feeling was the Holy Ghost.

Rearing children is a spiritual process, and children gain testimonies by having spiritual experiences. Under such conditions, the Holy Ghost bears witness to them that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is a prophet, and that the restored gospel is true. As parents, we ought not leave these experiences to accident. Fortunately, opportunities can be created for children to feel the influence of the Holy Ghost. The remaining chapters of this section provide ideas about how parents can create conditions under which sacred experiences can take place.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Dallin H. Oaks, "Recognize Spirit When It Is Manifest," Church News, April 29, 1989, 14.
[^2] See Mosiah 4:3, 20; D&C 6:23; 11:13.
