R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

4

Teaching Children to Listen to the Spirit

As I walked out of my Sunday School class, I was so choked up I could hardly talk. It had been one of the spiritual highlights of my entire senior year. I looked at Mike, smiled, and said, "Wow. That was great!"

"I don't believe a thing he said," Mike retorted.

"What?" I couldn't believe what I was hearing.

"He made up every one of those stories. There is no way they could have happened to him. Things like that don't happen to people today. They happened in the Bible and in the Book of Mormon. They might even happen to some of the General Authorities today. Maybe. But they don't happen to people here in our ward, and they certainly didn't happen to him."

By this time the other kids in our Sunday School class had joined us in the hall. "How do you know those things didn't happen to him?" I asked.

"I just know," Mike said flatly. "I've never had those kinds of experiences. Neither has anybody that I know of. If he is really that close to God, why isn't he a General Authority? He isn't even a bishop. He's only a Sunday School teacher. I think he stole those experiences from somebody else and said they were his. The Lord has never given me those kinds of experiences, and he isn't going to give them to anyone else, either."

"I can't believe what I'm hearing. You sound just like Laman and Lemuel. I felt the Holy Ghost in that class. I know how I felt. You can't tell me that what he said isn't true. I felt it."

"He was just playing on your emotions," Mike argued. "I got sucked into it for the first part of class, but then I realized what he was doing."

"You didn't get sucked into anything. That was the Holy Ghost you felt."

"Nonsense. That was just your emotions. You've been deceived. That guy knows how to work a group."

I was stunned. I had just listened to one of the best Sunday School lessons I had ever heard in my life, and my friend had no idea that what he was feeling was the Holy Ghost.

Teaching Children to Listen to the Spirit

A testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ comes when the Holy Ghost bears witness to us that the gospel is true. Since that witness is a private experience, we cannot safely assume that our children will recognize that witness when it happens. So we can help them immeasurably by teaching what receiving revelation and having spiritual experiences feel like. A bishop described the insight he gained about how to better serve the youth in his ward:

Recently I accompanied twenty-eight young people from our ward to the temple to do baptismal work for the dead. Before the baptisms began, the temple president spoke to us, and I was particularly interested in a comment he made. He said, "If you are worthy to come into the temple, you are worthy to go to the celestial kingdom. That means that you are worthy to enter the presence of God, and you are entitled to all of the spiritual gifts that God has in store for those who love and serve him."

I thought to myself, "If that's true, then why aren't our young people having more spiritual experiences? They've been given the gift of the Holy Ghost. They have the right to the constant companionship of the Spirit. They're certainly worthy of that great blessing." Yet several of our youth had told me in interviews that they had never had any spiritual experiences. I found that hard to believe, given the kind of lives they were leading. They had every right to receive revelation and to have their prayers answered.

The Spirit then bore witness to me that most of them had received numerous revelations and had been blessed with many spiritual experiences. However, they didn't know what having a witness from the Holy Ghost felt like, so they had nothing with which to compare those experiences.

Perhaps the main reason children are unable to recognize the companionship of the Holy Ghost is that their parents haven't taught them what to expect. Sometimes that happens because parents don't have testimonies themselves, and teaching something you don't know is tough. Other parents may have spiritual experiences, but, like their children, they are unable to recognize them. As Dallin H. Oaks explained,

I know from experience that some seasoned members of the Church do not know when they are receiving a witness of the Spirit. . . .

Perhaps lifelong members of the Church don't recognize the testimony of the Spirit because they have had it so often they take it for granted. Perhaps they are looking for something startling and different. . . .

I have heard adult members of the Church claim they do not have a testimony because they have never experienced a "burning in the bosom." (D&C 9:8.)

If I thought this scriptural "burning" only referred to caloric heat, I would have to say that I have never had a burning in the bosom either. . . . In this usage, it does not seem to refer to heat but rather to an intensity of feeling.

For me, the witness of the Holy Ghost is an intense feeling of serenity or well-being. [^1]

Other parents do not teach their children what receiving a witness from the Holy Ghost feels like because they have the mistaken notion that young people are incapable of understanding things of the Spirit. Consider, for example, the following experience:

Recently a friend described the difficulty she was having with her daughter. The fifteen-year-old girl was in love with a boy and was furious that she couldn't date until she turned sixteen. Her anger had begun to spill over into other areas, and she had started questioning some of the basic principles of the gospel.

After my friend finished her story, I said, "I'm sure that your daughter will continue to flounder with these issues until she goes to the Lord and seeks his guidance. The Holy Ghost will testify to her the answers to her questions."

The mother replied, "You don't understand. My daughter is only fifteen. She's too young and immature to understand the promptings of the Spirit."

Shocked, I said, "Throughout history, young people have responded to the Spirit's promptings. The Prophet Joseph Smith was only fourteen when God and Jesus Christ appeared to him. Mormon was your daughter's age when the Savior appeared to him. Many young people are converted to the Church during their teens. Your daughter was given the gift of the Holy Ghost when she was eight, and that means that she has the right to the constant companionship of the Spirit."

"You're right. I hadn't thought of that."

"One crucial element in gospel training is knowing how to create opportunities for our children to have spiritual experiences and then help them understand what they felt."

"Are you sure you can do that? I thought spiritual experiences just came to people."

"If you just wait for them to come along, nothing will happen. But you can create opportunities for spiritual experiences, and the Lord will support you and bless you for your efforts. There are many things you can do as a mother to help your daughter become more spiritual, as long as you don't underestimate her capacity to understand things of the Spirit."

Since a spiritual witness from the Holy Ghost is a private matter, there is no guarantee that children will recognize the Spirit when it comes. Spiritual growth accompanies experience. It is a gradual process and comes line upon line, precept upon precept. Just as intellectual growth comes with hard work and sacrifice, so does spirituality. As the Holy Ghost bears witness to us over and over again that gospel principles are true, our faith increases and our knowledge of gospel principles becomes certain. The easiest way to help children learn these valuable lessons is to place them in situations where the Spirit of the Lord is present and then point out to them what they have experienced. Under those circumstances, children can be taught what it feels like to have the Spirit affect them. Note, for example, the insight that was gained by an Aaronic Priesthood holder:

One of the great learning experiences of my life occurred at our dinner table one fast Sunday when I was a junior in high school. While discussing the testimony meeting we had attended earlier that day, I told my father that it was one of the best meetings I had ever attended.

"Why do you say that?" he asked.

"I don't know for sure. I liked what people said. But the thing I liked best was the way I felt."

"How did you feel?"

After thinking about it, I said, "It's hard to explain. I felt warm inside. Sometimes I kind of tingled. Sometimes I felt something like the chills, except I wasn't cold. I noticed it most when Brother Forsberg bore his testimony."

Dad then said, "What you felt today was the Holy Ghost. I felt it very strongly myself. It affects people differently. Now you know for sure what it feels like to have the Holy Ghost bear witness to you that a gospel principle is true. That's what it feels like to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Never forget those feelings. Satan can't duplicate them. When you feel that way, you can feel confident that you have the companionship of the Holy Ghost."

I was amazed. So that's how it felt. I had always wondered what feeling the Spirit of the Lord was like, but I had never been able to identify it. Therefore, I had claimed that I had never had any spiritual experiences.

Once I knew what to expect, I was able to recognize those feelings in the future. I also realized that I had been blessed with many spiritual experiences throughout my life—I just didn't know what had caused those feelings.

What kind of feelings, then, can we help our children identify as the effect of the Holy Ghost? As with most other gospel principles, the scriptures clearly and powerfully tell us. The Topical Guide in the LDS edition of the Bible, for instance, refers to so many feelings from and experiences with the Spirit or Holy Ghost that listing them all is almost impossible. Following are just a handful of examples:

Paul makes a list of many of the "fruits" of the Spirit, specifying "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Gal. 5:22-23.) The Comforter may fill us "with hope and perfect love." (Moro. 8:26.) Our hearts may swell with joy because of the Spirit. We may experience peace. [^2]

The Spirit may also help us suddenly remember things when we need them. He may comfort us. [^3] He may help us recognize truth, especially concerning God the Father and Jesus Christ. [^4] He may make us clean and pure. [^5] He may lead us to and strengthen our desire to walk uprightly and do justly. [^6] He may even give us prophecies, dreams, and visions. [^7] So the question for our children is not so much "When will I experience the Holy Ghost?" but rather "How can I recognize the many times the Holy Ghost has affected me?"

Family testimony meetings also provide unique opportunities for spiritual experiences and, at the same time, provide the freedom to talk instructively about what family members have felt. A young father recalled the following:

The experience I remember most when I was little was a testimony meeting we held as a family. Dad, Mom, and we five kids each bore our testimonies and said how much we loved each other. I resisted participating, because I did not know that the gospel was true. So Dad wisely asked me to bear testimony to what I knew was true. I talked about God answering prayers and about people being healed. When I said, "I know that the gospel is true," I felt the Holy Ghost bear witness to me that my words were true. I will never forget how I felt when that happened. Dad pointed out that those feelings were what it's like to receive a witness from the Holy Ghost.

I have since learned the genius of that experience, and I now hold regular testimony meetings with my own family. We strengthen each other with our testimonies and expressions of love for one another. These meetings also provide an opportunity for the Holy Ghost to bear witness to our children that the words they themselves say are true and to feel the Holy Ghost in an environment where we can explain to them what is happening.

Developing spirituality is an individual responsibility. We can help our children achieve it, but the ultimate responsibility falls on them. No one can force spirituality on them. But they do need to be taught how to recognize that the Holy Ghost is bearing witness to them of the truthfulness of the gospel. Their lives will be much richer and their testimonies much firmer if we do.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 14:192.
[^2] See Mosiah 4:3, 20; D&C 6:23; 11:13.
[^3] See John 14:16-18, 26.
[^4] See Neh. 9:20; John 15:26; 16:13; Moro. 10:5; D&C 136:32-33.
[^5] See Mosiah 4:2-3; D&C 76:118.
[^6] See Ps. 143:10; Eph. 5:9; D&C 11:12.
[^7] 7. See Prov. 1:23; Joel 2:28.
