R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

5

The Power of Example

I felt someone squeeze my arm. When I opened my eyes, I saw my father kneeling beside me as I lay in my sleeping bag on the kitchen floor by the telephone. Even though I was fourteen and almost as big as he was, Dad took me in his arms, as he had so many times when I was little, and said eight words that I will never forget: "Son, your mother died about twenty minutes ago."

I clearly recall the events of the next three days: selecting the casket, planning the funeral, viewing Mother's body in the living room of Aunt Agnes and Uncle Leonard's home, attending the funeral, dedicating the grave, and riding the lonely, seventy miles home with my father and my three younger sisters, ages ten, six, and three.

I also remember the difficult days, weeks, and months that followed. During that time, Dad's unwavering faith in God seemed almost miraculous. I watched him closely as he sought the Lord in prayer and pled for strength to deal with his grief and for wisdom to help meet the needs of his heartbroken children. Not once did I sense any bitterness, anger, or resentment. He loved the Lord and put his trust in him. He knew the Lord loved him and his children, and he sought the comfort and companionship of the Spirit that Christ has promised to those who mourn. He frequently spoke of the blessings we had as a family and expressed his gratitude to the Lord for helping us face our challenges and trials.

The faith I saw my father exercise after Mother's death has been a great source of strength to me as I have experienced the trials, vicissitudes, and tribulations of mortality. His example had more influence on my life than all the discussions we had about the principles of the gospel.

The Power of Parental Example

Teaching by example is basic to teaching our children, since we cannot teach with power a principle we do not live. As President Brigham Young explained, "If each and every one of us who are parents will reflect upon the responsibilities devolving upon us, we shall come to the conclusion that we should never permit ourselves to do anything that we are not willing to see our children do. We should set them an example that we wish them to imitate." [^1]

Thus, the best way to teach children honesty is to be honest ourselves. We most effectively teach children to love by loving them. We teach compassion by being compassionate. What they see and how they feel will have a far greater impact on their values and attitudes than the words they hear. Great lessons are learned from the silent sermons we preach through the way we live. For example, consider how one woman learned the importance of prayer:

I don't recall my folks ever talking to me about prayer, though I'm sure they must have. I don't even remember any family home evening lessons on it. Prayer was just something that happened in our home, and we took it so much for granted that I assumed everybody did it. As a result, I learned to pray from listening to my parents pray. Every morning and evening without fail, and sometimes in between, we knelt around the kitchen table in family prayer. Guests were always invited to join us. There was never the slightest indication of any embarrassment about kneeling before the Lord. It seemed just as natural as the meal that followed.

Parents are the most effective examples children will have. As they see us live the principles of the gospel, they understand much more clearly the importance of the gospel themselves. They are then able to translate those principles into productive behavior. As a mother of three said,

People have often asked why I'm so kind and considerate. If I do have those traits, the main reason is that I never heard my mother say anything unkind about anybody. On many occasions I heard people tell her things about others that I knew she already knew, because I had overheard other conversations. However, she never divulged confidences, and she never gossiped. As I was growing up, I thought that was a classy way to act, and I prided myself on doing the same. That decision saved me a lot of grief, because nobody ever accused me of talking behind their backs or saying hurtful things about anybody. People knew I would keep my mouth shut, and so they trusted me with things that they'd tell no one else.

When children see our behaviors as consistent with the principles we teach, they trust us and tend to adopt our values. As a stake president reported,

The main reason I love the scriptures is because my dad loved them. Throughout his life, I was continuously impressed with his faithfulness in studying the scriptures. He read them constantly. On many occasions, while reading, he would say, "Son, I didn't know this," and then proceed to tell me about something "new" he'd discovered while reading the Book of Mormon for the "nth" time. Since I love my father, it is only natural that I love the things he loves. I want to be like him.

Very few parental behaviors miss the watchful eyes of children; they can tell when we practice what we preach. As they observe our obedience, they better understand the need for obedience in their own lives. For example, a mother of two learned about the importance of tithing in the following way:

I learned to pay tithing by watching my parents. Every fast Sunday the family gathered around the kitchen table with the tithing envelopes. We had our banks. Mom and Dad had their checkbook. We each determined the amount of money we had earned that month, filled out the tithing receipts, put our tithing in the envelopes, and sealed them up. I remember how important I felt when I did that. My folks usually recounted the blessings the Lord had given us and told us what an honor it was to give him something in return. Occasionally they talked about how the tithing money was used. As a result, there was never a time when I didn't feel good about paying tithing.

We also teach our children powerful lessons by the way we treat others, particularly those who "revile [us] and persecute, and . . . say all manner of evil against [us] falsely." (3 Ne. 12:11.) As one young man explained,

Eight years ago, before my folks were divorced, Dad sat down with each of us individually and again as a group and told us that we would never hear him say anything negative about our mother. He wanted us to have a close relationship with her, and he would do everything he could to see that we felt that way.

Dad kept his promise. Even though Mom continually bombarded us with criticism about our father, he never responded in kind. He answered our questions factually, but he never even hinted at any kind of criticism of her behavior or her life-style. He consistently reminded us that she was our mother and counseled us to love and honor her. As a result, I grew to love my dad more than I had ever thought possible, and I made up my mind that I would follow his example in dealing with people myself.

The same is true for the ordinances of the priesthood. When we value them and treat them with the reverence they deserve, our children come to more fully understand their importance as well. A single mother described the impact of her mother's positive example:

I learned about the importance of the sacrament at a very early age. When I was six, my mother underwent emergency surgery. After returning home, she was bedridden for over a month. Each Sunday the priests in our ward came to our home and administered the sacrament. The first time they came, she cried when she partook of the bread. Later she frequently told me how much the sacrament meant to her and described the spiritual strength she received from partaking of it. Since that time, I have had a special reverence for the emblems of the Lord's supper.

Children also learn to forgive by watching us forgive others. Sometimes that is much more challenging than we think. Consider the following example:

While riding his bicycle home from elementary school one day, my little brother was accidentally hit by a car and killed. Later that evening my parents and I went to the home of the teenage driver of the car. The teenager had been hysterical because of what had happened.

As soon as my dad saw the boy, he put his arms around him, hugged him to his breast, and said, "It was an accident. There is nothing you could have done to prevent it. We aren't angry with you. And we forgive you for what has happened." Everyone in that room wept. I will never forget the impact of that experience and my father's willingness to forgive a young man for taking the life of his son.

Seldom do we understand the extent to which setting a good example positively impacts our children's behavior. A mother of five children was delighted to learn of the long-term effect of one critical incident in her daughter's life:

Twenty-two years ago, Carol was dating a young man whom she liked a great deal. One evening she told us that she would be home at 11:30 P.M. However, midnight came and went. By 3:30 A.M. she still wasn't home. I was terrified. I alternated between wanting to break her neck and praying that she was all right. At 4:00 A.M. I heard her slip into the house. I got out of bed, walked to the end of the hall, and waited. She turned around, looked at me, and said, "Oh, Mother, this has been the most spiritual night of my life. Frank has finally decided to go on a mission."

Last week Carol sent us a letter in which she wrote, "You will never know how often I think about the night Frank decided to go on a mission and how understanding you were. You had every reason to be furious with me. But you listened. That single experience did more to help me understand what motherhood is all about than anything else you ever did."

Parents are the most important people in their children's lives. All our behaviors—whether benevolent or detrimental, accepting or critical, upbuilding or destructive, tender or harsh—have a powerful impact on our children's identities, self-esteem, and desires to live the gospel. They imitate us. What we do and what we are give a much more profound message than what we say. No greater service can be rendered to our children than for them to see the principles of the gospel manifest in our lives.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ezra Taft Benson, To the Mothers in Zion, pamphlet (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987), 8-9.
