R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

6

Children as Best Friends

As I walked past the restaurant, I looked through the window and saw Kathy standing next to the cashier. She smiled and waved, and I felt my stomach turn a little bit. Kathy was the vice president of our junior class, and I had caught her red-handed, skipping school. In the absence of a legitimate reason, I would, as the assistant principal, have to initiate disciplinary action against her. My first inclination was to pretend that I didn't see her; but it was too late, so I waited.

As she came out the restaurant door, I said, "Hi, Kathy. How are you doing?"

"Great. How are you?"

"Fine," I said. "How was lunch?"

"It was wonderful."

"Say, aren't you supposed to be in school?"

Kathy grinned at me and said, "Yup." She didn't appear to be the least bit concerned. If I had run into my assistant principal while skipping school, I would have been rattled.

"What's going on?" I asked.

"Oh, nothing much. I just decided to go to lunch with my best friend. I've got to hurry, though, or I'll be late for fifth period." I breathed a sigh of relief.

"That's neat. Who is your best friend?"

Again she smiled and said, "Excuse me just a minute, and I'll get her." Sixty seconds later Kathy emerged from the restaurant, arm in arm with a woman who looked as though she could be her older sister. Kathy smiled and said, "I would like you to meet my mother. Mom, this is our assistant principal."

Being "Best Friends" with Our Children

Some parents strongly believe that developing friendships with their children is a mistake. They argue that the nature of parenting and the disciplinary process make it impossible to both be friends with their children and fulfill what they perceive to be their parental responsibilities. The disciplinary process alone requires objectivity; and objectivity with friends is impossible!

From our point of view, that is a dangerous and unwise notion. Those parents do not understand the powerful influence they can have on their children through friendship. As President Benson counseled, "Take time to be a real friend to your children." [^1] Effective parenting is the process of righteously influencing children. When parents refuse to develop friendships with their children, they cut themselves off from their most powerful source of influence—the influence that comes from the high level of trust that exists between friends.

Trust is the single most important factor in healthy, interpersonal relationships. The degree to which people trust each other defines the nature of their relationship. Their trust for one another determines how much information they share, the extent to which they try to control others, and the degree to which they permit others to influence them.

To illustrate, a Sunday School teacher shared the following about a discussion with the twenty-two high school seniors in his class:

After suggesting that each of my Sunday School students think about the person whom he or she trusted most in this world, I asked the following questions:

Â How much information do you share with that person? (The unanimous answer was "A lot.")

Â How much do you let that person influence you, in terms of following his or her counsel and advice? (Again, the unanimous answer was "A lot.")

Â How much do you try to control that person, particularly as it relates to protecting yourself against him or her? (Without exception, they said, "Very little.")

Then they identified, in their minds, the people they trusted the least, and I repeated the same three questions. Without exception, the students agreed that they shared little information with those people, and they permitted them to have virtually no influence on their lives. Further, they did everything they could to control the behavior of those untrustworthy people, particularly as it related to protecting themselves against them.

What is the difference between the two groups? Their interpersonal skills? Their communication skills? Their backgrounds? Their commitment to the gospel? It was none of those things. The difference was the degree to which they trusted the other people.

The basis of true friendship is trust, whether the friendship occurs inside or outside the family. Therefore, if parents want to be good friends with their children, they must behave in ways that foster their children's trust and confidence. When family members trust each other, almost everything in family life becomes easier, including teaching gospel principles. Consider the following experience of a concerned mother:

For several years my oldest daughter didn't trust her father. Although he is a wonderful husband, the chemistry just didn't seem to be "right" between the two of them. When she finally told me that she didn't trust him, mainly because of the way he talked to her in front of her friends, the lights went on for me and for my husband, and we finally had something specific to work on. Over the next six months, he did everything in his power to rebuild the trust he had lost. As my daughter later explained:

"My dad apologized to me, asked me to forgive him, and promised to never again criticize me in front of my friends. He also asked me to tell him about it if he ever slipped up and did it again. That hasn't been necessary because he hasn't slipped. We started holding covenant interviews [see chapter 16], and he kept every promise he made in those meetings as well. He also started to talk to me about the things I was doing that bugged him. By the way he did it, I could tell he was really interested. Whenever I asked him for help, he would really help me, rather than finding fault with everything I did or telling me he was too busy. Soon I realized that he really meant it when he said he loved me, and I started to believe that he could be trusted."

The transformation in that girl was close to miraculous. She became more obedient. When my husband explained things to her, she listened—and then followed his counsel. Soon she began to seek his advice. Their relationship has become an enjoyable, rather than a painful one.

Our children will go to someone for advice in times of trouble. They will also ask someone for help when they need it. They are going to pattern their lives after someone. In short, someone is going to be our child's best friend. Why not nominate ourselves for the position of that someone?

Developing Friendships with Children

Developing friendships with our children can be a real challenge and, at best, a complex process. It requires a great deal of patience, primarily because proper parenting is a time-consuming process. It also takes time to build trust.

One thing, however, is absolutely essential: parents need to understand that developing friendships with their children does not come by dressing as they do, using teenage vernacular, or accompanying them everywhere they go. In short, parents don't become good friends with their children by acting like teenagers. Rather, friendships are built by following these prophetic guidelines, as given by President Benson: "Listen to your children, really listen. Talk with them, laugh and joke with them, sing with them, play with them, cry with them, hug them, honestly praise them. Yes, regularly spend unrushed one-on-one time with each child." [^2] Friendships with our children come from treating them the same way we treat our good friends.

Several things can facilitate the process of building friendships with our children. For example, wise parents will stay as far away from criticism and fault-finding as possible. Research on behavioral change supports the idea that coercive and critical behavior provides very little motivation, except in the short run. Criticism diminishes motivation, damages self-esteem, and almost always creates enemies, particularly in families. Consider, for example, the following description by a grief-stricken mother:

My husband has nearly destroyed his relationship with my son and daughter. In fact, they have told me on several occasions that they hate him. They can't seem to do anything right in his eyes. He is so mean and hateful. Every meal is a barrage of criticism and fault-finding. It has gotten to the point that the kids refuse to eat dinner with us; and they spend as much time away from home as possible. I have shed buckets of tears because of what is going on in our family, and I feel helpless to do anything about it. The irony is that he loves them very much and wants to help them, but he doesn't know how to go about it.

Unfortunately, the above example is repeated all too frequently. We have found that most people want to be successful parents and that they are doing the best job they know how to do. But many simply lack the necessary skills and knowledge. Significant progress can be made, however, when parents understand that they will never motivate anyone by attacking them with criticism. As one father explained:

Am I motivated to excel when someone constantly tells me how rotten I am? Does telling my daughter how ugly she is help build her self-confidence and her interpersonal skills? Do I successfully motivate my son to do his school work when I tell him how stupid he is? Does that kind of treatment make me want to work extra hard and to go the extra mile? Absolutely not. It doesn't work with my kids; it doesn't work with my wife; and it doesn't work with me. All it does is build resentment and destroy self-confidence. The more I stay away from the negative, the more effective I am.

In building a "best friends" relationship with our children, we need to realize the importance of keeping our priorities straight. Note, for example, the lesson learned by a single mother of four, three of whom were teenagers:

My children have never been accused of being especially tidy. In fact, sometimes they act like first-class slobs. They typically come home from school, dump their books and back packs on the floor, and then spend the afternoon watching TV or gabbing with each other.

Since I teach school, they usually get home before I do, and that means that I almost always walk into a pigpen. After a while I found myself caught in some win-lose dynamics, and I was losing! As soon as I walked through the front door, I immediately started my "Oh, my heavens" routine. The house was a mess. The kids hadn't practiced the piano. They also hadn't done their homework. So I put on my "Hitler hat" and got them moving.

Pretty soon I noticed that they stopped looking forward to me coming home. In fact, they resented my presence. That quickly got my attention. I felt that I should be concerned about the school work, the piano practice, the condition of the house, and their discipline. However, I realized that it was an issue of timing.

Now when I come home, I intentionally ignore everything except the personal needs of my children. I try to have a private talk with each child. Sometimes it's for ten minutes; sometimes it's only for two, depending on the need of the child. I ask them how their day went. "What happened that was good and what happened that was lousy today?" We rejoice together in the successes and think about what to do with the problems.

Then after supper I'll say, "Okay, you guys, I need fifteen minutes of slave labor, and we'll set the timer." We quickly put away the books, clean up the mess in the living room, and do whatever we need to make the place presentable. Most of the time it is fun for all of us. But I first get in touch with them personally and emotionally. I find that that works much better than coming home and criticizing them for just being kids.

If you are ever tempted to criticize or condemn your child, take the time to read the following article, "Father Forgets," written many years ago by W. Livingston Larned. Time has proven it to be one of those rare gems that continue to strike a chord in hearts of subsequent generations.

Listen, son: I am saying this as you lie asleep, one little paw crumpled under your cheek and the blond curls stickily wet on your damp forehead. I have stolen into your room alone. Just a few minutes ago, as I sat reading my paper in the library, a stifling wave of remorse swept over me. Guiltily I came to your bedside.

These are the things I have been thinking, son: I had been cross to you. I scolded you as you were dressing for school because you gave your face merely a dab with a towel. I took you to task for not cleaning your shoes. I called out angrily when you threw some of your things on the floor.

At breakfast I found fault, too. You spilled things. You gulped down your food. You put your elbows on the table. You spread butter too thick on your bread. And as you started off to play and I made for my train, you turned and waved a hand and called, "Good-bye, Daddy!" and I frowned, and said in reply, "Hold your shoulders back!"

Then it began all over again in the late afternoon. As I came up the road I spied you, down on your knees, playing marbles. There were holes in your stockings. I humiliated you before your boyfriends by marching you ahead of me to the house. Stockings were expensive—and if you had to buy them you would be more careful! Imagine that, son, from a father!

Do you remember, later, when I was reading in the library, how you came in, timidly, with a sort of hurt look in your eyes? When I glanced up over my paper, impatient at the interruption, you hesitated at the door. "What is it you want?" I snapped. You said nothing, but ran across in one tempestuous plunge, and threw your arms around my neck and kissed me, and your small arms tightened with an affection that God had set blooming in your heart and which even neglect could not wither. And then you were gone, pattering up the stairs.

Well, son, it was shortly afterwards that my paper slipped from my hands and a terrible sickening fear came over me. What has habit been doing to me? The habit of finding fault, of reprimanding—this was my reward to you for being a boy. It was not that I did not love you; it was that I expected too much of youth. I was measuring you by the yardstick of my own years.

And there was so much that was good and fine and true in your character. The little heart of you was as big as the dawn itself over the wide hills. This was shown by your spontaneous impulse to rush in and kiss me goodnight. Nothing else matters tonight, son. I have come to your bedside in the darkness, and I have knelt there, ashamed!

It is a feeble atonement; I know you would not understand these things if I told them to you during your waking hours. But tomorrow I will be a real daddy! I will chum with you, and suffer when you suffer, and laugh when you laugh. I will bite my tongue when impatient words come. I will keep saying as if it were a ritual: "He is nothing but a boy—a little boy."

I am afraid I have visualized you as a man. Yet as I see you now, son, crumpled and weary in your cot, I see that you are still a baby. Yesterday you were in your mother's arms, your head on her shoulder. I have asked too much, too much. [^3]

Friendships are built when we treat our children with respect and accept them as they are in their various stages of progress. One father benefited from some insight about the matter that his teenage daughter gave him:

My fourteen-year-old daughter's best friend is an unusual girl. In fact, some people think she's weird. She was the only girl to play on the boys' eighth-grade football team. For two years she wore shoes and socks that didn't match; and many aspects of her behavior were as unique as her appearance. She is the last girl I would have suspected my daughter to pal around with. When I asked my daughter what she liked about her friend, she said, "I can tell her anything, and she never judges me. She never criticizes me. She never tells me how stupid I am for feeling a certain way or for doing some of the things I do. It's really safe to be with her and to talk to her. I feel important when I'm with her." That was a great lesson for me, and I realized that if I wanted to be good friends with my daughter, I had better start treating her at least as well as her friends treat her.

In short, if we want to be friends with our children, we need to treat them the same way we treat good friends. We must let them know that we value and appreciate them, and we must provide the support and encouragement they need to become healthy and responsible adults.

That kind of growth is best accomplished in a supportive and positive atmosphere. Why? Because that is the way people grow—toward light and warmth, toward the positive. Children thrive in that kind of an environment, and they trust those who provide such a climate. When children know that their parents value and appreciate them, they usually see their parents as friends—even when corrective action is taken. And remember that children and parents, as friends do everywhere, take special efforts to make their friends happy.

However, recognizing our children as friends and developing those friendships take time. Establishing a friendship requires spending time with them when they need it, whether or not it is convenient. Sometimes, though, it is at the most inconvenient times that the investment of time yields the greatest returns. One father recalled this great experience with his seventeen-year-old son:

Richard arrived home on Sunday at 1:30 A.M. after attending a musical workshop in another state. As always, he let me know he was home as soon as he arrived. I got up, staggered to the kitchen table, poured him a glass of milk, and broke open a package of chocolate chip cookies. Then I sat down at the kitchen table and listened.

Richard shared the details of each day's activities and talked excitedly about the girls he had met. He described, with some embarrassment mixed with pride, the pranks he and his roommates had engineered. He also explained how he had spent one evening defending the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Word of Wisdom, and the law of chastity. At 3:15 A.M. he paused, looked at me, and said, "You know what, Dad? I honestly think that you like me."

"What on earth gave you that idea?"

"Look at it this way." His eyes became moist. "I wake you out of a deep sleep at 1:30 in the morning. You get up, listen to me yak for almost two hours, and even act as if you're really interested. There's no way you would do that if you didn't really care for somebody. I really believe that I'm very important to you."

I smiled and responded, "Are you really important to me? My son, you have no idea."

Parenting is not an easy task. But by treating our children the way we treat our best friends, we avoid the trap of letting "the things that matter most . . . [be] at the mercy of things that matter least." [^4] Besides, being friends with our children is an extremely enjoyable way to be parents.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Foster W. Cline, Parent Education Text (Evergreen, Colorado: Evergreen Consultants in Human Behavior, 1982), 77-78.
[^2] See Cline, 78-79.
[^3] Dale Carnegie, How to Win Friends and Influence People, rev. ed. (New York: Pocket Books, 1981), 15-17.
[^4] Ashley Montague, as quoted in A. Theodore Tuttle, "The Things That Matter Most," Ensign, December 1971, 90.
