R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

7

The Good Neighbor Policy

As I pulled the car into the driveway, I immediately knew that I was in trouble. The living room light was still on, which meant that my dad was still awake. And only one thing would keep him up until 1:30 A.M.: his sixteen-year-old son was in trouble. But it had to be a coincidence; nobody could have found out what we had done!

As I opened the front door, Dad put down the newspaper, smiled, and said, "Hi, Son. How's it going?"

I swallowed and tried to act relaxed. "Great. How are you doing?"

"Have a seat. I'd like to chat with you for a minute." I sat down. "Anything unusual happen tonight?"

"What do you mean?" Secretly I suspected I had been found out.

He looked at me with that half-smile that meant he knew more than he was telling me and again asked, "Anything unusual happen tonight?"

"We did a lot of things."

"That's what I understand. I talked with Sheriff Roder earlier this evening. Would you like to tell me what happened?"

"Sheriff Roder is a jerk—a typical small town cop. He hates us, and he won't leave us alone. They ought to fire him. He deserves all the garbage he gets."

"Would you like to tell me what happened?"

By now I was certain that he knew all about it. "Gary, Jack, and I were driving around, talking about nothing like we do sometimes. When we drove passed Sheriff Roder's house, we saw those yellow rose bushes in his garden next to the road. Jack said it would be great to get back at him for all the junk he's given to us. Nobody was around, and the lights in his house were out. So I pulled the car into his rose garden, revved up the motor, popped the clutch, and peeled out. I think we got a few of his rose bushes." I smiled with pleasure.

"That's close to the story I got. However, you wiped out more than just a few of them. Sheriff Roder watched the whole thing from his living-room window."

"You're kidding!" Suddenly it didn't seem all that funny anymore.

"He got your license-plate number, and a few minutes later he rang our doorbell. We really had quite an interesting visit. By the way, he'd like to visit with you in his office at eight o'clock in the morning." I could feel myself getting sick. "Would you like to talk about it?"

I took a deep breath. "Not right now."

Dad said, "Well, why don't you sleep on it. If you'd like to visit in the morning before your meeting, I'll be available. It looks as if you've got yourself a serious problem. It'll be interesting to see how you handle it." As I stood up, I felt my knees weaken. Dad gave me my nightly hug, said good night, and went to bed.

The whole thing was admirable. No yelling. No threats. No criticism. No overreaction. Just a simple, respectful discussion of the problem—exactly the way he talked to our neighbor after his daughter lost control of their family car and knocked down ten feet of our fence. It would be tough to face Sheriff Roder, but Dad knew I could handle it, so I was left to face the consequences of my behavior.

Love Thy Neighbor as Thyself

Luke records that a lawyer asked the Lord, "What shall I do to inherit eternal life?" Jesus asked in turn, "What is written in the law?" and then agreed with the lawyer's response: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself." (Luke 10:25-27.) Then the lawyer asked, "Who is my neighbor?" Jesus responded with the parable of the good Samaritan, admonishing the man, "Go, and do thou likewise." (Luke 10:29, 37.)

Since the Savior even included complete strangers in his definition of "neighbors," we can safely assume that members of our own families are also neighbors. Something as simple as treating our family members as we treat our good neighbors can have a wonderful effect on our children. As Foster Cline explains,

The Good Neighbor Policy is . . . so sensible that it seems like nonsense; so thoughtful that it may seem non-caring; so friendly that it may seem non-parental. When parents follow the Good Neighbor Policy, they almost inevitably raise friendly children. They raise children who will turn out to be Good Neighbors! Because children learn almost all things through modeling, it means that if parents want their children to grow up to be good neighbors, they must treat their children like good neighbors. [^1]

As good neighbors, we show concern for people, we do what we can to help them, we keep our noses out of their business unless we are asked for advice, and we let them experience the consequences of their actions. These same behaviors can also help us rear healthy, responsible children, because the principles relate directly to most of the normal problems that children encounter.

The Good Neighbor Policy can be applied in a variety of different ways. [^2] For example, if my neighbor borrowed my lawn mower and then ran over a large rock, damaging the blade, which of the following would I (as a good neighbor) say?

Â "Good grief, John, I can't believe you're so irresponsible. Didn't it occur to you to pick up the rocks before you mowed the lawn? This is the last time I'll ever loan you anything, so if you're thinking about borrowing something else from me, forget it."

Â "Do you think I'm made of money? I can't afford this type of expense! I can't believe you'd be so careless and irresponsible with something that isn't even yours!"

Â "This is the last straw. You've pushed me too far this time. You're grounded from all privileges, and you can't borrow anything from me again for two months!"

Â "Hey, John, that's too bad. But those things happen sometimes. When do you plan to get it fixed?"

Of course, the last answer is the most appropriate. In fact, the first three alternatives seem so preposterous that they're almost absurd; any one of them would only exaggerate the problem and seriously damage the relationship.

Most of us go out of our way to be friendly and cordial with our neighbors. Very seldom do we get angry with them when they make mistakes that don't directly affect us; and even when a mistake may affect us, we try to be tolerant and understanding. We accept their idiosyncrasies. If they're having problems, even if they've caused the problems themselves, we feel concern about their plight. Sometimes, when asked, we offer advice. We also provide support, and we help when we can.

However, when it comes to our own children, we often forget that the same laws apply. We tend to overreact. We may scream, yell, threaten, and intimidate them. As a result, we temporarily—and sometimes permanently—damage our relationships with them. They may begin to distrust us or put up defensive walls. Then we become perplexed when our children talk not to us but to others about their problems. Children confide in people who treat them with respect and who value their friendship. The simple truth is that family members would have many more friends inside the family if they treated each other the way they treated their good neighbors.

Applying the Good Neighbor Policy doesn't mean ignoring problems. Even when children make decisions that are harmful to themselves, there are ways we can be of help and still maintain a healthy, trusting relationship with them. Consider the following example:

During the second quarter of the seventh grade, Nate came home with a midquarter grade of D- in math. Since aptitude tests had consistently placed him in the 98th percentile, and since he received an A- his first quarter, this report got my undivided attention. Therefore, I invited myself to a meeting with Nate and his teacher. When I asked about the poor grade, Mrs. Jackson explained, "Nate has the ability, all right. But he's lazy. He talks during the entire class period, and he doesn't turn in his homework."

Nate looked at me with an expression on his face that said, "Okay, now you know. What are you going to do about it?"

"Nate, is that correct?"

"Yup," he said with a smile.

"So what do we do about it?" I asked.

Mrs. Jackson answered, "I don't know. I've tried everything that I can think of. He simply won't respond."

"Nate, what do you think we ought to do about it?"

"I don't know, Dad. Math isn't fun any more. It's a royal pain. Besides, I have other things to do."

"Well, it sounds as if you have a problem. You see, seventh-grade math is very important, because it's the foundation for all the math classes you take the rest of your life. In fact, it's so important for you to understand the basics that you can't progress without it.

"Now, the only way I know how to determine if you understand the material is to look at your grades. Therefore, if you don't get at least a B in the class, it means you don't understand the material well enough to go on to eighth-grade math. So you'll have the unique opportunity to take seventh-grade math again as an eighth grader." Nate turned white.

"Mrs. Jackson, do you have any eighth graders taking seventh-grade math right now?"

"Yes. One boy is taking it, and he hates it."

"Well, Nate, it seems that you have some decisions to make. I'm curious to see how it all turns out. If I can be of any help, let me know." I then thanked Mrs. Jackson, and we left.

Within one week Nate's math grade jumped to a B+. He got an A for the quarter, and he has excelled in the subject ever since.

Most of the time children know when they have made a mistake. When parents refuse to overreact and, at the same time, let children take responsibility for their own difficulties, the problems almost always get resolved. In the process, healthy parent-child relationships are maintained because mutual trust is built up, and self-confidence increases because children develop the ability to solve their own problems.

Children need a safe environment in which it's okay to make mistakes. In such an environment, they realize that they can talk about their problems and learn to deal with them without the fear of always being punished. If we continually punish children for telling us the truth, then we are really training children to lie to us. In short, parents need to make it safe for kids to share their concerns without the fear of being humiliated or embarrassed.

Of course, some problems are more serious than others; and sometimes problems arise that are very expensive to resolve. Even in those cases, the natural consequences the child faces because of those problems are usually enough to teach them sufficiently. Thus, the Good Neighbor Policy still applies, as illustrated by the experience of a father of three teenagers:

Our house was full of excitement that afternoon. Eric had the lead part in the school musical, which was opening tonight in less than three hours. Tomorrow was also Eric's eighteenth birthday, and true to form, he was trying to finish the last requirements for his Eagle Scout Award before the deadline.

As I sat on the living-room couch talking with my youngest son, I heard the back door slam. "Dad, can I talk with you for a minute? It's important!"

I walked into the kitchen and saw Eric, standing by the back door, his face flushed. "Hi, Eric. What's up?"

"I just wrecked the car."

"Are you okay?" I asked anxiously.

"Yes."

"Was anyone hurt?"

"No. But the front end of the car is all smashed up."

"What happened?"

It had been snowing all day, and the streets were extremely slick. While driving through a parking lot at less than five m.p.h., Eric put on the brakes. Unfortunately, the car slid underneath the back bumper of a pickup truck. The truck didn't get a scratch, but the front end of our car was wrecked.

We walked out to the driveway and looked at the car. I quietly estimated the cost of the damage at roughly fifteen hundred dollars. But I forced myself to smile and said, "Well, the front end has developed some real character since I last saw it."

"Yeah, I guess it has. You know, Dad, this is really embarrassing. Here I am, passing off my safety merit badge for my Eagle Scout Award, and I get in a wreck! What am I going to tell people?"

I was actually tempted to laugh. "Listen, Son, nobody was hurt, and that's the important thing."

"Won't our insurance rates go up?"

"Probably. We'll have to see. But we have more important things to worry about right now."

"Am I in trouble?"

"Did you mean to wreck the car?"

"No."

"Of course not. Accidents happen to all of us. We'll have to get the car fixed, but we can talk about the details later."

"Thanks, Dad."

Later that evening, after the musical had finished, I talked with the director. "Congratulations on how well your son did," she said.

"Thank you. He really enjoys it."

"I understand you had a little excitement around your house tonight. I don't know all the details of what happened, but Eric announced to the entire cast that he had just wrecked the family car. The kids all laughed, and then one of them said, 'I'll bet your parents were furious.'

"Eric said, 'No, they're not the least bit miffed.'

"'You mean they didn't yell at you?' asked another.

"'Nope.'

"'Are you grounded?'

"'Nope.'

"'Are you going to have to pay for the damage?'

"'I'm sure I will,' Eric said. 'I'll also have to pay the increased insurance premiums. But they didn't yell at me, and I didn't get into trouble. My dad just said that he was glad that nobody got hurt, and we can talk about the details later.'

"'Sounds like you've got some great folks.'

"Eric smiled and said, 'Yeah, they're awesome.'

"The kids couldn't believe it. None of them had ever had that kind of an experience with their parents. You really have a remarkable relationship with that boy. Few kids are so fortunate."

Taking time to think about the Good Neighbor Policy before we react can help us handle problems in a way that will prepare our children to become successful adults. Parents who consistently apply that policy in their homes find that their children grow up to behave like good neighbors, both inside and outside the family. Being good neighbors and treating others as good neighbors makes it much easier to love our neighbors as ourselves, particularly those neighbors who live within the walls of our own homes.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] L. Tom Perry, "Train Up a Child," Ensign, May 1983, 77; italics added.
[^2] Marion G. Romney, "Let Us Set in Order Our Own Houses," Ensign, January 1985, 5.
