R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

8

Teaching Children Obedience

"Dad, people always talk about spiritual experiences, but I don't get any. In fact, I've never had a revelation in my life."

That seemed like a legitimate concern for a fifteen-year-old boy. I was delighted that my son was finally ready to talk about such things. "Are you sure about that?" I asked.

"Sure, I'm sure."

"Why do you think that's the case?"

"I don't know. I understand the gospel pretty well, but spiritual experiences still aren't coming. Do you have any ideas?"

"Maybe," I said. "Mind if I ask you some questions?"

"Be my guest."

"How often do you read the scriptures privately—not with us as a family, but on your own?"

"Almost never."

"What about your prayers? Do you pray privately?"

"Not much anymore. I used to pray all the time, but I never got anything out of it. So I quit."

"How do you feel about going to church?"

"It's okay, I guess. I know I ought to, but it gets pretty boring."

"Do you go to early morning seminary?"

"Dad, you know I don't!"

I smiled. "Now that I think about it, you're right." I reached for the scriptures and read aloud the following: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." [D&C 130:20-21.]

I then said, "There's no reason whatsoever for you to be having spiritual experiences. You're not doing anything to receive them. You're only going through the motions, and that's not enough. Spiritual experiences will come when you decide to follow the Lord's program, and not until then. You say you want the Lord's blessings, but only on your terms, not his. Fortunately, that isn't the way the Lord works."

"That's not what happened to Alma and Paul. They didn't keep all the commandments, but the Lord gave them great manifestations anyway."

"True, they had their visions. But notice what they experienced. The angel didn't say to Alma, 'Behold, because of your faithfulness, you are about to have a wonderful, spiritual experience. Listen to the will of the Lord, and learn about the great mysteries of the kingdom.' What the angel said was, 'Seek to destroy the church no more' [Mosiah 27:16], and then he called Alma to repentance. In effect, the angel said, 'Look, if you want to destroy yourself, that's your business, and you have the freedom to do so; but stop trying to destroy the church of God in the process.' You remember how Alma suffered for two days and two nights?

"That's basically the same message the Savior gave to Paul. He said, 'Why persecutest thou me?' [Acts 9:4.] Paul had been having a problem seeing clearly with his natural eyes, but things came more into focus after he was blind for a while. He got a much different outlook on life. You see, Son, both Alma and Paul went through literal hell before they became instruments in God's hands."

"So it all hinges on obedience?"

"That's right. You have the freedom not to pray, not to study the scriptures, not to worship at church. It's your choice. But don't expect to be rewarded for doing so. If, on the other hand, you choose to keep the commandments, your Father in Heaven will bless you with the spiritual experiences you seek. It's up to you."

Teach Children to Obey the Lord's Commandments

Obedience is the key to personal righteousness and progression. It is also the key to personal revelation, to happiness, to freedom, and to a host of other blessings. Elder L. Tom Perry said, "The most important inner quality you can instill in a child is faith in God; the most important action a child can learn is obedience; the most powerful tool you have with which to teach a child is love." [^1] Obedience involves action. It is not enough to merely understand it. We must do it!

In teaching our children, most of us find that it is one thing to teach them the principles of the gospel, and it is something else to instill within them a desire to obey those principles. How we teach them obedience strongly influences their desire to obey their Father in Heaven. That is why Marion G. Romney wisely gave the following caution:

Whatever our method, however, we should remember that our teaching, to be successful and effective, must convince our children that living the gospel is the way to happiness. If they feel that the discipline, attitudes, and practices to which they are subject are arbitrary, that without reason they restrict their activities and keep them from enjoying life, they will conform only so long as we have them under our immediate influence. [^2]

When obedience is an enjoyable and rewarding experience, children learn to love the Lord and desire to keep his commandments. If, on the other hand, obedience becomes painful and restrictive, children will learn to hate the commandments and see them as unacceptable guidelines for behavior. When we make living the gospel enjoyable and fruitful, children are better able to learn first-hand that obedience need not be drudgery, that it need not be painful, and that it need not be restrictive.

As a junior in high school reported, "Ever since I was little, I have found it fun to live the gospel. I'm not sure what my parents did to teach that to me, but I have more freedom, greater opportunities, and fewer serious problems than my friends. I also feel more comfortable making mistakes, because I know that I have my family's support. Whatever I want to do that's worthwhile, they do all they can to help me."

We have a unique opportunity to make life either enjoyable or miserable for our children. The latter, unfortunately, is easy to do. If we continually criticize, badger, and nag them for not doing this or that, they will be miserable and devalue the things that are important to us. If, on the other hand, we support our children and show them the power of obedience in our own lives, they are more likely to value the things we see as important. We have the power to create either kind of climate. In this context, a young mother explained,

My husband and I fully understand that it's our responsibility as parents to create the right atmosphere for our children to grow and develop. So we work hard to make living the gospel an enjoyable experience. For example, we have fun going to and from church and singing the hymns. Even though we don't have much control over the sacrament meeting speakers, the little ones can quietly draw pictures, as long as they remain reverent. If attending church is a positive experience, they will want to keep going.

We also try to make family home evenings enjoyable. That means activities, music, lessons, and love. Learning the gospel doesn't have to be boring. When we teach our children gospel principles, we try to do it in a way that holds their attention. That doesn't mean that we water down the doctrine; we just try to make it entertaining. The bottom line is that we try to reward them for their obedience, knowing full well that the behaviors that get rewarded are the behaviors that continue. It is more of an attitude than anything in particular.

When learning is an enjoyable experience, children find it easier to remember gospel principles. Studying the gospel becomes more rewarding for them. For example, a mother of three reported how well she remembers one lesson her father delivered. The environment in which it was given was critical to how effectively it was understood.

From as early as I can remember, my father was either a bishop or a stake president. Fortunately, his job allowed him the flexibility to be with us every morning for breakfast. Each morning one of us selected his or her favorite scripture story, and Dad then read them to us, often dramatizing the story and hamming it up just a bit.

One morning he talked about Helaman's discussion with his son Corianton. I will never forget how I felt when Dad read the following words: "Behold, O my son, how great iniquity ye brought upon the Zoramites; for when they saw your conduct they would not believe in my words." [Alma 39:11.] He explained that the behavior of every member of our family determined whether he would be a successful stake president and whether the members would believe what he told them. I have never forgotten that important lesson, and since then I have wanted to keep the commandments. I knew my father loved me, and I didn't want to let him down.

There are also key times when children are especially receptive to learning the lessons of obedience. The times just before priesthood ordinances are performed are such occasions. Consider, for example, the experience that a father of two children had with his own father:

Before my baptism and ordinations to the various offices in the priesthood, Dad sat down with me and explained the responsibilities and obligations I was about to take upon myself. In each of these conversations, he said something like "Now, Son, this is an important step in your life. Once you participate in this ordinance, your Father in Heaven will expect much more from you than he has in the past because you've made covenants with him that require greater levels of obedience. With this ordinance also come greater blessings from the Lord. But you must fulfill your responsibilities and keep your covenants in order to get them. All of the blessings associated with this ordinance depend upon your obedience to the commandments. So if you aren't willing to be obedient to the commandments, don't participate in the ordinance." The genius of those discussions was that they took place before the ordinance was performed, and I was given a choice. Each time I chose to participate, which meant that I also chose to keep the commandments. But my commitment to do so came first. That made all the difference in the world.

Despite the wickedness that exists in the world today, living the gospel becomes easier when children understand and accept the fact that obedience is not always convenient. As one mother explained,

I continuously explain to my kids that the Lord did not guarantee that living the gospel would always be either fun or convenient, which is one of the major reasons some of their friends both inside and outside the Church don't always keep the commandments. Children constantly have to choose between living celestial or telestial laws. The joy that comes from living celestial laws will not come easily, but it will come.

Thus, teaching children obedience can be challenging. However, there are some basic things that we can do to help our children gain the desire to keep the commandments. A mother of four described her parents' method in the following way:

There were three things that contributed to my wanting to keep the commandments. First, my folks kept the commandments themselves. They set the example for me. They didn't ask me to do something they didn't do themselves. Second, they expected me to keep the commandments. Third, they loved me. There was never any doubt in my mind about that. And I loved them as well. It is always easier to follow someone who does the right thing and loves you.

Teaching the principle of obedience should begin at the earliest age possible. President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

Of course there should be prayer and faith and love and obedience to God in the home. It is the duty of parents to teach their children these saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, so that they will know why they are to be baptized and that they may be impressed in their hearts with a desire to continue to keep the commandments of God after they are baptized, that they may come back into his presence. Do you, my good brethren and sisters, want your families, your children; do you want to be sealed to your fathers and your mothers before you? . . . If so, then you must begin by teaching at the cradle-side. You are to teach by example as well as precept. [^3]

Obedience to the Lord's commandments brings spiritual power into our lives, and under such conditions, we can enjoy profound spiritual experiences. Every devoted member of the Church has the right to receive revelation from the Lord. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "No man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator." [^4] Therefore, we need to help our children understand the great blessings that come from obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel and teach them how to receive the revelations God has promised. As the Lord said, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say." (D&C 82:10.) When our children are obedient, they place themselves in a position to call upon the powers of heaven.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] David O. McKay, "Unity of Purpose," 34.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, "Agency and Control," Ensign, May 1983, 66.
[^3] Boyd K. Packer, "Revelation in a Changing World," Ensign, November 1989, 15.
[^4] Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 4:297-98.
