R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

9

Follow the Brethren

My father took his place at the pulpit and looked over the congregation for a full thirty seconds without saying a word. Finally he spoke. "As you are aware, there has been a lot of talk lately about our new bishop and whether he's really qualified to serve. Well, I think we have a lot of evidence that he isn't. He's too young, and he has had no administrative experience. I am equally certain that I am the most qualified man in this ward to serve as your bishop."

Less than a month had passed since the new bishop was sustained, and the gossip was rampant. The bishop, who had grown up in our community, was twenty-five years old and had been married only a year. Most of the ward members had watched him grow up. Some had even been his baby-sitters. They had tolerated his irreverence and put up with his rudeness and pranks. Now he was their bishop.

Today was our first regular testimony meeting since the new bishopric was installed. For the first ten minutes, nobody said a word. Then Dad had walked to the pulpit. It was one of those events that I will never forget.

Dad continued speaking. "Let me tell you why I am the most qualified man to serve as bishop. I have been an administrator all my professional life, and I'm good at it. I've already been a bishop once. I've been on the stake high council and also held other responsible stake and ward positions. I love the youth in this ward and have a good relationship with them. I also know almost everyone here today very well; I love you dearly and feel the same measure of love in return. Furthermore, I have a Ph.D. Therefore, I submit to you that nobody is more qualified than I am to serve as your bishop."

Nobody moved a muscle. Every eye was riveted on the pulpit. The babies didn't even cry. Dad then said, "But as you are aware, I wasn't called. Why? Because decisions like that aren't made on the basis of someone's outward qualifications. Bishops are called by revelation. So it doesn't matter whether our new bishop meets my own private set of standards. He is obviously qualified, or he wouldn't have been selected. The Lord called him to lead us, and I sustain him in that call. Furthermore, I pledge my support to him and will also do everything in my power to help him succeed." He then bore his testimony about the truthfulness of the gospel and sat down.

Supporting Church Leaders

President David O. McKay said, "The greatest safeguard we have for unity and strength in the Church is found in the priesthood, by honoring and respecting it." [^1] It follows, then, that we have the sacred obligation to teach our children to support and to sustain Church leaders. Without the conviction that leaders are called by revelation, a member could not fully support them. Indeed, a member's spiritual survival depends on that conviction, for there will always be detractors whose purpose is to destroy faith and undermine the Church. The father of a sixteen-year-old boy recounted the following experience:

Recently the father of Bill, my son's best friend, had some serious problems with the Church. As a result, my son, a sophomore in high school, was continuously bombarded with criticism about the Church. Although he lacked the background to effectively address the man's concerns, he didn't hesitate to stand up for the truth. The positive side of it was that these challenges provided numerous opportunities for my son and me to have some lengthy gospel discussions.

After one particularly confronting evening, my son raised some interesting questions. "Dad, what about blind obedience?"

"Sounds like you had a pretty tough night," I responded.

"It was awful. I didn't know what to say to him."

I reached for a recent copy of the Ensign. "This might help. Let me read you something that Elder Packer said in general conference: 'Latter-day Saints are not obedient because they are compelled to be obedient. They are obedient because they know certain spiritual truths and have decided, as an expression of their own individual agency, to obey the commandments of God. . . . Those who talk of blind obedience may appear to know many things, but they do not understand the doctrines of the gospel. There is an obedience that comes from a knowledge of the truth that transcends any external form of control. We are not obedient because we are blind, we are obedient because we can see.' [^2] The Lord never expects blind obedience from anyone. We can go to him at any time and get the answers that we desire."

"But Dad, his arguments sound so logical. When I tell him I know the gospel is true, he just laughs at me. How can you tell the difference between someone who is really struggling to know the truth and someone who is out to undermine the Church?"

"There are several ways. First, Jesus said in 3 Nephi 11:29, 'He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil.' That tells us something about who's behind an argument. Second, Elder Packer said that 'two things characterize [antagonists]: they are always irritated by the word obedience, and always they question revelation.'" [^3]

"But Dad, we know that Church leaders aren't perfect. Bill's dad said it's foolish to follow someone when he's made a mistake."

"Yes, our leaders sometimes do make mistakes. But we have a sacred responsibility to follow them anyway."

"How is that different from obeying blindly?"

"Brigham Young said that he once found himself being critical of the way the Prophet Joseph handled some financial matters. Even though those thoughts lasted less than sixty seconds, the 'spirit of revelation manifested to [him] that if [he] was to harbor a thought in [his] heart that Joseph could be wrong in anything, [he] would begin to lose confidence in him' to the point that he could not believe anything that Joseph said. Brigham concluded, 'Though I [knew] that Joseph was a human being and subject to err, still it was none of my business to look after his faults. . . . It was not my prerogative to call him in question with regard to any act of his life. He was God's servant, and not mine.' [^4] You see, Brigham Young understood that you cannot criticize God's prophet without criticizing God."

"Does that mean we just ignore mistakes, even if they're serious?"

"Son, let me give you another example. Assume for just a minute that you and some of your friends are climbing a mountain. It's a dangerous undertaking, so you tie a rope around each of your waists to protect yourselves, just in case someone falls. The leader of the group is an excellent mountain climber. He has climbed this mountain many times before, and he knows the way. Now suppose you're almost to the top when the leader steps on something he thinks is solid, only to find that it isn't. He slips, and there he is, hanging over the edge from the rope.

"What is your responsibility? Do you say, 'I can't believe it. You're supposed to be our leader. You're supposed to know the way. How could anyone be so stupid as to slip and fall like that in front of everybody? You obviously don't deserve to lead this group!' So you take out a pocket knife, cut the rope, and say, 'So long!'"

"Dad, that's sick!"

"Of course it's sick. It's also obvious what you'd do. You'd pull him back up, make certain that he's okay, and encourage him to continue leading you. Why? Because in spite of his mistake, he's still the best qualified person to help you reach the top."

"Okay. I have another question. The Prophet Joseph said that a prophet is only a prophet when he's acting as such. How do you know whether the President of the Church is speaking as a prophet or as just a man?"

"Son, I've found that if you apply two simple tests, you'll never be deceived. First, the statement will be consistent with what's taught in the scriptures. Second, the Spirit will bear witness to you that the doctrine is true. You have the right to receive a spiritual witness from the Lord about the truthfulness of any doctrine taught, regardless of the source. These are just two of the safeguards the Lord has prepared against deception."

When the prophet of the Lord speaks, children have a right to know that he is speaking for and in behalf of their Heavenly Father. That means that neither parents nor their children should ever find fault with the Lord's prophet. The same principle applies to local authorities as well. As President McKay said, "It is one of the most poisonous things that can be introduced into the home of a Latter-day Saint—this murmuring against presidents of stakes, high councilors, Sunday School superintendents, presidents of high priests' quorums, seventies, elders, priests, teachers, and deacons." [^5] President Gordon B. Hinckley also warned us against criticism of local leaders:

Unless there is loyalty toward the bishop and stake president on a local level, there will be an absence of harmony, there will be suspicion and hesitation to serve with fidelity, there will be that kind of division which is always destructive of faith. Let it ever be remembered that no President of this church, no counselor in the Presidency, no General Authority, no member of a stake presidency or of a bishopric or of an elders quorum presidency is there because he wished to be there and requested the privilege. Each is there because he was "called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (A of F 5.) Loyalty to leadership is a cardinal requirement of all who serve in the army of the Lord. A house divided against itself cannot stand. (See Mark 3:25.) Unity is basic and essential. [^6]

Thus, parents who find fault with their leaders place themselves and their children in a very dangerous position. As Dallin H. Oaks explained, "The primary reason we are commanded to avoid criticism is to preserve our own spiritual well-being, not to protect the person whom we would criticize." [^7] The following experience of a bishop illustrates the point:

Several months ago I talked with a man who was offended by something our stake president had said to him. After he told me his side of the story, I said, "If that had happened to me, and I had the same background and experience you have had, I suspect that I'd feel the same way you do. Have you talked with him about this?"

"No."

"Why not?" I asked.

"Because it won't do any good. He doesn't listen."

"I suggest that you talk with him. If you choose not to do that, then I suggest that you forgive him, forget about this whole matter, and get on with living."

"Why would I do that?"

"The Church means a lot to you, doesn't it?"

"Yes. It's my life."

"When you criticize the stake president," I said, "you are really undermining the Church."

"That's nonsense. He's a public official. It comes with the territory. If he makes a mistake, I have a right to call him on it."

"There is a difference between Church officials and other public figures. Let me read you something Elder Dallin H. Oaks said: 'Criticism is particularly objectionable when it is directed toward Church authorities, general or local. Jude condemns those who "speak evil of dignities" (Jude 1:8). Evil speaking of the Lord's anointed is in a class by itself. It is one thing to depreciate a person who exercises corporate power or even government power. It is quite another thing to criticize or depreciate a person for the performance of an office to which he or she has been called of God. It does not matter that the criticism is true. As Elder George F. Richards, President of the Council of the Twelve, said in a conference in April 1947, "When we say anything bad about the leaders of the Church, whether true or false, we tend to impair their influence and their usefulness and are thus working against the Lord and his cause."' [^8]

"Don't give me that stuff. You're just trying to protect him."

"Not so. Listen to the rest of the statement: 'The counsel against speaking evil of Church leaders is not so much for the benefit of the leaders as it is for the spiritual well-being of members who are prone to murmur and find fault. The Church leaders I know are durable people. They made their way successfully in a world of unrestrained criticism before they received their current callings. They have no personal need for protection; they seek no personal immunities from criticism—constructive or destructive. They only seek to declare what they understand to be the word of the Lord to his people.' [^9]

"If you continue to murmur and find fault, you'll lose the spirit and become inactive in the Church. You'll also put your family in jeopardy."

"That will never happen to me. I have a testimony, and I'll stay active in spite of him."

Six months later the man and his entire family had left the Church.

Criticism of Church leaders damages the faith and spiritual development of children. The testimonies of most children are not well grounded in Church doctrine, and many children do not have sufficient wisdom and experience to differentiate between Church doctrine and the behavior of Church leaders. Thus, when parents ridicule, condemn, or find fault with leaders, it can be, in their children's eyes, the equivalent of criticizing Church doctrine or the Church itself. And most children's fragile testimonies cannot withstand such an attack without suffering permanent damage.

In citing research on the subject, Gene Dalton observed, "The Mormon parents, who had apparently been reared in active homes themselves, constantly complained and criticized Church authorities, but they never left the Church nor abandoned its teachings as guides in their lives. They were too much a product of their own upbringing to do so. But their children, who had heard the chafing and the criticisms at the dinner table all their lives, did leave—to the partial dismay of their parents." [^10]

Rearing children is such an important yet unpredictable challenge that, to be successful, most of us need all the help we can get. We never know who will be called to teach or lead our children. So to destroy the credibility of a future leader or teacher is of such serious consequence as to hardly go unnoticed by the Almighty in the eternal scheme of things. Under such conditions, the law of the harvest often comes into play: "Whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap." (D&C 6:33.)

Several years ago, a counselor in a Young Women's Presidency had a serious conflict with the Scoutmaster over the scheduling of some church facilities. Although the Scouts had previously scheduled the building, the counselor insisted that the activity for all the girls in the ward took priority. The Scoutmaster disagreed and refused to change the schedule. An appeal to the bishopric resulted in a decision in favor of the Scoutmaster.

The woman took the decision personally and singled out the Scoutmaster for being at fault. She shared her feelings with anyone who would listen. Unfortunately, her most captive audience sat around her dinner table each evening; and for two years she consistently pointed out the man's shortcomings to her four teenage children.

Two-and-one-half years after the incident, the Scoutmaster was called to serve as the bishop. At about the same time, the woman began having trouble with her oldest daughter. When the problems became quite serious, this woman, now repentant, went to her bishop for assistance. However, when he sat down with the daughter, she refused to even listen—he had absolutely no credibility with the girl. The continuous diet of criticism had rendered him powerless.

Regardless of the seriousness of our problems with others or the depth of our feelings about those problems, it is in our and our children's best interests to avoid criticism. On the other hand, supporting Church leaders helps to create an environment that encourages leaders to successfully fulfill their stewardship, thereby blessing the lives of those they serve. Children need to know that their leaders can help them; and both the children and the leaders are empowered when they have faith in each other. A former branch president shared the following incident:

The young man was just completing his Ph.D. and was contemplating a move to another state. The problem he presented was complex. I told him that I had no idea what he should do.

"I can't accept that," he said. "You're my branch president. You're entitled to receive inspiration for me. I have a serious problem, and I don't know what to do about it. When I prayed, I felt prompted to come to you for counsel."

I was touched by his faith. As I bowed my head in silent prayer, the answer immediately came to me. We discussed how the solution to his problem could be implemented, and he left the meeting confident that he was on course and that the counsel he had received was inspired. His faith in the divine nature of my call made it possible for me to provide the assistance he needed.

When we teach our children to support and sustain Church leaders, we make it possible for them to draw on the important spiritual resources that leaders can provide. Inspired leaders can help only if we sustain them and listen to their counsel. Thus, a testimony that they are "called of God by prophecy" allows them to serve as instruments in the Lord's hands to bless our families.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] David O. McKay, "Unity of Purpose," 34.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, "Agency and Control," Ensign, May 1983, 66.
[^3] Boyd K. Packer, "Revelation in a Changing World," Ensign, November 1989, 15.
[^4] Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 4:297-98.
[^5] David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953), 143.
[^6] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Keeping the Temple Holy," Ensign, May 1990, 51.
[^7] Dallin H. Oaks, "Criticism," Ensign, February 1987, 68.
[^8] 8. Oaks, "Criticism," 70.
[^9] 9. Oaks, "Criticism," 70.
[^10] 10. Gene W. Dalton, "Insight and Responsibility," Commissioner's Lecture Series, 1974, Church Educational System, 4.
