R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

10

Let Them Make Choices

As I walked up the front steps, I could hear someone yelling inside. I took a deep breath, rang the doorbell, clutched the fast-offering envelopes, and waited. Blair yanked open the front door with all of the strength available in his eleven-year-old frame. "What do you want?" he demanded.

"I'm here to collect fast offerings."

"Mom, Mike is here to collect fast offerings, and I'm not going."

"It's your decision," his mother said. "You don't have to go to church if you don't want to. You've been taught right from wrong. So make up your own mind." Sister Smith then looked at me, smiled, and said, "Hi. Thank you for coming. I've been expecting you." She took the check off the piano and placed it in the fast-offering envelope.

Blair continued, "I'm not going, and you can't do anything about it."

"You're right, and I don't intend to try. You can do whatever you want. I'm going to church because that's where Heavenly Father wants me to be. You have to make up your own mind."

"Why do I always have to go to church? I hate church."

She answered, "You're not being forced to go to church. It's up to you whether you go. If you don't want to go, then stay home." She handed me the fast-offering envelope, smiled, and said, "Thank you very much for coming."

"I told you that I'm not going. I want to stay home and read. If I have to, I'll even read the Book of Mormon. But I'm not going to church."

"Okay, I got the message, so you don't need to say any more. The decision is yours. You know what your Father in Heaven expects of you. When you were baptized, you promised him that you would keep his commandments. You have to decide if you're really going to do that. I'm going to church. If you want, I'll save you a seat. But the choice is yours."

"I told you, I'm not going." Blair then threw the comics on the living-room sofa and stomped out of the room.

As I was leaving, I asked, "What was that all about?"

"He's just trying to grow up. I hope and pray that I live long enough to raise that boy—there's not another person on this earth who understands him."

An hour later, as I was walking out of the ward clerk's office, I was surprised to see Blair standing by the water fountain. "I thought you weren't coming to church today."

Blair smiled at me, shrugged his shoulders, and said, "I changed my mind."

Teach Children to Make Choices

The gift of agency is universal. It comes from God to everyone. Parents have the responsibility to teach their children to exercise that gift properly by making right decisions; the quality of their lives, both in this world and in the next, depends upon it. To develop decision-making skills, children need practice; and the most effective way to get that practice is to have abundant opportunities to make choices. For most children, the choosing process can begin very early. As one mother explained:

I start giving my children choices as soon as they can understand what I'm saying. "Do you want half a glass of milk or all the way to the top?" "Do you want to take your bath right now or in a few minutes?" "Do you want plain water or bubble bath?" "Do you want to wear your pink pajamas or your blue ones?" "Do you want to wear your white shirt or your blue one to church today?" "Which bedtime story would you like me to read?" These are the kind of choices that I give my children before they turn two. Between two and four years old, I expand the choices. That way I'm not constantly having to say "no." As they get older, the opportunities to choose increase.

In providing choices, however, I always make certain that I can live with whatever they decide. If they then refuse to make a decision, I will make it for them. In fact, I never give my children a choice unless I'm willing to make it for them. They want parents who are strong enough to take care of them.

Providing children with choices does not mean that they have unrestricted freedom. Clear limits need to be established, particularly as they relate to physical and spiritual health; and children need to understand exactly what those limits are. To illustrate this point, consider the following statement by a father about his son:

As we were riding home from town the other day, my eleven-year-old son asked me to stop the car so he could run the rest of the way home. "Where are you going to run?" I asked.

"Oh, up through the neighborhood."

"You can run straight down this road for two miles, or you can ride the two miles with me in the car. Either one is fine with me."

"I want to run through the neighborhood."

"What are your choices?" I asked.

"But Dad, that isn't fair."

"What are your choices?"

"I don't want to do either of them."

I smiled at him again and said, "Son, what are your choices?"

He smiled back at me and said, "I'll run down the road."

Thus, as long as our children's behavior falls within acceptable boundaries, they can be given a great deal of freedom in which to grow and develop. For example, one father said:

When my children are little, there are areas in which they don't get to choose. We don't give them a choice about playing on the roof, or entertaining themselves with loaded guns, or taking dangerous drugs. They also don't get to make choices about going to church, kneeling in family prayer, attending family home evening, or keeping the Word of Wisdom. It's not that we force them to do go to church or to pray. We just do it, and they go along. The consequences of unwise decisions in those areas are simply too expensive; they are too young, and they lack the experience to make sound decisions.

Fortunately, most decisions children make don't fall into the "life and death" category. So if they make mistakes, we and they can live with them. Let them make mistakes because that's the secret of learning—making mistakes and learning from them. Remember, the duty we have as parents is to rear responsible children who are well grounded in gospel principles and who have strong testimonies, so that when they go out into the world, they can make a contribution. We want them to be assets, rather than liabilities. Children can't learn to be responsible without making mistakes. Just keep the price affordable.

What does affordable mean? Allowing them to get hit by a car while playing in the street or letting them poison themselves is something we can't afford. Going without dessert or getting into trouble with a playmate next door, however, is affordable. One good thing about children making mistakes when they're young is that their mistakes are usually inexpensive, in the sense that little damage is done, and they can easily get up and try again. An elementary-school principal explained it this way:

A girl forgets her homework, and what's the price tag? She gets a zero in the teacher's grade book. Can she pick herself up and try again? Sure. . . . What if Karen forgets her field trip slip? She doesn't get to go. Can she pick herself up and try again, or is she a disadvantaged student from then on?

What about a forgotten lunch? There we're into serious business, because there's no more emotional issue in any school in the land than a child who did not get his lunch. According to pediatricians I've consulted, there's not one documented case of a child dying between noon and 3:00 P.M. because he forgot his lunch! Also, it's interesting to note that in all the years we offered vegetables and salad to students who forgot their lunches, not one kid ever took us up on it! [^1]

Parents sometimes overreact when their children don't adhere perfectly to gospel standards, particularly when they are younger. As long as the price is affordable, however, there is wisdom in letting the children learn from their mistakes. A prudent stepmother told us the following:

One Sunday afternoon my thirteen-year-old daughter got a call from her best friend. Several girls had pulled together a swimming party, and she wanted to go. She pleaded, "Mom, I know all the reasons why I shouldn't, but I want to do it just this once!"

"I don't think it is a wise decision, but it's up to you. You decide."

"Okay, then I'll go," she said.

Three hours later, when she returned, she was quiet and pensive. I said, "Hi. How did things go?"

She responded with an unenthusiastic, "Fine."

"Do you want to talk about it?"

"Nope."

Later that evening, as we had our usual bedtime chat, she said, "Mom, it wasn't worth it to break the Sabbath. I didn't have that much fun. I felt sort of a sick, let-down feeling. I don't think I ever want to do that again."

I said, "Honey, I'm glad you've made that decision. Heavenly Father loves us and knew what he was doing when he asked us to keep the Sabbath Day holy."

"I wish you had said I couldn't go."

"Would you have learned anything if I had done that?"

"Probably not."

Six months later she joined a volleyball team at the local recreation center. After the first practice, she learned that, due to scheduling problems, the team would have to practice on Sunday. She promptly quit the team. When the teammates pushed her for a reason, she said smilingly, "My religion teaches me that I shouldn't do things like that on Sunday, and I want to live my religion." At the dinner table that night, she said, "I learned my lesson six months ago. I'm never going to let something like that happen again."

Making decisions is an important factor in growth and development. The more children apply gospel principles to their decisions, the better they become at seeing how the gospel affects their lives. As parents, we can hope that, by the time they're teenagers, they'll have had so much experience that the first thing they think of when major decisions come along is, "What impact will this have on me?" But that doesn't mean they'll like it. As one mother cautioned:

Don't expect to be popular with your children when you stop telling them "No." When my children come to me with a problem or a request, I try to discuss the implications and explain to them what I see as the costs. I then tell them, "I've taught you the best that I can. Now you need to make the decision. I'm sure you'll do the right thing." My son once said, "I hate that. You never tell us what to do. We always have to make up our own minds." He got the point, even though he didn't like it very well.

Even with practice, children will make mistakes. When that happens, they need a safe place to learn the important lessons that those mistakes can offer. As children get older, the stakes increase, and the cost of poor choices becomes much more expensive. One father explained that his two daughters, who graduated from high school in the late 1980s, had made more life-and-death decisions—decisions about drugs, sex, alcohol, fast cars, careers—in a week than he had in all of his high-school years. When he was in high school, he couldn't have bought hard drugs if he had wanted to, and there was no such thing as AIDS. Given the challenges children face today, it is critical that they learn how to make proper decisions.

Those youth who have had experience with making decisions understand the degree to which they control their lives; and that is a very freeing knowledge. They have learned that the quality of their decisions determines the quality of their lives. When they realize that they are in control, they often find it easier to take counsel from others, particularly their parents. A senior in high school shared the following incident:

One night last year I asked my parents if I could go to a canyon party. My mom said she had an uneasy feeling about it and didn't think it was wise for me to go. As always, however, she said I could go if I wanted.

My parents almost never say no to me, so when they do tell me no, I listen, because it means that they usually know something I don't. I've also learned from experience that when my mother says she has an uneasy feeling about something, I'd better pay very close attention. So I chose to stay home.

The next day I learned that there had been an auto accident and several of the kids were badly injured. Imagine the impact of that decision on my life. I will be forever grateful that I listened to my mom.

Having the freedom to choose is empowering. If given a choice between feeling powerful and powerless, people will choose feeling powerful. The parent-child relationship, unfortunately, has many dynamics built into it that cause children to feel powerless. Children, like adults, need to feel that they are in control of their lives. Generally, the more they feel in control of their own lives, the less they feel a need to rebel against their parents. Rebellion is a power struggle, whether it occurs at age two or age sixteen. The only way to win that struggle is not to play. A returned missionary described his feelings this way:

Shortly after I was ordained a teacher, I began to struggle with the notion of going on a mission. I wasn't sure that that was what I wanted to do with my life. Two years is a long time. One Sunday afternoon I defiantly asked my father, "Do I have to go on a mission?"

"No," he quietly replied. "You don't have to go. That is strictly your choice. You can stay home if you want to."

I still remember how I felt when he said that. All of a sudden I realized that I had nothing to rebel against. From that moment on, going on a mission was never an issue for me.

Often it takes very little to give children the message that they are in control of their lives. A wise father did it in the following way:

When Jim was a sophomore, he wanted to grow a beard. Unfortunately, the only thing he could produce was a silly-looking goatee. One day one of his female friends asked me, "How come you don't make your son shave that little beard?"

"Oh, I don't know. I guess because it makes him happy." What she didn't realize was that the goatee gave him the message that he was in control of his life. What a tiny price to pay to let him know that he was in control! Now he's more inclined to listen to me on other things. He has since said several times, "Dad understands me. He let me grow a goatee. That shows he trusts and respects me." And people listen to others whom they trust and respect.

One of the major secrets of happy parenting is understanding how to avoid power struggles with children. The terrible two's is a power issue. Teenage rebellion is a power issue. The easiest way we know of to avoid power struggles is to provide children with choices. One couple handled it this way:

My wife and I decided early in our marriage that when our children came along, we wanted to minimize the points of conflict as much as possible. I have learned that if you let the children win a hefty portion of the time, they're going to honor your requests for the things that are important to you. On the other hand, if you fight them, they're going to fight you in return. So as a result, we have tried to confine ourselves to the basic things that we can't give in on. The Word of Wisdom is one of them. Being morally clean, keeping the Sabbath Day holy, and being honest are others. Almost everything else is open. If my children want to cut their hair off and be bald, it's their choice. If they want to dye their hair purple, I could live with that. They can dress any way they want to, provided they're modest. They are free to do what they want, as long as what they do won't keep them out of the celestial kingdom.

To get a perspective from the receiving end, we interviewed this couple's oldest son, a senior in high school. He told us the following:

I realized very early that I was in control of my life. I also learned that the kinds of choices I made determined the quality of my life. My parents taught me that I have complete control over my actions, but I have no control over the consequences of those actions. I can choose how I feel. If I want to be angry, I have that freedom. If I want to be happy, I can do that too. I've watched people who live the gospel, and I've watched people who don't. I learned that those who live the gospel are much happier than the rest. People who make good decisions are happier than those who don't. Since I want to have as great a life as possible, I try to think in terms of the long run, particularly on gospel related matters.

People have asked me why I don't rebel. They don't understand. I don't have anything to rebel against. I have the freedom to choose, and my folks will still love me if I make mistakes. How do I know that? Because I have made mistakes, and they still love me. So it's hard for me to identify with kids who are trying to find themselves. I know who I am. I am a son of God, and I have the freedom to choose how I want to live my life. I have chosen to live a good life. That means that I follow the teachings of Christ. It's really very simple.

Obviously, rearing great children is more than merely providing them with choices. There has to be a lot of love, a lot of effective teaching, and a lot of praying. Life, however, is full of decisions; and the quality of our lives depends upon the quality of our decisions. Therefore, the more experience children have in making choices when the price tags are affordable, the better they will be in making good choices when they start facing the life-and-death decisions.

---
Notas:
[^1] David O. McKay, "Unity of Purpose," 34.
