R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

Tools for Teaching the Gospel in the Home

Footnotes

11

The Power of Prayer

As I leaned over the bed to kiss Matthew good night, I suddenly felt a sick feeling come over me. I immediately ran downstairs and said to my husband, "Honey, where's Rebecca?" He turned pale and said, "Good heavens! We left her at the church."

Our two oldest sons had played in a basketball game earlier that night. At 9:30 P.M. we piled seven of our eight children in the van and drove home. Not until I had put our two youngest children to bed a few minutes later did I realize that our six-year-old daughter and her girlfriend weren't with us. On the way back to the church, my husband said, "From now on I'm going to be much more understanding of Joseph and Mary for leaving Jesus in Jerusalem."

When we arrived at the church house, we found the lights off and the doors locked. We fully expected the children to be inside, but a search of the building proved otherwise. By that time I was in a state of panic.

As we walked out of the building, I saw Rebecca and her friend running across the parking lot toward us. I had never been so happy to see that little girl in my life. I hugged her so hard I thought she'd break.

On the way home Rebecca told us what had happened. Once she realized we had gone, she and her friend started to walk home. As they were crossing a park near the church, our daughter asked her friend to kneel down with her and pray. Rebecca said, "I told Heavenly Father that we were cold, all alone, and really scared, and I asked him to help us get home safely. As soon as I finished praying, something told me to go back to the church and wait, so we came back. I was so glad to see our van that I started to cry and came running." Thankfully somewhere along the way, my little girl had learned the importance of prayer and was convinced that she could rely on her Father in Heaven for help. Childlike faith is a powerful force for good in the world.

Teaching Children to Pray

Prayers are sacred experiences that provide opportunities to communicate with God and to pour out the righteous desires of our hearts. Since gaining a testimony without prayer is impossible, we have a sacred responsibility to teach our children how to pray, both publicly and privately.

Public prayers are offered in public settings. These prayers are formal, such as the opening and closing prayers in a worship service, when we speak for a congregation. Such prayers should be specific and relate to the needs of the people attending the meeting. They should also be kept short: "Two minutes will open any kind of meeting, and a half minute will close it." [^1]

Private prayers, on the other hand, include family prayers, blessings on the food, and our secret prayers. Family prayers and private prayers are much more personal and can last longer—private prayers can be as long as we choose. Most of the instruction we receive in the scriptures relates to these secret prayers. Throughout the scriptures the Lord counsels us to pray continuously. Nothing in the gospel is better designed to keep our attention on God, on righteousness, and on fulfilling our covenants and obligations than prayer. [^2]

Great blessings pour into the lives of children who learn to pray. Parents who teach their children to pray have unique opportunities to teach gospel principles and to implant in young hearts a desire to receive the blessings the Lord has in store. As a father of seven explained:

Every night and morning, as I was growing up, I knelt at my mother's knee and asked my Heavenly Father to help me be worthy to go on a mission and to be married in the temple. Between the time I turned two and the time I was ordained a deacon, I had asked the Lord for that blessing over seven thousand times. As a result, there was no way I would stay home and not serve a mission. Similarly, there was no way I would get married anywhere but in the temple. That desire had been implanted in me when I was little, and I wanted to live worthy of that great blessing.

When children are taught that God is a kind and loving Father who desires to bless them, they are also taught that they can freely discuss their problems and concerns with him. Under such conditions, parents can learn a great deal about the problems that face their children by listening carefully to their prayers. For instance, a young mother said:

One night I knelt beside our seven-year-old son as he began his evening prayers. About halfway through he said, "Heavenly Father, please help me with my times tables, 'cause I'm really scared." He then broke into tears. After he calmed down, he told me that he had fallen behind the rest of his second-grade class in learning his times tables. He was upset and embarrassed to the point that he didn't want to go to school anymore. And this kid loved school.

I was stunned. Neither my husband nor I had any idea that he had a problem with arithmetic. We began working with him, and within three weeks he had caught up with the rest of the class. That experience taught me an important lesson. Since that time I have paid careful attention to what my children say when they talk to their Father in Heaven.

It is one thing to teach children the mechanics of prayer, and quite another to teach them that Heavenly Father hears their prayers and will answer them in the way that is for their best good. Children who understand that their Father in Heaven loves them also understand that they can rely on him for help in the everyday difficulties of life. They develop the kind of faith that makes prayer so powerful. A father of four children shared the following experience:

I had driven all day to get to Targhee National Park at the base of Wyoming's Teton Mountains, where my family had been camping for several days. As I got out of the car, my eleven-year-old daughter greeted me excitedly, "Daddy, it really works. We were in trouble, and Heavenly Father answered our prayers. Heather (her cousin) and I were hiking up in the mountains. We took the wrong trail, and after about an hour we were out in the middle of nowhere, and we didn't have a clue about where we were. We knelt down, and I asked Heavenly Father if we were on the right trail. At first I didn't feel anything, but after a few seconds, I knew we were on the wrong trail and that we should go back as quickly as we could. So we ran all the way back, and Heavenly Father helped us get home safely."

"Heavenly Father really loves you," I said.

"Yeah, he really does, Daddy. I know that."

Sometimes, however, prayers don't always get answered so quickly, particularly when they relate to gaining a testimony of the gospel. For most people, the process of gaining a testimony is gradual and extends over a period of years. This is even true for prophets. Note, for example, President David O. McKay's experience:

One day in my youth I was hunting cattle. While climbing a steep hill, I stopped to let my horse rest, and there, once again, an intense desire came over me to receive a manifestation of the truth of the restored gospel. I dismounted, threw my reins over my horse's head, and there under a serviceberry bush I prayed that God would declare to me the truth of his revelation to Joseph Smith. I am sure that I prayed fervently and sincerely and with as much faith as a young boy could muster.

At the conclusion of the prayer, I arose from my knees, threw the reins over my faithful pony's head, and got into the saddle. As I started along the trail again, I remember saying to myself: "No spiritual manifestation has come to me. If I am true to myself, I must say I am just the same 'old boy' that I was before I prayed."

The Lord did not see fit to give me an answer on that occasion, but in 1899, after I had been appointed president of the Scottish Conference, the spiritual manifestation for which I had prayed as a boy in my teens came as a natural sequence to the performance of duty. [^3]

There are also times when the answer we seek is not consistent with the mind and will of the Lord. Thus, children, as well as their parents, must be willing to take no for an answer, knowing that a wise Heavenly Father will do what is best for them. That is not always easy, particularly when the lives of loved ones hang in the balance. In recalling one of the greatest tragedies of his life, a man said:

As long as I live, I will remember sitting on the front row of the Garland Tabernacle, with my grandmother on one side, and my seven-year-old sister on the other, looking over my mother's white velvet casket at Bishop J. Roscoe Hunt, who was speaking from the pulpit. I had turned fourteen three months earlier. My three younger sisters were ten, seven, and three. The previous six days had been the worst of my life. I felt like my entire world had fallen apart. I had prayed, as I had never prayed in my life, that my mother's life would be spared. But she died.

Bishop Hunt said, "Sometimes we don't understand why the Lord doesn't answer our prayers the way we want them answered. A father had two daughters. One was married to a farmer, and the other to a potter. The wife of the farmer prayed, 'Father, please bless us with more rain, that our crops may grow.' The wife of the potter prayed, 'Father, please bless us with more dry weather, that we may have more clay for our pots.'"

I remember nothing else from that sermon. But to this day I can remember the words that came into my mind: "I could not give you that for which you prayed. Someday, you will understand. But you can be at peace, knowing that I have taken your mother for a righteous purpose. She is still your mother. She loves you, and she will remain very close to you."

The rest of the day is a blur. We went to the cemetery for the dedication of the grave. Later we went back to put flowers on the grave. I remember crying as though my heart would break. That night, as we knelt in family prayer, my father thanked the Lord that we still had each other and prayed for strength. As he spoke, I again heard in my mind the sacred words that I had heard earlier in the funeral. I realized that heaven isn't very far away, and I am grateful to this day that a kind and loving Father in Heaven saw fit to comfort his heartbroken son at a time of such desperate need.

Family Prayer

Great spiritual strength is poured into families when they kneel together in family prayer. Such is the promised result of obeying the Lord's commandment to "pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed." (3 Ne. 18:21.) By doing so, we effectively teach our children to pray. One father put it this way:

When I was growing up, I belonged to a praying family. My mother knelt with us night and morning and taught us to pray. We also prayed as a family several times a day. For example, we knelt in family prayer each morning before breakfast, and then we sat at the table and had a blessing on the food. At lunch we also blessed the food. In the evening, we knelt again as a family in family prayer, and then we sat at the table and blessed the food again. The genius of that pattern is that it provides an opportunity for more people to pray. It also focuses the family members' attention on the purposes of prayer. Family prayers were particularly significant. We learned how to talk to Heavenly Father by listening to our parents. There was a sacred, spiritual feeling in our home when we knelt in prayer together, each person taking his or her turn.

Family prayer can serve a variety of different functions. For example, consider the experience of Elder Loren C. Dunn:

No matter how tired [Dad] and Mother must have been, they never went to sleep until we were in. When I was the only one left at home, he was in the habit of not holding family prayer until I came home, even though he and Mother would be in bed. In situations like that he always called on me to pray. I want to tell you that that had quite an impact on how I conducted myself as a youth, when I knew that I was going to have to end my evening at the bedside of my parents in prayer. [^4]

Family members who regularly invite the Spirit of the Lord into their homes through family prayer grow in love, loyalty, unity, and spirituality. Family prayer provides a spiritual anchor against life's trials. President Spencer W. Kimball promised parents who kneel together with their families in prayer each morning and night that their "children will learn to honor and revere the Lord's anointed leaders as they are taught to pray for their local and general authorities; they will love the Lord as they pray for his work; they will love their fellowmen as they pray for the sick, the mourners, the distressed. They will anticipate with gladness their own missions as they pray for the missionaries out preaching the gospel." [^5]

Parents who kneel before the Lord and pray for their children help them to develop spiritual strength and self-confidence in ways that may otherwise be impossible. A young mother shared the following:

When we knelt together as a family, there was no question in my mind that my parents loved me. I could tell by the way they prayed. They consistently thanked Heavenly Father for us, told him how much they loved us, and explained how proud they were of the lives we were living and the choices we were making. They also asked him to bless each of us in the areas we needed the most. We grew up thinking we were the most important children in the world, and we did all we could to live up to the way they described us when they spoke about us to the Lord.

Regular family prayer also provides opportunities for children to have profound spiritual experiences. Few activities reveal the character of family members quite so much as their kneeling before the Lord and pouring out their souls to Heavenly Father. On such occasions the Holy Ghost descends upon families and strengthens all who are present. Recalling a tender memory years later, a priesthood holder told this story:

When I was a boy, my dad and I went to the Vernal, Utah, area each fall to get our firewood for the winter. We always stayed with my grandparents. One of the great blessings of those trips was the privilege of hearing my grandfather pray. When I was fourteen, I took a friend along. On the way home from that trip, my friend said to my dad, "When we knelt down in family prayer this morning, and David's grandfather was praying, I actually thought Jesus was there in the room. In fact, I wanted to open my eyes and see him!" I knew exactly what he was talking about, because I had experienced those same feelings several times.

Will any other activity have a more unifying impact upon our families than consistently kneeling together each morning and evening in family prayer? Children who participate in praying as a family have ingrained in their hearts and minds a deep, abiding love for their Father in Heaven.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Power of the Word," Ensign, May 1986, 79, 81.
[^2] Marion G. Romney, Conference Report, April 1960, 112-13.
[^3] Benson, "Power of the Word," 82.
[^4] Dennis and Sandra Packard, Feasting upon the Word (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1981), ix-x.
[^5] Packard, 207-8.
