R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

12

Developing a Love for the Scriptures

The color immediately left Danny's face, and I heard a sickening groan. He grabbed his stomach with both hands, gasped for breath, and fell to the living-room floor. After what seemed like an eternity, he started to cry. Taylor, his older brother by two years, stood over him with both fists doubled up, glaring at his eleven-year-old sibling. "That's just a taste of what you're going to get the next time you make fun of the way I read."

Now I am not so naive as to expect things to go perfectly all of the time. But this wasn't supposed to happen. Reading the scriptures is supposed to be a spiritual experience. The prophet said so. But my children hate it. They don't pay attention. They make fun of each other. And now we have a full-blown fist fight, right in the middle of Helaman 12. There has got to be a better way!

Blessings That Come from Reading the Scriptures

Scripture study is an important key to understanding the principles and ordinances of the gospel, and it is absolutely essential to the process of gaining a testimony. The scriptures contain God's teachings to mankind, and their importance cannot be overstated. When the Lord commanded Nephi to slay Laban in order to obtain the brass plates, he explained, "It is better that one man should perish than that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief." (1 Ne. 4:13.)

The Lord expects us to understand the scriptures. Jesus commanded his disciples, "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.) President Ezra Taft Benson strongly counseled the Saints about the importance of scriptural study and encouraged Church members to immerse themselves in the scriptures, explaining that "when individual members and families immerse themselves in the scriptures regularly and consistently, these other areas of activity will automatically come. Testimonies will increase. Commitment will be strengthened. Families will be fortified. Personal revelation will flow." [^1]

Thus, teaching our children to study and cherish the scriptures is vital. The word of God has been preserved by the power of God to provide us with the gospel truths. Great blessings come to those who regularly read the scriptures. As a single mother of four explained:

Five years ago I sat in stake conference and heard our stake president plead with the members to read the Book of Mormon each day. He then shared the following statement by President Marion G. Romney:

"I counsel you . . . everywhere, to make reading in the Book of Mormon a few minutes each day a lifelong practice. . . . I feel certain that if, in our homes, parents will read from the Book of Mormon prayerfully and regularly, both by themselves and with their children, the spirit of that great book will come to permeate our homes and all who dwell therein. The spirit of reverence will increase, mutual respect and consideration for each other will grow. The spirit of contention will depart. Parents will counsel their children in greater love and wisdom. Children will be more responsive and submissive to that counsel. Righteousness will increase. Faith, hope, and charity—the pure love of Christ—will abound in our homes and lives, bringing in their wake peace, joy, and happiness." [^2]

I have four sons, three of whom were teenagers at the time, and I desperately needed the blessings President Romney promised. Since 6:00 A.M. was the only time we could regularly be together as a family, we agreed to read the Book of Mormon for ten minutes each morning before seminary. So every night, when I set the table for the next day's breakfast, I placed a copy of the scriptures by each plate, just so we wouldn't forget.

I can bear testimony of the truthfulness of President Romney's words. The Holy Ghost came into our family as we had never experienced. The boys became more respectful and considerate. The contention left. I became more effective in helping my sons, and they responded more positively to my counsel. All four of my sons grew to love the Book of Mormon, and the three who are old enough have served missions. Every blessing that President Romney promised has been fulfilled in our family. What I thought would be a burden turned out to be a source of joy.

President Benson explained that studying the scriptures is not a burden laid upon us by the Lord. Rather, it is a marvelous opportunity:

If we ignore what the Lord has given us, we may lose the very power and blessings which we seek. . . . Let us not treat lightly the great things we have received from the Lord! His word is one of the most valuable gifts He has given us. I urge you to recommit yourselves to a study of the scriptures. Immerse yourselves in them daily so you will have the power of the Spirit to attend you in your callings. Read them in your families and teach your children to love and treasure them. [^3]

Ideas for Reading the Scriptures

Carefully studying the scriptures daily is an invaluable tool for teaching children the gospel. If we want our children to gain testimonies, we must read the scriptures ourselves and then instill within our children a love for the teachings of the prophets. The challenge comes in knowing how to effectively teach our children to love the scriptures. Knowing what is important is one thing. Doing it in a way that is both enjoyable and instructional is entirely different. Granted, it is not an easy task; and in order to accomplish it, families must dedicate themselves to developing the habit of scripture study. A father described the method he and his wife used to motivate his three children to study the scriptures:

We decided that if scripture study was going to work in my family, we had to establish a habit of reading every day. No exceptions. We called a family council, and we set a goal to read the scriptures each day. It didn't matter what we read, where we read, or how much we read, as long as we read the scriptures. We kept track of our progress, and at the end of each week we celebrated our success. This gave us the motivation to both get started and to keep it going until it became a habit. Our approach worked remarkably well, and soon the scriptures became an essential part of our lives.

As the children grew older, we expanded the goal of a week at a time to two weeks, to a month, and then to three months. Soon, the celebration became unimportant. We had learned to love the scriptures. Our knowledge of the scriptures improved, and our spirituality increased. We started having family prayer and regular family home evening. We also felt much closer to God. Family unity and harmony increased, and we found ourselves better able to work out family problems.

Something else happened that surprised me. During family discussions, the children began to use stories from the scriptures to illustrate their points. They also began asking more questions, some of which surprised me. For example, within the past month my nine-year-old son asked the following questions:

Â What is it like to be in hell?

Â How could Mary be a virgin if she had a baby?

Â What did Jesus mean when he said, "I and my Father are one?"

Â If Christ went to heaven when he died, why did he tell Mary not to touch him because he had not ascended to his Father?

Questions like these frequently provide an excuse for extensive gospel discussions. Before we started reading the scriptures, such things had never happened in our family—and all this has come because we developed a habit of reading only a few verses each day. There is great truth in the statement, "Out of small things proceedeth that which is great." (D&C 64:33.)

Reading the scriptures aloud can help children become comfortable with the language of the scriptures. That's why reading the scriptures to them when they are very young is so important. As one man explained:

I used to listen to my father read the scriptures to us every day before breakfast. I can still hear him reading to me the parable of the prodigal son. My father was accidentally killed when I was nine years old, but I had heard him read the scriptures for three or four years and those passages are still in my mind. That was the most important part of my education. . . .

As children [we] learned language mainly by hearing it constantly about us in contexts that enabled us to understand it. Our children, hearing the scriptures day by day and absorbing them from the very beginning of their lives, will be at home with the language of the scriptures. No other way of learning to read the scriptures is as good. So, it is our duty to read the scriptures aloud daily with our children, no matter what age they may be. If we do not, they will never learn to read the scriptures half so well by themselves. [^4]

Children may or may not fully understand the doctrine, but by learning the language of the scriptures as they grow, they become familiar with the scriptures and develop a love for them. A father of five girls described his experience this way:

When our oldest child was eight months old, she got the croup and couldn't sleep at night. The only things that calmed her down were for me to rock her and to talk to her. I was taking a Book of Mormon class at the time, and I had to do my homework. So for several months I read the scriptures to her each night. I am not certain of the extent to which that had an impact on her, but to this day she dearly loves the scriptures; and I attribute that love to the fact that they were read to her so much during her first year.

Most families find it difficult to develop the daily habit of reading the scriptures together. Busy activities and different ages often deter regular family scripture study. Fortunately, the schedule doesn't seem to matter as long as it fits the needs of the family. Some families get up fifteen minutes early and read before the normal day gets started. Others read together before, during, or after the evening meal. Still others read before the youngest children go to bed. Consider the following comments from a single mother of six:

Since I am divorced and work full time, reading scriptures with the children has been a special challenge. For a few weeks after President Benson asked us to read the Book of Mormon each day, we experimented with different ways to do it. We read in the morning before school, and we read at the dinner table. Sometimes we were successful. Most of the time we weren't. It seemed like an impossible task, and since there was never a time when the whole family could be together, we quit. I knew the decision was not right, but I'm willing to fight only so many battles, and that wasn't one of them.

Then while attending a wedding in another state, we spent the night with some close friends. At bedtime the father asked, "Would you like to join us for scripture reading?" Everyone had his or her own copy of the Book of Mormon, and we went around the room with each person reading one verse.

At first I thought it was a bit strange, because the family members weren't all present like they were supposed to be. However, it didn't matter if their oldest son had not yet returned home; they still read the scriptures. After we finished the chapter, we knelt in family prayer. The father and mother then hugged and kissed their children, and it was over. The whole thing hadn't taken more than twenty minutes.

I thought, "Bedtime is the answer—and everyone doesn't have to be there." That thought had never occurred to me before. We started as soon as I got home.

Now, when the first person gets ready for bed, we stop whatever we're doing, and those who are home gather together in the living room. The person to my left reads the first verse, and we proceed in turn around the room. We don't always read a complete chapter. With my children, the attention span is short, so we go around the room only four times. There are seven of us, so when all of us are home, we read twenty-eight verses. Sometimes we discuss what we read. Sometimes we don't. After family prayer, everyone goes on about their business.

This schedule may not work for everyone, but it has certainly worked for us. We've been doing it for six months now, and we have missed only one or two nights. My children are developing a love for the scriptures that I never thought possible, and we have had some wonderful, tender experiences. It has created opportunities for us to talk about the gospel and things that are important to us, in ways that we had never before experienced. I've felt the Spirit much more in our home since we began reading the scriptures. The surprising thing for me is that it is so simple. I don't know why it didn't occur to me before.

There are also variations in how much time families spend reading the scriptures and in how they read them. Some families read one chapter a day. Others read for fifteen minutes. One family has a jar filled with scriptural verses. Each evening at the dinner table, a child takes one slip of paper from the jar and reads it to the family; they then discuss that topic during dinner and determine how it applies to their lives.

Since there is not an "only way" to successfully read the scriptures, most families experiment a bit before they discover what works for them. But one thing is clear: God has promised us that regular scripture study will powerfully affect the lives of family members, and when we prayerfully consider the scriptures, he will bless us with the wisdom to make right choices for our families. For example, a father of four described his experience in this way:

My wife and I thoroughly enjoy reading the scriptures together. We typically start at the beginning of the book and plow through to the end. However, that approach never really excited my children. They read with us, and they enjoyed reading, but it didn't excite them as we had hoped. After fasting and prayer, we felt impressed to make a list of our favorite stories from the scriptures. Our four children each selected their five favorites, and my wife and I added passages we thought important. Each evening, after dinner but just before dessert, we take turns choosing the one we want to read. The children love it. It's fun for them, so there's no resistance whatsoever.

Before we started this, the younger ones never really understood what was going on. But now they look forward to scripture time, and they get excited when they can choose their scripture and everyone else in the family participates.

All four children have developed a love for the scriptures, and in the process they are building a solid foundation of gospel principles. Our original pool of thirty stories has since expanded to seventy stories and doctrinal passages. Typically, the children add the stories; my wife and I add the rest. We have found that the children have become intimately familiar with major sections of the four Standard Works.

One Sunday in sacrament meeting, as someone was giving a talk, my seven-year-old daughter whispered to me, "That's a famous passage right there." The only reason that passage was famous was because it was one of "our" scriptures.

In selecting stories, considering the needs of the children is important. Dennis and Sandra Packard describe their experience in the following way:

These days, we're choosing fairly short passages of scripture, passages a minute or two long. When our children are older and their sense of continuity is stronger, we'll no doubt choose longer ones, maybe a whole book, like the book of Mosiah, reading a portion each night. We'll continue, of course, letting our children take turns choosing. And for now, we are doing all the reading. As soon as they're able, we'll let them take turns doing that, too.

We keep several things in mind as we choose what to read. We select passages we particularly like, ones that say something to us. We look for passages we can give easily remembered names to, often stories and sometimes passages on particular topics, especially those topics we want our children to learn about at their ages. We pick stories that have elements children enjoy, such as animals, children, and repetition. [^5]

There are many ways to successfully read the scriptures as a family, and flexibility is a key in meeting the changing needs of family members: if one approach doesn't work, try something else. The important thing is to make scripture reading an enjoyable experience for everyone involved. When that happens, the Spirit is unrestrained, and those present will have great experiences. Such was not always the case in a family with nine children. As the father explained:

As far back as I can remember, scripture reading has been a battle ground. Our pattern was to go around the room, each person reading two verses. But the children wouldn't follow along. I always caught somebody horsing around between turns. We often had quarreling. The children criticized and laughed at each other when they mispronounced words. They also yelled at one another if they read an extra verse. Sometimes they even slugged each other. It was awful.

Three years ago a friend of mine said, "You're killing yourself. Get the scriptures on audiotape—it'll make all the difference in the world." So I bought a set.

The next morning I said to the family, "Okay now, we're no longer going to read two verses each, and listen to the big children make fun of the little children because they can't pronounce the words. Everybody will just listen to this professional recording."

I turned on the tape recorder, and to my amazement, we had dead silence the entire time. The children followed along in their own books. There was no horsing around. Nobody got slugged. Nobody made fun of anybody. It was wonderful.

Scripture reading has since become an enjoyable experience. Each morning at 6:30 I make a pass through the house and announce that it's time to read the scriptures. I then go into the living room, wait for about sixty seconds, and then turn on the tape recorder. Most of the time the children are ready to begin. Sometimes a few of them are scrambling, trying to finish getting dressed. But the hassling has stopped.

The spirit of our scripture study has completely changed. We're able to go twice as fast: the speaker on the tape moves quickly, and we read a chapter every morning. The younger ones are able to follow along, and it helps them learn words without mispronouncing them.

The conflict has completely stopped. There's never a mispronounced word. There's no criticizing. The children no longer pound on each other. It is wonderful.

The tapes also allow us to have flexibility without offending the reader. If we come to something important, I'll stop the recorder and ask, "What does this mean? What's going on here?" Then we take a few minutes to talk about them. I resume the recording, and the person on tape doesn't even realize we stopped.

Once we finish our chapter, we kneel in family prayer. Almost without exception the person praying thanks Heavenly Father for the scriptures and for the Spirit we have felt. When my children leave home, they know that they started their day right because we read the scriptures. It's been a significant way to formally teach the gospel in our home.

Regardless of the reading schedule, or the variations in how a family reads the scriptures, the Lord will pour out the Spirit upon them, and family members will gain a love for the scriptures. Bishop J. Richard Clarke shared the following experience about this principle:

I am convinced that families, even young children, can learn to love the scriptures. A few years ago when I was in Colorado Springs for a conference, I called on Mark McConkie, son of Elder and Sister Bruce R. McConkie, to address the question "How did you develop a love for the scriptures?"

As I recall, he said: "I first developed a love for the scriptures from my mother. I remember she would teach me while she did her ironing. I felt how she loved the scriptures by the way she would speak about the prophets. How much she loved them! As I grew older, I would listen to the recordings of the scriptures. I wanted to know the scriptures like my father. Sometimes he would enter the room while I was listening and it would take him just a moment to identify the exact scripture I was listening to. I wanted to be able to do that." [^6]

Under such conditions, family members learn to love the scriptures, and they, like Nephi of old, can say with conviction: "My soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children. Behold, my soul delighteth in the things of the Lord." (2 Ne. 4:15-16.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), 271; emphasis added.
[^2] Kimball, Teachings, 137.
[^3] Kimball, Teachings, 211.
[^4] Dennis and Sandra Packard, Feasting upon the Word (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1981), ix-x.
[^5] Packard, 207-8.
[^6] J. Richard Clarke, "My Soul Delighteth in the Scriptures," Ensign, November 1982, 14.
