R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

13

Attendance at Church Meetings

I was sick and tired of hearing about it. As the mother of five children, I had an ongoing battle with my children about attending church meetings. I heard constant complaints about unprepared teachers, boring speakers, hot meetings, and unfriendly peers. They said they weren't learning anything; and since learning the gospel and partaking of the sacrament were the reasons they went to church, I was hard pressed to justify why I made them suffer so much each Sunday.

Then one Sunday evening, while reading Faith Precedes the Miracle, I came across the following statement by President Spencer W. Kimball:

We do not go to Sabbath meetings to be entertained or even simply to be instructed. We go to worship the Lord. It is an individual responsibility, and regardless of what is said from the pulpit, if one wishes to worship the Lord in spirit and in truth, he may do so by attending his meetings, partaking of the sacrament, and contemplating the beauties of the gospel. If the service is a failure to you, you have failed. No one can worship for you; you must do your own waiting upon the Lord. [^1]

Our family home evening lesson the next night was on the keeping the Sabbath day holy. I read President Kimball's statement, and we then spent the next hour and a half discussing church meetings, selfishness, and the meaning of worshiping the Lord. I explained to the children that they weren't forced to attend church, just as they weren't forced to pray or to keep any of God's other commandments. They had their agency to make their own choices.

Once our children learned that they go to church to worship the Lord and that the responsibility fell squarely on them and nobody else, the problem was resolved. Since that time we have had no problem with church attendance. The children are now doing the right thing for the right reason.

The Importance of Church Meetings

Spiritual growth comes from activity in the Church; and by definition, being active in the Church is impossible without attending church meetings. The Lord expects his children to keep the Sabbath day holy, and that includes attending the designated meetings. The sick and afflicted might have an excuse. The rest of us do not. Substituting scripture study at home is not an alternative to church attendance.

In order for children to gain testimonies of the gospel, the Holy Ghost must bear witness to them that the gospel is true. The best way to have spiritual experiences is to go to those places where the Spirit of the Lord is present. Thus, church meetings and activities provide rich opportunities for spiritual growth. As the Lord promised, "For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matt. 18:20.) The purpose of the gospel is to build people, to exalt them, and to help them return to and live with their Heavenly Father. The programs of the Church are designed to accomplish that task. As one father explained,

My brother became the principal of a high school where the children never went to class; they spent their time out in the halls. He immediately changed the school's grading policy; a major part of the grade was based on attendance. His basic philosophy: If the children aren't in class, they don't get the benefits from going to school.

I have a similar philosophy about church attendance. The Lord has asked us to attend church meetings so he can bless us. We are taught gospel principles by dedicated teachers in an environment conducive to feeling the spirit of the Lord. We associate with great people of all ages. We partake of the sacrament and renew the covenants we made when we were baptized; and in the process, we learn the importance of keeping covenants. We find out who we are and what God expects us to be. We worship the Lord. These are all blessings that come from attending Church.

Parents need to take the initiative to help their children develop the habit of attending meetings. President Kimball explained the impact of his early Church attendance: "When I was a small boy, I was taught the habit of going to sacrament meetings. Mother always took me with her. Those warm afternoons I soon became drowsy and leaned over on her lap to sleep. I may not have learned much from the sermons, but I learned the habit of 'going to meeting.' The habit stayed with me through my life." [^2]

A mother of five children under the age of twelve explained her attitude toward Church attendance as follows: "In our home, going to church is not up for negotiation. None of our children are old enough to make that kind of decision. The Lord commanded me not to let my children "transgress the laws of God." (Mosiah 4:14.) Keeping the Sabbath day holy is one of God's laws. They must attend their church meetings to obey that commandment. I try to make it as pleasant as possible for them. But in our house, we go to church. It's just part of being a member of this family."

The Lord has designed the Church programs to help us grow spiritually. Of course, it is impossible to predict when important spiritual experiences will take place in our children's lives. One thing, however, is certain: if our children don't attend the meetings where those spiritual experiences take place, they won't get the blessings. When they do attend, they sometimes have experiences that profoundly affect their lives. Consider what this fourteen-year-old girl would have missed had she not chosen to keep the Sabbath day holy and attend her church meetings. Her father described the situation this way:

Our children have always considered stake conference synonymous with cruel and unusual punishment. They go because they have to. After all, two hours of conference meetings once every six months is not too big a sacrifice, particularly in light of the other blessings that membership in the Church provides. Besides, attending church is simply expected in our family.

Unfortunately, our fourteen-year-old daughter has found stake conference particularly distasteful, and yesterday, before we left for the meeting, she announced that she would rather go to the dentist; and she hates going to the dentist.

We arrived early and planted ourselves on the second row, directly in front of the pulpit. As we waited for the services to begin, I suggested that she ask her Heavenly Father to help her feel good about being there and to understand the message that he had for her. Privately, I pled with the Lord to bless her with a spiritual experience.

During the first hour nothing unusual happened. Although the speeches were not boring, I also would not call them outstanding. However, she listened intently.

As we stood to sing the "rest hymn," something wonderful happened. The organist began to play hymn #134, "I Believe in Christ," and I immediately felt an outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord. By the time we began the second verse, I was so choked up, I couldn't sing. My wife was sobbing. My daughter, however, sang enthusiastically.

Later, as she helped my wife prepare Sunday dinner, she said, "Today is the first time I've ever listened to the speakers in stake conference. When we sang that song, I had the most wonderful feeling I've ever had. I almost shook, and I felt as if I had the chills. I know that the gospel is true. I know that Jesus died for us. My Heavenly Father let me know that today while we were singing. I don't understand why anyone would want to take drugs when they could have that kind of experience. You know, the only thing I feel bad about is that Susan [her best friend] wasn't there to feel what I felt. It would have been really helpful to her; but she decided to stay home because stake conference is boring."

When we attend church meetings, the Lord gives us blessings that we can get in no other way. And occasionally, those opportunities come once in a lifetime, as illustrated by the following example:

At 7:00 P.M. on October 10, 1958, the Aaronic Priesthood Memorial Monument was dedicated on Temple Square in Salt Lake City. President David O. McKay conducted the services and offered the dedicatory prayer. There was not an empty seat in the Tabernacle, and the overflow crowd filled the Assembly Hall to capacity.

A combined Aaronic Priesthood chorus from the Salt Lake Valley provided the music for the dedicatory service. I was one of four young men who represented our ward in that chorus. In addition to participating in the opening hymn, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," we sang three other hymns that evening: "Priesthood of God," "Priesthood Song of Triumph," and "The Spirit of God like a Fire Is Burning."

After each member of the Presiding Bishopric had spoken, we sang our second song: "Priesthood of God." The choir sang the first verse and the chorus. A young man, whom I shall call Tom, had been asked to sing the second verse as a solo. He was a first tenor. When I heard him sing during our practices, I marveled at the beauty and clarity of his voice and at the composed and confident way he handled himself. Clearly few, if any, young men in the Church could have done as well.

During his solo, Tom faced the audience as he stood on a platform directly behind the First Presidency: President David O. McKay, President Stephen L Richards, and President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.

After we finished the first verse, Tom began. He sang beautifully: "We honor the glorious priesthood; 'tis a gift from the Lord in our day. With our faith firm and secure, and a love that will endure, we are called in God's appointed way." Then something terrible happened. The organ continued to play, but Tom stopped singing. He had forgotten the words.

Awkwardly, he fumbled through his note cards, but he could neither find his place nor regain his composure. It seemed an eternity before the choir joined him in the chorus and the final verse of that hymn.

I still remember the terrible feeling I had in the pit of my stomach. I became sick to my stomach, and I actually wept for him because of the pain he must have felt.

Immediately after we finished singing, President McKay stood up to conduct the remainder of the service. Before that time, I had felt few positive feelings for President McKay. I wasn't even sure that I had a testimony that he was a prophet. I had heard him speak on the radio and had seen him conduct general conference on television; but I had never seen him in person. I really didn't know what to expect, except that I was excited and honored with the opportunity to participate in that great event.

What I experienced that night, in that one single meeting, changed my life. I shall never forget what President McKay said on that occasion and how he handled that situation. As nearly as I can remember, he said:

"When I was a young boy in Huntsville, Utah, I was thrilled with the opportunity to be ordained a priest. The following Sunday I was assigned to bless the bread at the sacrament table. In those days, we were not allowed to read the prayers from a card, like you young men do today. We had to have the prayer memorized, word for word. I still remember practicing that prayer over and over in the attic of our home during the week prior to my first assignment.

"To ensure that we said the prayers correctly, each Sunday my father, who was the bishop of our ward, would lean over the pulpit that stood directly above the sacrament table and listen carefully to make sure that the priests offered the sacrament prayers correctly.

"As I knelt there at the sacrament table, I began to pray: 'O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it. Amen.'

"My father said, 'that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son'; and I said, 'that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son. Amen.'

"My father then said, 'and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father'; and I said, 'and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father. Amen.'

"My father then said, 'that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son'; and I said, 'that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son. Amen.'

"My father added, 'and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them'; and I said, 'and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them. Amen.'

"My father then said, 'that they may always have his Spirit to be with them'; and I said, 'that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen.'"

President McKay then went on to conduct the remainder of the dedicatory service. Not a word was said about Tom. But every Aaronic Priesthood holder and leader in that audience got a clear, simple message from a prophet of God: "Everyone makes mistakes, even prophets. So don't worry anymore about this one." From that moment on, I loved President David O. McKay with all my heart.

I heard President McKay speak many times after that. I have seven of his books in my library at home, and I have read them all. But never have I been so profoundly taught what it means to "[love] thy neighbor as thyself" (Luke 10:27) as I was that night when, as a fifteen-year-old boy, I watched a prophet of God reach out to restore the self-confidence and self-esteem of a young man who had made a simple but embarrassingly obvious mistake. Had I not been in that meeting, I would have missed the single event that taught me more about loving God's prophets than any other experience. I will be forever grateful that I attended.

Similar experiences take place every Sunday in wards and branches throughout the Church. For example, consider the following incident, as described by a young man shortly before he left for his mission:

My single most influential Church leader, during my early years, was my Sunday School teacher when I was eleven. She was short and fat and wasn't very pretty. We made fun of her all the time, mainly because we were all bigger than she, and we were only eleven!

One Sunday, when we began to misbehave, she stopped talking. We immediately quieted down. She then told us about her childhood, about the problems she had faced while growing up, and about how she had decided at a very young age to do everything Heavenly Father asked of her. She then bore her testimony, and concluded by pleading with us to live the gospel and keep the commandments.

The impact of what she said was profound. I remember that experience vividly. I remember how she looked. I remember where she stood. I don't have any idea what she said, in terms of specifics, but I certainly remember how I felt. I remember thinking, "This is the neatest lady I have ever known," and I knew that I loved her.

That experience changed my entire attitude toward the Church. I didn't know what was happening at the time, but I knew how I felt. I also knew it was a better feeling than anything I had experienced before. I thought, "If that is what the prophet meant when he told us that Heavenly Father would bless us if we kept his commandments, then that is what I want to do," and later that day I knelt in prayer and promised him that I, too, would do as he asked. I have often thought how much I would have missed had I not attended church that Sunday.

President Kimball said, "There is no compulsion in one going to meetings or to praying or to having home evening, or to living the law of the Sabbath or any of the other laws of the Ten Commandments or the other scores of commandments, but the Lord seems to know what will make people supremely happy, and he has outlined a program which will develop and give growth to the people." [^3] Worshiping the Lord in church meetings provides rich opportunities for young people to have spiritual experiences. Thus we need to do all in our power to make certain they take advantage of those opportunities.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] First Presidency, "Editors' Table: Home Evening," Improvement Era, June 1915, 733-34.
[^2] Dallin H. Oaks, "Parental Leadership in the Family," Ensign, June 1985, 11.
[^3] Oaks, "Parental Leadership," 11.
