R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

14

Family Home Evening

"Son, we're ready to start." I had told Mom four times already that I had too much to do. I had three exams the next day, and my senior project in English was due on Thursday. To top it off, my obnoxious little brother was about to get his nose broken. Sometimes I felt like punching his lights out! The last thing I needed that night was to spend an hour in family home evening.

Mom had told me I didn't have to attend if I didn't want to. Some choice. Although I believed her about the choice business, I learned a long time ago that whenever I didn't do what I was supposed to do, I ended up feeling miserable. "I'll be there in a minute," I groaned.

Fortunately the opening song was "Love at Home," one of my favorites. Brian, whose turn it was to conduct, called on Mom for the opening prayer. As always, she talked with the Lord as if he was present. My mother has always had a special gift for doing that. As she prayed, I thought about how tough it is to be divorced with three teenagers. What a great lady. She's my best friend.

Sarah gave the lesson on the importance of obedience and talked about a family that was blessed because they obeyed the Lord. We also read some scriptures. She did a nice job, and I felt proud.

Mom then shared some of the sacred experiences she'd had when she was growing up. As she spoke, I thought about how much I loved her. As she concluded the lesson, she told us how much she loved us, how important we were to her, and how she wanted us to be together forever. By the time she finished, it was hard for me to talk. I felt that special, warm feeling I feel mostly when I am with my family and at Church, and I knew that I'd rather be at home with those three people than anywhere else in the world.

Family Home Evening

In 1915 President Joseph F. Smith introduced the "weekly home evening program," and with it came the following promise to the members of the Church: "If the Saints obey this counsel, we promise that great blessings will result. Love at home and obedience to parents will increase. Faith will be developed in the hearts of the youth of Israel, and they will gain power to combat the evil influences and temptations which beset them." [^1] Thus, the predecessor of the family home evening program was established. The prophets since that time have consistently reaffirmed President Smith's promises and counseled family members to meet together to increase spirituality and strengthen family bonds.

Family home evening is a Churchwide program designed to help families learn the gospel, love one another, and develop a sense of family unity. The Lord has promised great blessings to those who follow his counsel to hold regular family home evenings. In summarizing the potential of the program, Elder Dallin H. Oaks said, "It is a striking fact that the family home evening is the ideal time to accomplish almost every type of family togetherness. It is the ideal place for the family to pray together, learn together, counsel together, play together, and even work together. Most of us recognize this, but I wonder how many of us are really using the family home evening to its full potential." [^2]

In order to help families enjoy the benefits that come from effective family home evenings, the Church has published the Family Home Evening Resource Book. In describing the potential of this publication, Elder Oaks said:

More than any prior manual, the Family Home Evening Resource Book is designed to accomplish the broadest purposes of the family home evening. . . . [This book] is a superior resource for parents to use in fulfilling their parental responsibilities and for family fun and learning. It is not a book just to own or to store on a shelf. It is a book to be used. Make sure you have it in your home. Use it. It will bless your lives and the lives of your children. [^3]

Unfortunately, many parents do not take advantage of the rich gold mine contained in the Family Home Evening Resource Book. In fact, some don't even know it exists. As a father of three confessed:

We struggled with family home evening for three years and made no headway. After hearing about a friend's positive experience with the Family Home Evening Resource Book, we decided to buy one. Only then did I learn that we'd had a copy on our shelf for two years. How embarrassing! After using it for a year, we were convinced that the material is so great that it's worth buying two and giving one away (which is what we did with our extra). I can't say enough good things about that publication. The material in that book has changed the way we have family home evening.

However, the Family Home Evening Resource Book, like all other tools designed to help us rear our children in light and truth, is only a resource. To meet the specific needs of our families, we must adapt these ideas to the ages and circumstances of our children. One father explained it this way:

The secret to our success has been flexibility, so our methods have constantly changed as our children have grown. I once heard President Kimball say that if eight things were present, we'd have a quality family home evening: a lesson, scripture reading, music, stories, an activity, prayers, refreshments, and a relaxed atmosphere with no criticism. Over the years we've found that this formula has always worked, as long as we allow enough flexibility to meet our children's needs.

For example, we've been particularly flexible in our activities. When holidays roll around, we have our own family parties. At other times we've played games, made posters for school, prepared talks for church, and watched video movies, particularly those put out by the Church. We've gone to the zoo, visited historic sites, and even had our own family track meets in the back yard. Recently we spent several weeks assembling our seventy-two-hour emergency-preparedness kits. We've also had service projects for those in need. Our goal has been to create as many positive, happy memories for our children as possible. However, we've never let the activities take priority over teaching our children the gospel. The activities are the dessert. But we've always served them some of the meat of the gospel, so they could have some spiritual experiences.

Music also plays an important role in successful family home evenings. As a young mother explained: "Singing is an essential part of every family home evening, simply because it is such an easy way to bring the Spirit into our home. We have opening and closing hymns. We also have a "Fun Songs" section, where each person chooses a favorite song and the rest of the family sings along. Some songs are unique; some are downright bizarre. But they create happy memories for everyone. That's what's important."

Regular family home evenings also give children clear messages about their value to their families and their worth as individuals. Often this message is more clearly spoken by example than by precept. Consider the message that regular family home evenings gave to one junior-college coed:

There was never any doubt in my mind that we were important to my parents. Even though they were both extremely busy, we had family home evening every Monday night. No exceptions. Interruptions were not allowed. No TV. No phone calls. No radio. No outside appointments. I heard my dad decline meetings with very important people when they wanted to meet on Monday night. That was our night together, and it was sacred. My folks also spent hours preparing for the lessons. They would never have put in that kind of time on somebody they didn't think was important.

Under such conditions, bonds of love are developed, and the foundation for happiness and family solidarity is entrenched in the lives of family members. As a fourteen-year-old girl explained:

My friends think we have the neatest family in the world. They can't believe that we do so much together and love each other like we do. I mean, it's just beyond them to really believe that I love my little brother. Three of them have little brothers, and they hate them! They would also never think of talking about their boy friends around the dinner table; but I do it all the time. The reason I can do it is that I trust my family. They are really my best friends, the only ones that I can always count on.

Despite our best intentions, however, things don't always go right. This often happens when we stop listening to our children. Although running a business without listening to our customers would be unthinkable, we often try to run family home evening without input from our children. A mother described her difficulties with trying to run family home evening:

As our children got older, family home evening became painful, particularly for our two teenagers, so my husband and I sat down with them privately to find out what was going on. As they saw it, we did the same old thing every week, with almost everything geared to the younger children. They couldn't talk about things that interested them. They had no opportunity to participate. We preached a lot. The meetings lasted too long. And we fed them no "gospel meat." In short, we had missed the mark completely. Our approach had worked ten years ago, but we had gotten into a rut.

That night things changed. Based on their observations, we limited the lessons to fifteen minutes, and each meeting lasted no longer than one hour. A new assignment wheel identified who did what: opening song, opening prayer, lesson, activity, refreshments, closing song, closing prayer. The wheel rotated each week, so everyone got to contribute in different ways. My husband and I served as resources. If the children wanted help, they asked for it. Otherwise, they were on their own. Where possible, we let the older children help the younger ones prepare, which involved them more and gave them a stake in our success. We added a question-and-answer period, where everyone could ask gospel questions and see if they could stump Dad—a goal they regularly achieved. That alone gave us a great, although subtle, excuse to study the gospel in ways we had not done before.

We also introduced a new game called "What do you like about this person?" We rotated through the family, focusing on a different person each week. We all thought of as many positive things as we could about the person and then bombarded him or her with the information.

All of a sudden, family home evening became exciting. The children loved the new format, and our regular feedback sessions provided information for midcourse corrections. We were amazed at how much our family home evenings came to life when we started listening to our children and responding to their needs.

When children present the lessons, they internalize the principles much more easily. They also feel a sense of pride and satisfaction with having accomplished something important. A young man reported just before he left for his mission: "When I was six, I gave a lesson on 'judge not that ye be not judged.' As a part of that lesson, I told a story about Thumper, the little rabbit in the movie Bambi. I can still remember what I said that night. I spent a lot of time preparing that lesson, and I was very proud of it. It has stuck with me forever. It was one of the first things I ever did that was really grown up."

By teaching our children the gospel in regular family home evenings, we ensure blessings for ourselves and for our posterity for generations to come.

During the week following the First Presidency's 1915 request that families meet together weekly to study the gospel, Ida went to the bedroom window of their small farmhouse and talked with Peter, her husband, who was cleaning the weeds from the ditch on the north side of their home. She said, "Father, President Joseph F. Smith has asked us to meet together each week to study the gospel with our children. What do you think?" Peter responded, "I think that we should follow the prophet." The next Sunday Peter and Ida began holding weekly "home hours" with their children, a practice that they continued every week until their last child left home to serve as a missionary in Switzerland thirty-eight years later.

Not coincidentally, seven of their ten children served missions. All ten were married in the temple. Nineteen of twenty-one grandsons served missions; and of their thirty-five grandchildren, only one has a marriage which has not been sealed in the temple. Seventy-five years later their posterity of several hundred now rise up and call them blessed for their faithfulness and devotion in following the prophet.

The Lord keeps his promises! Even under difficult circumstances, the Lord will pour out his blessings upon families who are obedient and who faithfully teach their children the gospel. President Kimball illustrated the blessings that come from family home evenings:

Many years ago we went to one of the Iron Curtain countries when we were touring the world. . . . We attended a series of meetings at which many people were in attendance. My first questions to these faithful Saints were these: "How do you get along with your children? Are they taught about God in their school?"

They said, "No. The teachers teach them that there is no God and teach them many other things that are opposed to what we believe."

Then I asked, "If every day the children receive that kind of training, how do you keep them faithful to the Church?"

One of the brethren said, "We're holding our children. They still go on missions, they still believe in God, they still pray, and they still do all of the things that are required of good Latter-day Saint boys and girls. We, as parents, provide good homes for them and continue to teach and train them righteously. Therefore, what they hear in the daytime from a godless school teacher makes no difference to them. It just runs off like water on a duck's back."

When children go off to school or to play with their friends, parents cannot be totally sure of what they are learning. But if parents take time at home each evening to explain the gospel program to their children, it will offset the negative things they may get during the day. [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Kimball, Teachings, 250-51.
[^2] Boyd K. Packer, That All May Be Edified (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 12.
[^3] Oaks, "Parental Leadership," 11.
[^4] Spencer W. Kimball, "Train Up a Child," Ensign, April 1978, 2.
