R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

15

The Value of Service

"I just can't do it," I complained to my dad. "No way!"

"Sure you can. Besides, you promised Bishop Larson you'd do it. Every fourteen-year-old boy ought to enjoy the excitement of speaking in sacrament meeting."

"Come on, Dad. I don't want that kind of experience. Besides, I wouldn't know what to say."

"You have a testimony, don't you?"

"Of course. But that doesn't mean that I would have anything to say in sacrament meeting."

"You believe in giving service, don't you?" he asked.

"Sometimes. It all depends on who it's for."

"Well, one way you can render service to the other members of this ward is to share your testimony with them. Don't worry. You'll do a great job."

"What if I get sick?"

"That won't be a problem. They'll just let you give your talk the next week."

I knew I was trapped. There was no way I could weasel out of this one.

Two weeks later I found myself sitting on the stand. They had just finished passing the sacrament, and Bishop Larson, who stood less than ten feet away, announced me as the next speaker. I was out of breath by the time I reached the pulpit. As I started to read my talk, the fear left me. The words came easily as I told the congregation about the importance of friendship and how much I appreciated everyone in my teachers quorum. As I bore my testimony, I felt the Holy Ghost stronger than I had ever felt it before. Dad was right when he promised me that if I accepted this assignment, the Lord would bless me with a great spiritual experience.

The Blessings of Service

The scriptures clearly teach us that when we serve one another, we are really serving God. (See Mosiah 2:16-17). Unselfish service magnifies our souls and invites the Spirit of the Lord into our lives. Indeed, one of the major reasons for calling people to positions of responsibility in the Church is to provide them with opportunities to serve; and by doing so, they enjoy the gifts of the Spirit.

Parents have a sacred obligation to teach children the joy of service, and the home is where these lessons can best be learned. As King Mosiah said, "Ye will teach [your children] to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another." (Mosiah 4:15.) The easiest way to teach this important lesson is by example. As they watch us enjoy serving others, they will better understand the Savior's statement, "Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant." (Matt. 20:27.) As a young mother explained:

My mother often took me along when she went visiting teaching. When we lived in Illinois, she visited Sister Gonzalez. I will never forget listening to them trying to communicate. Mother spoke no Spanish. Sister Gonzalez spoke no English. Nobody understood anybody; but they loved each other, and the Spirit was there. My mother told me over and over again that when we served Sister Gonzalez, we were really serving Heavenly Father. As I watched my mother love and serve others, both inside and outside the family, I developed that same love myself.

By rendering unselfish service, we put ourselves in a position to receive a witness of the Spirit that what we have done is consistent with the mind and will of God. Many less active young people have been touched by those feelings and, as a result, have gained testimonies of the gospel. A senior in high school shared the following experience:

I wasn't active in the Church as a child. However, when I was in the ninth grade, the teachers quorum had a service project of painting the outside of an older couple's home. They invited me to participate, so I spent the entire day with those guys. It was great. I also felt some feelings that I had never felt before, particularly when Brother and Sister Whitney told us how much they appreciated what we did for them. That day was the turning point for me, and I have been active ever since.

Another young man had a similar experience while unselfishly serving others:

One of my favorite people is a divorced woman with four teenage children. In addition to working full-time and caring for her children, she unselfishly helped others in many quiet ways. In terms of her priorities, however, her yard came last. So we decided to do something about it.

At 7:00 A.M. one Saturday morning, seven of us showed up at her home with rakes, shovels, hoes, and a power lawn mower. Five hours later her yard was spotless.

I will never forget the look on her face when she came outside and saw us working. She couldn't believe that seven guys would care enough to spend their Saturday morning helping her. I will also never forget how I felt while we worked that morning. I had a similar feeling when I was baptized for the dead on our last temple trip.

Rendering righteous service to others lifts our souls and invites the Spirit of the Lord to come into our lives. In fact, that is the only way some blessings come. As President Spencer W. Kimball said, "Only when you lift a burden, God will lift your burden. Divine paradox this! The man who staggers and falls because his burden is too great can lighten that burden by taking on the weight of another's burden. You get by giving, but your part of giving must be given first." [^1] A senior in high school described how she learned that valuable lesson:

I will never forget the worst day of my life. I broke up with my boyfriend, failed two tests, and didn't get a part in the school production. In addition, one of my best friends started some ugly rumors about me. I wanted to die.

When I got home from school, I remembered that my mom and I were scheduled to spend three hours that evening at the local nursing home with some elderly people. That was the last thing I wanted to do that night. But I had no choice. We'd told them the week before that we would do it.

I also remembered what my father had told me on many occasions: "When the world seems to have fallen in on you, find someone who needs help and go to work. The Lord will bless your efforts, and it will amaze you how much better you'll feel afterward." So I went.

I spent part of that evening reading to the sweetest little man I had ever met. The rest of the time was spent with a lady in a wheelchair who had no family within a hundred miles.

As I drove home that night, a sweet, peaceful feeling came over me. In my mind I heard the words of the Master: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.) All of my problems weren't solved; but I felt confident that I could handle them and that things would turn out okay.

The Lord consistently blesses both the giver and the receiver when we manifest our willingness "to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light." (Mosiah 18:8.) A newly ordained priest described how unselfish service blessed a young woman and her mother:

Last year a friend of mine joined the Church. Although her nonmember mother wasn't hostile, she didn't hide the fact that she cared little for the Church.

Three months later the girl and her mother moved to another part of town. They blocked out all day Saturday and Sunday to get everything moved—and even then they doubted if that would be enough time. I called the president of our elders quorum for help.

At 7:30 A.M. on Saturday morning, ten guys showed up with four trucks. Combined with the five people in our family, we almost had an army! The mother was so touched by our thoughtfulness that she spent most of the morning crying. She just couldn't believe that so many people whom she didn't even know would treat her so kindly. By 11:00 A.M. everything they owned had been moved into their new home.

That single incident caused a miraculous transformation in the mother. She began meeting with the missionaries, and four months later she was baptized.

One of the great benefits of unselfish service is spiritual experiences. When we serve others, we place ourselves in a position to receive revelation much more quickly than would otherwise be the case. The service need not be highly visible. In fact, the most meaningful service is often rendered quietly, as a result of the Spirit's gentle promptings. A grandfather learned this lesson as a young man and described his experience this way:

Twenty-five years ago, after a general priesthood meeting, I felt impressed to stop by Susan's apartment. I was eighteen at the time and felt a little awkward dropping by unannounced. However, Dad had repeated over and over to me the importance of following the promptings of the Spirit, especially when they came as strong as that one did. So I did as I was "told."

After we were seated, I told Susan about the great meeting I had just attended and asked if she would like me to share my notes with her. She agreed, so I proceeded to summarize each of the speeches.

As I spoke, her eyes filled with tears. Later I learned that her boyfriend had invited her to be immoral with him later that evening, and she had agreed. As I spoke, the Spirit bore witness to her of the enormity of the mistake she was contemplating, and she resolved at that moment to never see her boyfriend again.

Recently I got a letter from Susan. She wrote in part, "I have since married a wonderful man in the temple and have five delightful children. I have often thanked my Heavenly Father for your visit that night. By following the promptings of the Spirit, you served as an instrument in the hands of the Lord to help me prevent what would have been the most tragic mistake of my life. I can never repay him for what he did for me."

I have no idea what I said that meant so much to her, nor is that important. I have learned, however, the truth of Elder Boyd K. Packer's statement, "Inspiration comes more quickly when we need it to help others than when we are concerned about ourselves." [^2] With only few exceptions, every revelation I have ever received has come while serving others.

As we teach our children to serve, it is important that we teach them to serve for the right reasons. Serving the Lord because we expect a tangible reward or the approval of others is one thing. Serving because we love the Lord is another thing entirely. For such people, service is a measure of their pure love of Christ. A high councilor recalled this illustration:

Years ago, when I was called to teach an early-morning seminary class, I had the responsibility to select a seminary president. After consultation with the bishop, we felt impressed to call James, the seventeen-year-old son of the ward clerk.

This young man knew what service was all about because his parents had taught by both precept and example. For instance, during the five previous years, Jim and his father had been home teachers to four widows. The two of them were always there when somebody in the ward needed help. He also mowed the chapel lawn once each week.

When I asked Jim about the service he had rendered, he said, "It isn't that big a deal. When we help other people, we are really serving the Lord. It's one of the ways we show our love for the Lord. I'm sure I could have done a lot more." I then asked him how he felt about the Savior, and he started to weep. After a few minutes, he whispered, "I love him." This kid was doing the right thing for the right reason.

When we have the pure love of Christ in our lives, we serve with a purity of heart that sanctifies our service and blesses both the giver and the receiver. When we teach our children to serve others, we teach them to serve the Lord and keep his commandments. That puts them in a position to enjoy spiritual experiences that strengthen testimonies and bless lives.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Dad won't put his arm in front of the TV while Daniel plays video games. Dad will try not to talk harshly to Andrew. If Dad should slip, Andrew will say, "Dad, you're talking harshly to me again." No caffeine. (John can't sleep at night, so he wandered around this house at two in the morning. We finally pinpointed the problem. He loves Dr. Pepper, and he drinks it like he was at a watering trough. Therefore, he made the commitment to stay away from drinks containing caffeine.) Be a little bit more loose, as John becomes more trustworthy. Ease up and don't lose my temper so easily. See McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 166-68.
[^2] Daniel will hang up his clothes when he takes them off at night. Andrew will listen to Dad, so Dad won't have to talk harshly in order to get his attention. Lights out by 11:30, excluding the exceptions we discussed, i.e., if the family stays up late watching a video or a movie on TV. Thomas S. Monson, Favorite Quotations from the Collection of Thomas S. Monson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985), 61.
