R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

16

The Covenant Interview

My watch said one A.M., and I was very nervous. As the traffic light turned green, I saw a pay phone in the middle of the next block. "Would you please stop at that telephone on the right and let me call home!"

Randy gripped the steering wheel tighter, looked at me, and growled, "Stephanie, what's this nonsense? You're a senior in high school, for heaven's sakes. I mean, it's not like you're a little kid anymore." I heard Pam and Jim giggle from the back seat.

"Will you please do as I asked? It will only take a few minutes."

"So we're going to be forty-five minutes late. What's the big deal?"

"The big deal is that we told my folks that we would be home by one o'clock. We aren't going to make it, and I don't want them to worry."

"We couldn't help it that the waiter took his time getting the food to us after the dance. It also isn't our fault that the man's car wouldn't start without help. What we did was honorable. I mean, your folks will think we're wonderful for helping him."

"Randy, you need to understand something. Three weeks ago my mom and I had a covenant interview, and we talked about problems we had with each other. She has this problem. If I'm not home when I say I'll be home, especially after a date, she worries. That's just the way she is. So I promised her I'd call if I was ever going to be late. If I don't, she won't trust me anymore. So please stop, and let me give her a call."

"All right," he said, smiling at me. "It's different than the way we do things at our house. But if it's important to you, let's get on with it."

What Is a Covenant Interview?

Several years ago Elder S. Dilworth Young visited our stake for a stake conference. In the course of his instructions to the stake and ward leaders, he described what he called a covenant interview with our children. This interview, held at least monthly (and more frequently if needed), normally lasts from thirty minutes to an hour. He called it a covenant interview because, as problems are discussed, each person makes promises or covenants concerning what he or she will do to address them. The covenants are then written down and become part of a permanent record that is available for future reference.

The term covenant interview is not intended to give the impression that this is an official term used by the Church. Although the word covenant usually refers to sacred pacts made between an individual and the Lord, the kinds of promises exchanged by parents and their children through an interview are clearly not in the same class. [^1] However, they are agreements that parents and children make with each other and, therefore, can be called covenants. In addition, young people who participate in these interviews consistently report that they better understand the nature of covenants that they make with the Lord as a result of their experience in fulfilling their agreements and promises with their parents.

The major purpose of the covenant interview is to let children know that we love them and that they are of infinite worth before Heavenly Father. By holding these interviews, we and our children can communicate more effectively, solve problems that either may wish to address, learn gospel principles in ways that are relevant to our lives, give both of us an opportunity to hold one another accountable, strengthen the bond of love, give our children time to share spiritual experiences, and build esteem in our children.

The best way to begin a covenant interview is to kneel in prayer together, and then sit down, facing each other, and start talking. The easiest way to start is by saying, "What can I do to be a better parent?" and then listen to what our children tell us.

Covenant interviews can cover a variety of subjects. They almost always include, for example, a discussion of problems, such as difficulties in school, interpersonal problems with peers or family members, disagreement with family rules, frustrations with girlfriends or boyfriends, and basic information sharing. We and our children also decide on some promises to each other. An interview is a simple way for us to learn what's going on in our children's lives. If they have had some success experiences, this is a good time to talk about them. Essentially then, our discussion should address both our own and our children's needs; and anything that falls into that category is appropriate to talk about.

After discussing problems, successes, and achievements, we need to review the decisions we made in the last interview. The last item on the agenda, before kneeling in prayer, is to go over the commitments made during that interview, to ensure that both parties clearly understand the assignments and to guarantee that the written list is accurate. Remember, the major purpose of the covenant interview is to let our children know that we love them and that they are important to their Heavenly Father.

The Blessings Will Follow

Since Elder Young introduced the idea of holding covenant interviews, many parents in our stake have regularly conducted these interviews each month with their children; and several types of blessings have consistently resulted from these activities.

First, covenant interviews help us to hold our children accountable—one of the more important jobs a parent has—without looking like the "bad guy." The covenant interview format, with its written list that is reviewed during subsequent meetings, also ensures that both parent and child are held accountable.

Second, experience with covenant interviews is consistent with Elder Thomas S. Monson's belief that "When performance is measured, performance improves. When performance is measured and reported back, the rate of improvement accelerates." [^2] As one father explained: "I can always tell when it's time for another covenant interview with my twelve-year-old daughter. All of the sudden the things that we talked about in our last interview start to get done. It's interesting to watch. The reason? She knows we will go over the things each of us promised to do; and she wants to be certain that she has kept her commitments."

A third blessing is that covenant interviews make administering discipline easier for parents. Since all agreements are reviewed regularly, responsible behavior gets noticed and can be immediately rewarded. On the other hand, the failures tend to be painfully obvious, and both the parent and the child tend to hold themselves accountable. This by itself substantially increases the potential for solving problems. Both can then work together to help each other do what each agreed to do. A single mother described the following interaction with her teenage son:

For years I battled with my oldest son about the time he should get home from activities, and the problems got much worse as soon as he turned sixteen. He simply resisted deadlines and was continuously late. Finally I realized that I was doing all the worrying and fussing. It didn't bother him at all.

In our monthly covenant interview, we discussed the problem. I told him that from now on I would no longer tell him what time to be home at night. We would negotiate it ahead of time. However, once we agreed on a time, that was the latest time that I expected him to arrive. If he wasn't there, and he didn't call to let me know why he would be late, he couldn't use the car for the next week.

Since that time, we have had no problems with deadlines. He has been late only once; and his first comment, as he walked through the door was "I know. You don't have to say anything. But it's not going to happen again." What a relief. I'm no longer the bad guy. The problem is his, and he's willing to take the consequences.

A fourth blessing is that covenant interviews can deal with subjects too private for regular family home evenings and family councils. There are times when we can teach our children as a group, and there are times when a one-on-one relationship is best. For example, a father shared the following information about his sixteen-year-old son:

Something had been bothering Jim for several weeks, but he wouldn't discuss it. The other family members asked him about it in our weekly family home evenings and in the family councils, but he refused to respond. I also told him privately that I would be happy to visit with him anytime he wanted to talk, but he took no initiative.

After the first hour and a half of our covenant interview, he finally raised the subject. The problem dealt with a minor transgression he had committed, and he didn't know how to deal with it. Eighty minutes later we both understood the problem, and he had a plan for resolving it. Although we understand that the confidential things we talk about in those interviews are kept confidential, he again swore me to secrecy and said that there was no other setting in which he could feel comfortable in addressing such a problem.

A fifth blessing is that covenant interviews help improve family decision making. Most children want to participate in or at least influence decisions that affect them, but few want the responsibility that comes with that participation. Effective covenant interviews make avoiding those responsibilities almost impossible. A fourteen-year-old girl reported the following:

I know that if I can get my dad to agree to something in a covenant interview, I have a commitment I can depend on. All I have to say is, "Dad, you promised," and I have no question about whether he will do it. He always has, and he always will. It also puts pressure on me, because I can no longer ignore the things he asks me to do. If I don't like what's going on, I can have my say, and my parents listen. And most of the time, if I approach it right, I even get my way. But I can't do it anymore by sitting back and griping. I have got to get involved.

A sixth blessing is that covenant interviews give us an opportunity to talk with each of our children regularly. A major complaint in most families is the lack of one-to-one contact between parents and children because of differences in schedules and demands on parents' time. Regular biweekly covenant interviews, for example, ensure that children have access to their parents for at least one hour of uninterrupted time once every two weeks. A mother of six children shared this insight with us:

Schedules are so hectic at our home that we seldom have even dinner together, let alone the luxury of spending private time visiting with each other one to one. That is why covenant interviews are so important. My children and I treat them just like regular Church meetings and build them into our schedules. I can get more done with my children in an hour of covenant interview time than I can in a month with our regular schedule.

As a seventh blessing, regular covenant interviews build trust. The more we and our children trust each other, the fewer problems we will have with rebellion and disobedience. If our children see that we have consistently behaved in a trustworthy manner, they will probably trust us and be more inclined to do what we ask. It works the other way around too, as one single parent discovered:

I am finally learning to trust my son. That is a big relief, because this is the first time I've felt that way in years. I realize now that we have been talking past each other for a long time. As a result, he did not trust me, and I did not trust him. It is unfortunate how those misunderstandings arise. If I had started these interviews with him when he was six, most of the difficulties we have faced could have been prevented. It is a wonderful feeling to finally have my son trust me once again.

An eighth blessing is that covenant interviews are the easiest way that we know for dealing with conflict and for solving problems. If both the parent and child agree to deal with problems when they are small, the child has given "permission" to talk about things that bother the parent (and vice versa). Note the following example of how one father deals with problems he has with his children:

The first question I ask each of my children is "What can I do to be a better dad?" They are brutally honest, and they always bring up things that I do that bug them. That information has been extremely helpful, because then I know what I need to do to resolve the problems. I honestly want to be a good father. Since they are consumers of my "fatherhood services," it makes sense to find out what they like and don't like. Of course some things aren't negotiable; but most things are. If changing a behavior or two will help me be more influential with my children, I certainly want to know what those things are. I would be foolish to ignore such valuable information. I have learned more about being a good father from that feedback than from any other source, except what I learned from my own father.

Dealing with problems goes both ways; I also have my day in court when I tell them about the things they're doing that I would like to see changed. It's amazing how much we can get done in those meetings. We can accomplish more in that setting than in any other format.

A ninth blessing is that covenant interviews provide both us and our children with regular reminders concerning strengths and the areas that may need improvement. The parent and the child can then use this information to make midcourse corrections, as it were, to improve behavior and to make certain that both are on the right track. This is particularly helpful in developing better habits. As one mother reported,

Reviewing the commitments we made during the last session automatically builds in opportunities to provide my son with positive feedback. That is one of the most beneficial parts of those interviews—I have a chance to concentrate on the positive and to reinforce the things that he does well without appearing to be gushy or patronizing. The evidence is there, and his success is equally apparent to both of us. That helps build self-esteem. He now knows he can succeed at just about anything he tries because he has a track record of success. If I have to deal with something negative, there are plenty of positive things in the overall interview so the time doesn't appear to be a scolding session. For every mistake he makes, he probably does a hundred things well. I refuse to give the negative things equal time.

A tenth blessing is that covenant interviews help everyone involved to communicate more easily. As children get older, the interviews commonly become both less formal and much more frequent. A divorced father reported the following about his relationship with his son:

We hold formal covenant interviews once every month for no more than an hour. However, we hold informal interviews several times a week, and they often last two or three hours. My son knows he can count on me to listen, to suggest alternatives, to provide help if asked and to stay out of his business unless I am invited in. He also knows that he can trust me under all circumstances. It's great to have a "best-friend" relationship with my children.

An eleventh blessing is that covenant interviews teach children the importance of keeping covenants. We live in a world where people cheat, lie, steal, and don't trust each other. Promises don't mean much anymore. The Lord wants a people who are pure and who can be trusted to keep their covenants. Since covenant interviews include promises that children and parents make with each other, the meetings provide an ideal forum for helping children understand the importance of keeping their word and doing what they say they will do. A returned missionary explained it in the following way:

You know, I have come to appreciate the word covenant. All through my teenage years, I had covenant interviews with my dad and mom. Each month I promised them I would do certain things, and they also made promises to me. They always kept their promises. I kept most of mine; and it got better as I got older.

As a result, the word covenant took on a very personal and important meaning. I learned early in life that if I promised somebody something, I had a sacred obligation to keep that promise. The quality of my relationship with them depended on it.

Then, when I went through the temple before my mission, I saw first-hand what my folks had been trying to teach me all those years. My relationship with my Father in Heaven depended upon how well I kept the covenants I had made with him. I have learned that making covenants is one of the most important things that can happen in life.

Doing It Right

There are several things we can do to make covenant interviews work well. First, we need to make sure that our children know that we love and trust them. We must sincerely want to help our children solve problems, and the importance of a supportive attitude cannot be overstated. Without it, the covenant interview could easily result in our children feeling as if we're their enemy. Unfortunately, covenant interviews can provide an opportunity for parents who are disposed to taking advantage of their children's increased vulnerability to punish them for their mistakes. Force and unrighteous dominion should be avoided at all costs.

On the other hand, supportive covenant interviews will help build a relationship that can be achieved in few other ways. As one father explained, "I have been able to get closer to my children as a result of regular covenant interviews than by any other means."

Second, covenant interviews must be held regularly, and the time spent must be free of interruptions. This is critical, since the child receives a clear message about his or her importance when we choose to respond to unknown telephone callers during the special times that are supposed to be set aside exclusively for parent and child.

Third, we must take time to prepare intellectually and spiritually for the meeting, particularly if there is an age span among our children. Prayer should also be part of that preparation.

Fourth, we can make keeping written records easier by having a notebook handy or by using a computer. Writing down commitments helps both the parent and child crystallize their thinking and clarify exactly what is really meant. The written product is also something tangible to which both the parent and child can refer and by which they can measure success. It tells exactly what is expected and when. As one mother explained, "I find that if things get down on paper, they will almost always get done. Writing things down forces us to specifically identify behaviors that need to be changed. That always makes change much easier. After a while, those positive changes become habits, and we eventually drop them from the list of commitments."

Fifth, we must be willing to hold our children accountable and to ask the difficult "why" questions when assignments are not completed. Even more important, we must be willing to be held accountable ourselves. We too will have assignments; by following through on them, we not only set an example of dependability and responsibility, but also demonstrate to the child that he or she can trust us to keep our promises.

Sixth, we must keep the format flexible, both in frequency and in content, so that the interview will meet the needs of all our children. We must understand each child's needs and deal with each one at his or her level. As President Lorenzo Snow explained, "A father, in communicating counsel to his son, should in the first place prepare himself to communicate those proper counsels which will suit the condition of his son." [^3]

An interview with a three-year-old may require nothing more than a few moments of holding and kissing the child, a short visit about Heavenly Father's love for his children, and the parent and child kneeling in prayer together. A sixteen-year-old, on the other hand, may need a three-hour meeting to work through problems, to better understand a gospel principle, or to help him or her gain the skills and confidence to cope with unhealthy peer pressures and resist standards inconsistent with gospel principles. Understandably, then, we should give our children some say in how covenant interviews can best be used in our families. That flexibility is illustrated by the two following sample agreements. The first is a covenant between a father and his seven-year-old son:

Date: January 3

Invocation: Daniel

Benediction: Dad

Compare the above items to those discussed with the same father and his seventeen-year-old son:

Date: February 13

Invocation: Andrew

Benediction: Dad

These commitments can be extended indefinitely, depending on the needs of the parent and the child. One mother told us that the covenant interview agendas with her daughter regularly included over thirty items; and eighty percent of those items are on the agenda because of her daughter's insistence. Most agendas will be much shorter, but remember to be flexible when the situation calls for adjustments.

Seventh, we must be willing to listen to our children, both intellectually and emotionally. Some problems require nothing more than a listening ear. Others necessitate immediate action.

Eighth, we must be willing to empathize with and to express love to our children. The power of love cannot be overemphasized. People will do positive things because of love that they will not do for any other reason. President Joseph F. Smith explained:

Fathers, if you wish your children to be taught in the principles of the gospel, . . . if you wish them to be obedient to and united with you, love them! and prove to them that you do love them by your every word or act to them. For your own sake, for the love that should exist between you and your boys—however wayward they might be, . . . when you speak or talk to them, do it not in anger; do it not harshly, in a condemning spirit. Speak to them kindly; get down and weep with them, if necessary, and get them to shed tears with you if possible. Soften their hearts; get them to feel tenderly towards you. Use no lash and no violence, but . . . approach them with reason, with persuasion and love unfeigned. With these means, if you cannot gain your boys and your girls, . . . there will be no means left in the world by which you can win them to yourselves. [^4]

Ninth, covenant interviews provide a splendid opportunity for parents and their children to share spiritual experiences. As they kneel together in prayer, express their love for one another, talk about the weightier matters of the kingdom, and communicate heart to heart, the Spirit of the Lord can be poured out powerfully and bear witness of the truth of the gospel and the love that a kind Heavenly Father has for them.

Finally, covenant interviews provide an invaluable opportunity to help build our children's self-esteem. A major function of the gospel is to help members understand their relationship with their Father in Heaven. Once a child understands his or her relationship to Heavenly Father, the desire to keep his commandments significantly increases.

Concentrating on our children's strengths, emphasizing the positive, and creating opportunities for successful experiences also motivate our children to excel. Keep in mind that a positive, permanent change in behavior is always accompanied by an increase in self-esteem.

Teaching goes on constantly in all families, through both examples and counsel. But children need to learn both the doctrine and the application of the gospel in their lives. We need to ascertain what our children need to learn, and then choose our strategies accordingly.

What If the Covenant Interview Doesn't Go according to Plans?

Not all plans work perfectly, and many run into what appear to be difficult obstacles. The covenant interview can be an effective method of developing responsibility and closer family ties. But what happens if the problem the interview is to resolve is chronic and the agreement is breached? Here's how one father handled that difficulty:

I stopped reading, looked at the clock, and realized that my fifteen-year-old son and I had a serious problem. He was thirty minutes late getting home. I put down the newspaper, went to the other room, and picked up the phone. When I finally heard my son's voice, I said, "John, are you lost?"

"What do you mean?"

I said, "I think you know what I mean. I'll see you in a minute."

Five minutes later, John walked through the front door. I said, "Sit down. You are I are going to have a covenant interview."

"A what?"

"A covenant interview. That means we're going to talk about some problems, and we're going to write down what we decide." John had refused to acknowledge the fact that we have a right to know, before he leaves our home, where he is going, who he will be with, and when he will be back. Instead, he sneaks off. So we spent the next forty-five minutes in a critical interview about responsibility.

After we had prayer, the first thing I asked was, "John, what could I do to be a better father."

Instantly he said, "Ease up."

I was surprised at his response, since we really have very few rules in our home. "Okay," I said, "I'll ease up. Tell me where."

He said, "You're too stiff. You won't let me go on any dates."

I couldn't believe what I was hearing. This kid had never expressed an interest in girls in his life. He couldn't even get up the nerve to talk with a girl because he was afraid she'd think he was dumb. He also consistently maintained that he hated all females except his mother. So it's not like this dating business was really a pressing issue. "Hold it," I said. "I can't ease up on that. It's not my rule."

"What are you talking about? It is too."

"No, it isn't either. It's the prophet's rule. I can't ease up on those rules. I made that promise to Heavenly Father. When the prophet speaks, I'm going to do what he says. He's the one who counseled against dating before age sixteen."

"Are you sure he said that?"

"Yes. If you want to press the issue, I'll be happy to find the quotes. Otherwise, you can trust me. But he did say it."

"All right, I'll trust you."

I then said, "Okay. Now what else can I do to be a better father?"

"Ease up on your rules. Give me freedom."

"Okay, but freedom doesn't come for nothing. It has to be earned."

"What do you mean?"

"The more I trust you, the more freedom you have. Are you trustworthy now?"

He thought for a while. "About half," he finally responded.

"Then that means you're about half untrustworthy."

He hesitated, then said, "You're right."

It was a decisive interview. After additional discussion, he wrote down four things he promised he would do, and I wrote down what I would do. We both then signed the paper and dated it, and I said, "Okay, we have a follow-up interview two weeks from tonight."

He said, "I'll be there."

I said, "So will I."

Now I have held lots of interviews with my children, but I have never conducted a covenant interview. My children and I have had some great talks, but we've never written down what we decided. As a result, a lot of things don't get done. That covenant interview was a first important step, but I knew that John needed follow-up. He was really out of control in some areas at that time. The covenants he wrote down were the following:

John's promises:

Dad's promise:

John sat down at the table and wrote out his commitments in longhand. They were his promises—he had ownership for them. I wrote mine, then we signed them. What we had written down became a covenant between the two of us.

Well, I was both delighted and relieved. It looked as if the problem had finally been solved. However, I couldn't have been more wrong. The very next week that rascal broke two of his covenants.

I got home about 8:30 P.M. Just as I was pulling into the driveway, he was getting into our other car. "Where are you going?" I asked.

"I'm going over to Bill's house to jump on his trampoline."

"OK. Have a good time, but please be home by 11:30."

He said, "OK," and drove away.

Well, it turned out that rather than going to Bill's house to jump on the trampoline, he went to Mark's house to listen to music; and he told me a lie to get there. Furthermore, he didn't get home until after midnight.

Susan, my wife, waited up for him, and I went to bed. In fact, she insisted that I go to bed. I think she was afraid I'd get mad. She was right. At that point I was so angry that I felt like throttling him.

The next morning Susan and I discussed the matter privately. She didn't think that the problem was all that serious; and when I suggested that we take away his driver's license, which he had gotten two days earlier, she was convinced that it was overkill on my part. It was simply too harsh a penalty for what he had done. But she agreed to support me.

A few minutes later, when the two of us met with John, I started the discussion. "OK, what are we going to do about this?"

He started to hem and haw a little bit. He then said, "What's the big deal?"

I said, "The big deal is that you gave me your word of honor that you would do something, and you didn't do it. You made some covenants with me, which you didn't keep. In fact, you even wrote them down on a sheet of paper, and you signed it."

Susan said, "He did that?"

"Absolutely." I got up, went into my office, and got the paper on which John had written his covenants and signed his name. Susan suddenly became an instant convert. She waved that sheet in front of his nose and said, "John, it's right here. You promised!"

He protested, "Mom!"

"Don't 'Mom' me. You wrote it out yourself, and you signed it."

"But Mom, you don't understand."

"I understand it perfectly. You promised that you would do something. You gave your word. You wrote it down yourself, and then you didn't do it. What do you think it means?"

Susan clearly saw what he was up to, and she didn't like it anymore than I did. It was at that moment that John realized he didn't have a chance.

There's a great advantage in having had him write it. As they say in the legal profession, the records speak for themselves. It took away the possibility that the meeting would become coercive. Nobody was dictating anything.

I said, "John, she's right. You're the one who agreed to it. Nobody told you to. You signed it."

Normally we would have had a major battle on our hands. But he didn't say a word. He knew he had made a mistake, and he was stopped dead in his tracks, so to speak. Just having that single sheet of paper changed the entire focus of the discipline. The meeting was transformed from a potentially destructive and damaging encounter, as far as my relationship with him was concerned, to a less negative, more instructive experience.

I said, "Because you broke two promises, John, the only choice we have is to say you can't drive anymore. Not for a long time. Probably not more than a year."

John turned pale, and in a voice only slightly louder than a whisper he asked, "Are you serious?"

I smiled. "No, but you can't drive for the next two weeks. I hope you can catch on to what you're really doing to yourself. You aren't doing anything to us by your lying. True, it's painful to us to see your dishonesty; but we're not hurt, at least not in the eternal sense. You're the guy that's really getting beat up by this process. I'd also like you to write a five-page report on lying, based on what's recorded in the scriptures. What does the Lord say about it? Why does he hate liars? How come Satan likes to get people to lie? That's one of his main tasks, you know. Satan really likes liars."

It was a long interview; and when we finished, John's driver's license was in my pocket. Quite frankly, the whole thing was very hard on us, and I disliked the results almost as much as he did. It meant that Susan and I had to take him everywhere. The place where he works is fifteen miles away. But the end result was worth it. He learned some valuable lessons in that process.

The report on lying opened his eyes to what he was doing. For example, it shook him up to read about Korihor. After he had completed the project, he said, "I didn't know so many things had been said about lying. I also didn't think you cared if I lied to you. I just figured you didn't want to know, so you wouldn't be bothered."

John has learned that giving his word is serious business and the consequences of not keeping his word are very real. We believe that teaching him that lesson when he's sixteen is a whole lot better than trying to deal with it when he's twenty or forty. Where else could he learn a lesson so powerfully and yet so inexpensively? If he lies to his boss, he'll get fired. If he lies to the mission president, he'll be a lousy missionary. If he cheats in school, he'll flunk the class and likely be expelled.

Having the written document is the easiest way I have ever seen to deal with serious problems. John was the one who made the rules; he was the one who set the goals and made the commitments, not me. So when he failed to do what he said he would do, Susan and I weren't the bad guys. The responsibility fell squarely on his shoulders.

That happened three months ago, and we haven't had a problem with him lying since that time. He's also kept every promise he's made to me in our covenant interviews. He has been a different kid.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Kimball, Teachings, 349.
[^2] Wilford Woodruff, March 17, 1857, entry; in Scott G. Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, Volume 5, 1 January 1857-31 December 1861 (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1984), 39; italics added.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Angels May Quote from It," New Era, October 1975, 5.
[^4] For a helpful guide to creating family records, see Don Norton, Composing Your Life Story: Ten Practical Guides to Creating a Personal History (Orem, Utah: Don Norton, 1982).
