R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

17

The Value of Keeping Records

The phone rang at 7:20 on Sunday morning. I picked it up and heard the pleasant voice of the first counselor in our bishopric. "Hi Carol. This is Bill Simpson. Is Alex there?"

"Yes, but he's still in bed. Would you like me to wake him?"

"How soon will he be getting up?" he asked.

"He said he'd set his alarm for 7:45, but sometimes that doesn't mean a whole lot."

"I know what you mean. Why don't you ask him to give me a call as soon as he gets up. As you're probably aware, he's scheduled to speak in sacrament meeting this morning. The other youth speaker is sick, so if he'd like to take a few minutes longer than usual, he's welcome to do so."

"This morning!" I gasped. "I didn't know anything about it. But I haven't seen him for more than ten minutes at a time since last Wednesday night."

"Would you please ask him to give me a call when he gets up?"

I agreed, said good-bye, and hung up the phone. I knew Alex wasn't prepared. He told us last Sunday that he was scheduled to speak in sacrament meeting, but I had the impression that his assignment was still two weeks away!

At 7:24 I was standing next to my son's bed. "I just got an interesting call from Brother Simpson."

With his eyes still closed, he groaned, "What did he want?"

"He tells me you'll be speaking in sacrament meeting this morning."

Alex's eyes popped open, and I knew I had his attention. Ninety seconds later he was on the phone with Brother Simpson. "Sure, I'd be happy to. Thanks for the opportunity." He then hung up the phone, walked over to the kitchen cupboard, opened up the cabinet door, and dropped two slices of bread into the toaster.

"Well, what are you going to do?"

He looked at me, smiled, and said, "I'm going to be the two youth speakers in sacrament meeting this morning. I have ten minutes."

"Can I be of any help?"

"Nope. But thanks anyway." I felt sick to my stomach. I couldn't give a decent ten-minute talk if I had a week to prepare, and my sixteen-year-old son thinks he can give one two hours from now?

Alex took the longest shower of his life, dressed, and left at 8:15 for his priests quorum presidency meeting. As he walked out the door, I asked, "Are you ready for sacrament meeting?" He again grinned and said, "I hope so."

I again felt that empty feeling in the pit of my stomach. Several years ago he had suffered from low self-esteem, and I wasn't sure how he would react if he fell on his face, so to speak. I didn't see how he could help but embarrass himself—just as I do whenever I stand at the pulpit. And I had years of experience.

The opening activities of sacrament meeting that day were the shortest in the history of the Church: no announcements, no business, short hymns. Then my son stood at the pulpit and started to speak:

In First Nephi, chapter three, verse seven, the prophet Nephi said, "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." From my own experience, I can bear witness that the Lord does prepare the way for us to accomplish what he asks us to do.

Alex then shared a personal experience from two years earlier, when the Lord had helped him do something he thought was impossible and had blessed him for his obedience. It was a touching experience. The Spirit of the Lord was present as he spoke. He closed by bearing his testimony that the gospel was true.

I couldn't believe what I had heard. It was truly a wonderful talk.

As he joined the family after the closing prayer, I said, "Son, that was great. How did you do it?"

"Simple. I just read part of my journal."

The Importance of Keeping Records

Keeping records is essential to building spirituality in our homes. Records of our spiritual experiences provide a way to keep track of the Lord's blessings and allow our posterity to know those blessings. In short, records provide a rich pool of spiritual experiences on which family members will draw for generations to come. [^1] Often we, like the priesthood leader who shared the following experience, overlook the impact of important events in our lives:

For years our Church leaders had counseled us to keep journals and other family records. However, I assumed that such counsel applied only to Church leaders and people whose lives were far more active than mine. Besides, I had never experienced anything I thought worth recording. Then I happened upon the following statement by President Wilford Woodruff regarding the importance of recording personal experiences.

"[When] Elders go forth upon missions to the nations of the earth, they have to enter into a regular warfare. The Lord pours out his Holy Spirit upon them and they war with the world, the flesh, and the Devil, with kings, princes, Lords, Presidents and rulers. He is cast into prison and the Lord delivers him. The Devil enters into some of his converts and he lays hands upon them and he casts them out. The saints are sick and he heals them. He prophesies in the name of the Lord and his words come to pass. Rulers declare that he shall not preach to the people on pain of death. He preaches the word of God and many believe, obey and rejoice in the Lord and he is protected by the power of God. He goes upon the sea and storms rage and he calms the water and wind in the name of the Lord. He is shielded and guarded by angels of God all the day long and he knows the power of God is with him and reveals unto him all the evils that lie in his path. And yet he does not view these great and important things of value enough to make a record of them to spend a short time in writing them and the circumstances and history of those blessings unto him are lost both to the present and all future generations. Are these things right? I do not believe they are. I do not believe a man is justified in neglecting to record these things." [^2]

This statement sunk deeply into my heart. I had never cast out devils, healed the sick, prophesied in the name of the Lord, or calmed the seas. However, I realized that the Lord had given me my own set of spiritual experiences, some of which I could not remember, simply because I had not bothered to write them down.

Records can be kept in a variety of different forms, including journals, scrapbooks, quotes by family members, personal histories, and minutes of family meetings, such as family home evening.

Journals

Journals should include a record of spiritual experiences, answers to prayers, ordinances performed, blessings given, and other faith-promoting events. What is recorded should be accurate and complete, particularly as it relates to ordinances of the priesthood. One man learned the value of recording spiritual experiences the hard way:

While serving as a bishop several years ago, I received a call from a bishop in another state. A young man, whom I had watched grow up and whom I had ordained an elder several months earlier, was preparing to leave for his mission. He had been interviewed, and the missionary papers had been prepared. However, there was no record of his receiving the Melchizedek Priesthood. I had ordained him an elder while he was home for Christmas vacation, but the paperwork for the ordination originated in his own ward. Unfortunately, nobody bothered to notify his bishop of the ordination.

With a great deal of confidence, I went to my journal because I knew I had recorded the event. However, my entry read, "Last month I conferred the Melchizedek Priesthood on Mark Walker and ordained him to the office of an elder." I was embarrassed and chagrined. Had I bothered to record the ordinance properly and in a timely manner, a great deal of trouble could have been avoided. Of a sudden I better understood how Nephi felt when the Savior asked, "How be it that ye have not written this thing?" (3 Ne. 23:11.)

Recording spiritual experiences in journals can also strengthen the faith of descendants for generations to come. Consider for a moment the impact of the following experience.

Shortly after I returned from my mission, I came across the following journal entry of my father, who had served in the Palestine-Syrian Mission:

"After World War II broke out, and the brethren called all of the missionaries home throughout the world. At the time there were only four missionaries in the entire mission. So the four of us, along with President and Sister Jacobs and their family, boarded a ship and headed for home.

"Shortly after we arrived at Alexandria, Egypt, our ship was quarantined, and nobody would tell us why. So the other ships in the convoy left, and we were stuck in the Alexandria harbor.

"The next morning the quarantine was lifted, and we were allowed to proceed on our trip. As we sailed along, we saw the debris from a ship that had been blown up. Later we learned that the ship that took our place in the convoy was torpedoed by a German submarine. Had we not been quarantined, our ship would have been hit, and we would have all been killed. The Lord takes care of his missionaries."

Few experiences have had such a profound impact on me and my family as that incident, because it helped us understand how much Heavenly Father loved his missionaries in general, and my father in particular. I will be forever grateful that he took the time to record that experience.

President Spencer W. Kimball counseled, "Get a notebook, my young folks, a journal that will last through all time, and maybe the angels may quote from it for eternity." [^3] I have no way of knowing if angels are quoting from my father's journal. But that story has been quoted by family members many times in family home evening, in auxiliary lessons, and in sacrament meeting talks. To us it is scripture, and the reality of that experience is as meaningful to us as any scripture we have ever read.

If keeping your own journal is no small task, then getting your children to keep journals can be an even greater challenge. For some parents, parting the Red Sea would be easier. But it is not an impossible task. The experience of a father of seven children illustrates this point:

Every Sunday we have our children write in their journals. My wife interviews those who are too little and records their words. As soon as they learn how to write, we have them draw a picture and then use whatever words they know to describe what they just drew.

How do we get them to do it? We bribe. We use the old "M&M" technique. Every Sunday afternoon we have a special treat—something my wife has made especially for the Sabbath. Sometimes she bakes donuts. Sometimes it's cookies. Sometimes it's a special dessert. Our policy is, "As soon as you finish writing in your journal, you can have the family treat." They don't have to write in their journals if they don't want to. They just don't get the family treat until they do.

We started this Sunday activity eight years ago. At that time Jim, our oldest child, was ten. Last week he got his first journals out and spent three hours reading them. He couldn't believe what he had written. He couldn't believe that a kid so young could write something that profound.

Our children have quoted from their journals in their talks in church. They have used them for lesson material in Primary and family home evening. They have referred to them when writing papers for their classes in school. Their journals have become a record of their lives. By reading them, they are continuously reminded of the blessings the Lord has given to them. We also make sure that they use acid-free paper, available at the Church Distribution Center, and write with permanent ink.

Scrapbooks

Technically speaking, scrapbooks are blank books in which miscellaneous items, such as awards, newspaper clippings, pictures, and certificates, are collected and preserved. They differ from journals in that scrapbooks contain little written explanation. The items in scrapbooks speak for themselves. Ideally scrapbooks are neatly categorized by year and filed neatly in file drawers.

For most of us, however, our filing system is made up of boxes of memorabilia stored in the basement. Regardless of their location, the challenge is to arrange them in a way that is both accessible and useful. One mother discovered an easy way to organize her family's keepsakes:

For years I had tried to get our junk organized; but the more I tried, the more discouraged I got. My need to do it perfectly prevented me from ever doing more than start. Thus the collection from our ten years of marriage stayed in eight big boxes in our storeroom.

One day a friend showed me how she had resolved her problem. On one of her bookshelves was a row of three-ring binders containing clear plastic sheets with pockets of various sizes. Some sheets contained photographs. Others contained certificates, awards, and newspaper articles. Everything was easily accessible and well organized. I realized I had just discovered the answer to my problem.

The following Saturday my husband and I attacked our "ten years' worth of junk." Eight hours later we had not only organized the contents of all eight boxes, but we had also categorized and labeled 2800 pictures. We then did the same with the materials each of us had brought to our marriage. All of that "junk" was now neatly filed by year in fifteen three-ring notebooks in one bookcase.

Our three children also have their own books, and everything that happens to them gets filed. They put in all their pictures and some of their school work. They have all of their medical information, the hospital and doctor bills at the time they were born, the I.D. wrist bands they got at the hospital, the letters that my wife and I each wrote to them on the days they were born.

Since that time our children have spent hundreds of hours looking through those notebooks. When they get jam on the pages, the plastic sheets can easily be wiped off without damaging the contents. As new pictures and mementos come along, they are easily added. It has been wonderful, and keeping records has become fun instead of drudgery.

Quotes from Children

Occasionally children make comments that are quotable. Some are humorous. Others are profound. Still others provide insight into who they are and the greatness of their potential. Great lessons can be learned from our children, if we will take time to listen. As the Savior said, "Those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fullness of times."(D&C 128:18.) When those revelations come, we should take the time to write them down. A father of nine described how he and his wife handle this matter in his family:

My wife has a book in which she records every statement our children make that we think is clever or profound. For example, one day as I came home from work, my daughter came running to me. I picked her up and said, "Linda, you get more beautiful every time I see you. I don't know what I'm going to do with you." She put the palms of her hands on my cheeks and said, "Well, Daddy, I guess you'll just have to marry me in the temple."

We have hundreds of such statements. I have memorized many of them and use them regularly in talks and lessons. The greatest benefits, however, come to the children. They see themselves in an entirely different light when they understand some of the profound things they have said.

For example, tonight I read several of these quotes as our family sat around the dinner table. They giggled at all of the comments; and at a couple of them our daughter laughed to the point that she almost fell off her chair. She then said, "I don't remember saying any of those things. I was really a neat little kid, wasn't I!" That is one of the real payoffs. Each time our children read them, they are again impressed with how clever they are—and how important they are to us and to our Heavenly Father.

Personal Histories

Writing our own histories and including in them the details of our lives are important. However, getting a record of our parents, some of whom are in the twilight years of their lives, is also very important. Unfortunately, many older people have neither the skill nor the energy to write their histories. So if it is to be done at all, the children must take the initiative. There are both hard and easy ways to accomplish that task. One of the easiest ways, as a father of four testifies, is to record the person's life history on audiotape:

Shortly after President Kimball asked the members of the Church to write their personal histories, I began mine. However, I was having some major difficulties getting going. One day, while reading the Book of Mormon, I came across the following statement by the prophet Nephi: "Behold, I make an abridgment of the record of my father, upon plates which I have made with mine own hands; wherefore, after I have abridged the record of my father then will I make an account of mine own life." (1 Ne. 1:17.)

The impact of that statement was profound. I realized that I was working on the wrong project. I was supposed to be working on my father's history, not mine. I immediately called my father on the phone, told him that I would like to record his personal history, and suggested that we do it the following weekend. He resisted, maintaining that he didn't have enough information to talk for fifteen minutes. We started at nine on Saturday morning. By the end of the day, we had eight hours of his life story on audiotape, and we hadn't even gotten him through the first grade. One year later, when the history was completed, we had twenty-five hours of recorded tape. The edited version resulted in 160 pages of single-spaced manuscript, which we have published and distributed to family members.

I have since completed eight such interviews with my older relatives. In each case they vehemently resisted but later found it an enjoyable and richly rewarding experience. All they had to do was visit with me and tell me about the important happenings in their lives. Some of those happenings are the commonplace dates, places, and experiences. However, without exception they all have shared profound ideas, important thoughts, and rich experiences that bless everyone who reads them, particularly their own posterity.

Videotapes of loved ones also provide needed information, along with the added dimension of recording who they are and how they look. In addition to factual information, they provide hours of entertainment to friends and family members. Eventually, these records become priceless, as one woman learned in a most dramatic way: "Four years ago my father and mother came to our home for Thanksgiving. During that visit we recorded both of their life stories on videotape. On the following Monday they returned to Idaho Falls, and one week later my father died suddenly of a heart attack. Words cannot express how grateful I am that we listened to the Spirit of the Lord and recorded his history."

Family Home Evening Records

In chapter fourteen we discussed the importance of family home evening. It seems only natural that families who properly hold those meetings would frequently have spiritual experiences. Although one cannot predict when spiritual experiences will take place, it is important to have them accurately recorded when they do happen.

Other experiences during family home evening could be categorized as golden moments that family members will cherish for years to come. Consider, for example, the following comments:

Every evening at approximately nine o'clock we gather in our living room and read the scriptures. Tonight we had a delightful but unusual experience. Rather than reading the Book of Mormon, as is our custom, we read from another book of scripture: the minutes of our family home evenings.

I believe that one of the most sacred meetings in the Church is family home evening. Therefore, since September 27, 1976, we have kept a careful record of what took place in those meetings. I am the self-appointed record keeper, and I record in a spiral notebook what happens each Monday night. We now have several volumes.

Little did I realize at the time I began how valuable these books of "scripture" would become. We have recorded some of the most profound spiritual experiences in our family. Some of what I recorded is also funny. All of it is interesting.

Tonight, as I read what took place years ago, I was again delighted at the reaction of our children, ages 10, 14, and 18. (Their older brother is serving a mission in Japan.) They giggled, blushed, laughed, and punctuated the fifteen-minute-review with statements like, "I remember that," "I can't believe I did that," and "Ugh!"

I am continuously amazed at the interest the children have in that record. They often spend as much as an hour reading those notebooks. The following is a typical entry:

Date: March 6, 1978 (6:35 P.M.)

Opening Hymn: "Book of Mormon Stories"

Invocation: Scott

Fun Songs—Conducted by Alan (each person selects a favorite song and the rest of the family sings along).

Erin (age 3): "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang"

Mom: "Abba Dabba Honeymoon"

Scott (age 10): "Three Blind Mice"

Dad: "The Golden Plates"

Alan (age 7) didn't want to sing a song.

Lesson: Family Home Evening Manual #27: The Blessings of Obedience

We talked about the reasons people aren't happy. It is almost always because they are not obedient. They don't put things back where they belong. They don't get their work done. They talk disrespectfully to each other. They don't have family prayer.

We then thought of things we do in our family to keep us from being happy: not minding Mom and Dad, teasing each other, not putting our things away, not listening to each other, and Mom and Dad not listening to the children. We all decided to be more obedient this week.

(Erin sat on Dad's lap and played with the cap of Dad's fountain pen while Mom gave the lesson. Erin wanted to write with Dad's pen, but Dad wouldn't let her.)

Special Announcement: Mother announced to the children that Heavenly Father is going to send us another baby in late July or early August. Scott is glad that it will be born near his birthday in September. Alan wants a boy. Scott wants a girl. Erin wants a cookie. Dad and Mom don't care if it is a girl or a boy, but they would like the baby to be healthy.

Mom reminded the children about how it felt when Erin was in her tummy and Scott and Alan could feel her kick. Surprisingly, the children didn't seem all that excited about the news. While Mom was talking, Erin walked around the living room with a pocket calculator in her mouth.

Special Musical Number: Dad sang "The South Davis Junior High School Song." Everyone thrilled at both the beauty of the melody and the marvelous quality of Dad's voice. When the two were combined with the lyrics, the family was almost moved to tears.

Closing Hymns: "Frosty the Snowman," "The Golden Plates," and "Reverently, Quietly"

Benediction: Erin

Refreshments: Sugar cookies, which Mom and Erin made this morning. The family went into the kitchen, iced the cookies, and ate all of them. They were delicious.

The ideas and activities of this chapter are neither particularly unusual nor profound. In all likelihood, the activities reported here are duplicated thousands of times each week in the homes of Church members throughout the world. The records the families make, however, are invaluable to the people for whom they are kept. To us, those records constitute a sacred history of the most important events in our lives. And as the years pass, their value increases. [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Kimball, Teachings, 349.
[^2] Wilford Woodruff, March 17, 1857, entry; in Scott G. Kenney, ed., Wilford Woodruff's Journal, Volume 5, 1 January 1857-31 December 1861 (Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1984), 39; italics added.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Angels May Quote from It," New Era, October 1975, 5.
[^4] For a helpful guide to creating family records, see Don Norton, Composing Your Life Story: Ten Practical Guides to Creating a Personal History (Orem, Utah: Don Norton, 1982).
