R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

18

Using Vacations to Teach the Gospel

My son's voice cracked, and then he was quiet. He looked down at his notes, at the audience, and at his notes again. His eyes glistened, and a single tear ran down his right cheek. After what seemed like forever, he put both of his hands on the pulpit in front of him and continued:

Last summer, during our family vacation, I had the chance to visit Adam-ondi-Ahman, Far West, Winter Quarters, Independence, Liberty, Nauvoo, and Carthage. The Carthage Jail stands out as the most significant place we visited.

As soon as we arrived I started getting upset. We watched a movie about the history of the building, and as time went on I became increasingly more angry. I thought, "How dare they kill the prophet of God, the person who has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it." [See D&C 135:3.] As we toured the jail, all I could think about was, "This is the place where they murdered Joseph Smith."

As I entered the upper room where Joseph and Hyrum spent their last hours in mortal life with John Taylor and Willard Richards, a peaceful feeling came over me. I knew that the blood of the prophet had to be shed in order for him to seal his testimony and to complete his mission here in mortality. As I saw the blood stain of Hyrum on the floor, and as I looked out the window from which the prophet fell, I knew for sure that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was true.

Many other things happened during that vacation, and the Holy Ghost bore witness to me of the truthfulness of many other things. But my most memorable moment was at the Carthage Jail when the Holy Ghost testified to me that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.

Vacation Opportunities to Teach the Gospel

Family vacations provide unique occasions to reinforce family values and teach gospel principles. In contrast to the hectic schedules in most homes, vacations give family members the chance to spend uninterrupted, quality time together that can strengthen relationships and provide opportunities for spiritual enrichment. With proper planning, families can take advantage of the increased flexibility that vacations afford and create opportunities for family members to enjoy experiences that would otherwise be impossible. However, the creation of those opportunities must be a priority, as one mother described:

When our children were little, my husband and I decided to carefully plan our family vacations. Since we were spending all that money on experiences, we wanted to make sure that our investment paid off in helping our children feel better about themselves and in strengthening their testimonies of the gospel. We knew that if we didn't take steps to create spiritual activities, they wouldn't happen. As a result, whenever we plan a vacation, we never take our eyes off the goals of strengthening testimonies and building family unity.

Thus, even when the thrust of the family vacation is recreational or cultural, there is ample room for spiritual experiences. Sometimes we need to do nothing more than participate in the regular worshipful activities that are a part of our normal, everyday lives. In short, we keep the commandments, regardless of where we are. A young woman reported the following about the family in which she grew up:

When I was growing up, the only thing that was really different when we went on vacations was that we were away from home. We always had family prayer. We blessed the food at every meal, even in restaurants. We held family home evening. We also went to church. My folks gave us a choice about attending the other Sunday meetings, but we always went to sacrament meeting. That just came with being a member of our family. We planned our activities around the Sabbath, and my folks made sure that when Sunday came, we were near an organized ward or branch. My husband and I have adopted the same attitudes in our home. No matter where we are in the world, if we are near an organized ward or branch, we attend sacrament meeting.

Attending church meetings in other places provides opportunities for children to compare how things are done in their home wards with how meetings are conducted elsewhere. They also get a first-hand experience with the universal nature of the gospel and understand the consistency with which leaders conduct church meetings. A father of three described his family's experience in the following way:

Last Christmas we spent ten days on PoiPu Beach on the island of Kauai, Hawaii. Because we had come from the Rocky Mountains, the change in scenery was both exciting and breathtaking. We saw some of the most beautiful scenery in our lives, including an aerial view from a breathtaking helicopter ride around the island. From our front window we also had a gorgeous view of the ocean. It was an ideal location, and we are convinced that it is one of the most beautiful places on the face of the earth.

However, the highlight of the trip was the sacrament meeting we attended at the Kalaheo Ward on Kauai. What impressed us most was the music. Those wonderful Polynesian people sang with a spirit that I had never experienced. For an opening hymn we sang "In Our Lovely Deseret." I had not sung that hymn for thirty-five years, and my children had never heard it. As a closing hymn, we sang "As I Have Loved You" through twice. The former has since become one of my children's favorite hymns; and we now sing both hymns in every one of our family home evenings. Every time we sing them, we are reminded of that sweet experience in the Kalaheo Ward on Kauai. It is a wonderful memory.

A mother of four children reported a similar experience when she attended a sacrament meeting with her family on one of the Pacific islands: "I will never forget the spirit that I felt in that sacrament meeting. I heard a Polynesian priest bless the sacrament and, in doing so, communicate with our Heavenly Father in a way I had never before experienced. Since that time, the sacrament prayer has taken on an entirely different meaning for me."

Unfortunately, vacation schedules sometimes make it impossible to attend church meetings in an organized ward or branch, particularly when families are camping or traveling. Nonetheless, arrangements can be made to allow for variations in schedules, and families can still have meaningful, spiritual experiences. Consider, for the example, the following comments by the father of two young boys:

Since we knew that our camping trip would not allow us to attend church, we received permission from our bishop to hold our own sacrament meeting. Our two children were five and seven years old at the time. My wife led the music, and we sang Primary songs. The children said the opening and closing prayers, and I administered to and passed the sacrament. My wife told us some stories about the Savior, and each of us bore our testimonies. The whole meeting took no more than twenty-five minutes. The children loved it so much that they wanted to have a sacrament meeting every morning. That happened ten years ago. Today, the only thing they remember about that trip was that sacrament meeting.

Even when the primary purposes of family vacations are recreational (which is usually the case), parents can build in opportunities for children to have spiritual experiences. For instance, nearly every state and much of Canada and Mexico have important sites in Church history. With a little research, a family can incorporate visits to those sites into their itinerary. In the process of providing for spiritual dimensions in their vacations, a family is richly rewarded.

Vacations often provide great latitude to tour areas of historical significance, to attend meetings, and to participate in gospel-related activities. These experiences can create memories that will continue to inspire us throughout our lives. Consider, for example, the impact of the following experience on a couple and two teenage sons:

In January of 1985 I learned that my business would take me to several cities in Europe in June. Since I had accumulated enough miles in my airline account for several free round-trip tickets, my wife and I decided to take our seventeen- and fourteen-year-old sons with us. Predictably, the following five months were filled with a great deal of excitement and anticipation.

After calling the Swiss Temple president, we arranged our schedule to coincide with the day baptisms for the dead would be performed in English. Our sons could then participate in baptismal work while we went through a temple session.

Our first stop was Zollikoffen, Switzerland. After spending the night in a neighboring town, we arrived at the temple promptly at eight the next morning. The kindly temple officiators immediately took custody of our sons. While we went through an endowment session, each of them did thirty baptisms for the dead. It was a great experience for them.

During the remainder of the trip we saw some of the most beautiful scenery on the face of the earth. The Swiss Alps were magnificent. The German and Austrian countryside was breathtaking. But to this day our sons maintain that the highlight of that trip was the few hours they spent at the Swiss Temple, where the Spirit of the Lord bore witness to them of the truth of the gospel and the importance of temple work. Had we not gone to the temple that day, we would never have had that experience.

It is ironic that in the above cases those who participated did not anticipate profound spiritual experiences. They were merely trying to provide opportunities for their children to grow spiritually. As they did so, the Lord blessed their efforts and provided them with rich experiences that had a profound impact on their lives. In each case, the highlight of his or her vacation was the experience with the Spirit. Children know they can have spiritual experiences at home. But providing opportunities for spiritual experiences away from home can help them understand that the gospel is universal and realize that God can bless them anywhere in the world.
