R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

The Process of Teaching the Gospel in the Home

19

Teaching Children to Resolve Problems

As I looked out the living room window, I saw my seven-year-old daughter walking up the driveway. She looked like she had been crying. I opened the front door and asked, "Good heavens, Sally, what's the matter?"

"Oh, Mommy," she said and burst into tears.

After rocking together in the rocking chair for a few minutes, I said, "Would you like to tell me what happened?"

Sally slowly nodded her head and haltingly told me the events at school that had caused so much distress. "Bobby laughed at my art and said it was dumb. Jane laughed too and said it looked awful."

"I'll bet that feels terrible." She nodded and tried to hold back the tears. We then talked at length about how she felt. The more she talked, the more intently I listened.

After she finished talking, I asked, "How are you going to handle it?"

"I don't know. I just don't know what to do."

"Would you like to know what some other children have tried?"

"Uh huh," she answered.

We talked about the various ways she could handle things and explored the possible consequences of each alternative. I then asked, "What do you think Jesus would do?"

She immediately excluded the possibilities of hitting the other children, tearing up their artwork, telling the teacher, or ignoring the problem. That left only one alternative. She said, "If anyone makes fun of my art, I'll just say, "I like my art, and I think yours is nice too." Then she added, "But what if I can't remember what to say? I'm scared."

"Why don't we ask Heavenly Father for help?" So we knelt down by her bed, and she explained her problem to Heavenly Father and asked him for help. The next morning before she went to school we again rehearsed what she would say and how she would handle it. We then knelt together in prayer, and I kissed her good-bye.

When Sally came home from the school that afternoon, she bounded into the living room and excitedly reported that it had worked exactly as we had planned. When Bobby made comments about her work, she said, "I like my art work, and I think yours is nice too." He said, "Thanks," and walked away, and nobody else said anything.

I felt thrilled that my daughter could see how Heavenly Father would help her. We went again to her bedroom and knelt in prayer, then she thanked Heavenly Father for helping her resolve this problem.

Teaching Children to Resolve Problems

One of our major responsibilities as parents is to help our children to succeed as adults. Throughout their lives they will be faced with problems. Some will be simple. Others will seem overwhelming. Problems are a part of life, and they cannot be avoided. Since the quality of our children's lives directly relates to their ability to resolve problems, we need to give them so much practice dealing with problems when they are little that, by the time they are adults, it will be second nature to them.

The most important aspect of solving problems is to rely on the Lord. That is exactly what the Prophet Joseph Smith did. After reading "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him" (James 1:5), Joseph took his problem to the Lord. Our children need to understand that the same process will work for them, and that they can go to the Lord at any time with any problem and get an answer to their prayers. Their Father in Heaven is their most valuable resource. By including Heavenly Father in the problem-solving process, our children develop faith and understand better the great blessings that come from drawing close to our Father in Heaven in prayer.

Within the gospel context, then, children can apply the various steps to resolving problems. Jim Fay suggests a five-step process to help parents get their children to solve their own problems. [^1] First, we show empathy. This lets children know that we care about them and that we understand how they're feeling. That's important, because children probably won't listen to us until they believe that we understand how they feel.

Second, we give them the implied message that they are so smart that we don't have to tell them what to do. In effect, we give them a vote of confidence and let them know they are responsible people. This can be done by simply saying, "How do you think you're going to handle it?"

Third, we get permission to share alternatives. This is done by asking a simple question: "Would you like me to tell you what other children have tried before?" Not done, but tried. Why this approach? Because children will listen to what other children have tried much more than to what their parents have done—or worse yet, think they ought to do. It also gives us permission to present some outrageous alternatives to let them know how really badly things can be handled.

Fourth, we help them see the consequences of their behavior. By predicting the impact of each suggestion one at a time, we provide them with the opportunity to anticipate the results of each alternative.

Fifth, we let children decide to solve or not solve the problem. This places the responsibility for the problem directly on their shoulders, which is where it belongs. They are the ones who have the problem, and they are the ones who must decide what to do about it.

Let's look at an example to illustrate this five-step process for helping children gain skills in solving their own problems. As we do so, we will identify each of the steps the father and daughter went through (because of the complexity of this particular example, each step was repeated twice). This experience was related by the father of a ninth-grade girl.

As I walked up the basement steps into the kitchen, I was struck by the silence. John, my eleven-year-old, who had been singing while writing his spelling words, looked sheepishly over his glasses at me and didn't make a sound. He then looked up at Karen, who was standing next to the telephone, crying.

"I hate her! I hate her so much! How could she do this to me?"

"What's the matter?"

Karen looked at me with tears running down her cheeks. "I hate her so bad!" she repeated.

I led my fifteen-year-old daughter into the living room, and the two of us sat down on the couch. "Tell me what happened."

"I just got off the phone with Mary. She told me that today, after sixth period, Nancy was really mad and said, 'I don't think Karen deserved to be elected the ninth grade's best personality. It just isn't fair. She just didn't deserve it. She also didn't deserve to make the volleyball team. She gets everything she wants, and I never get anything.' This is my best friend talking. We even live next door to each other. Nancy has been my best friend ever since the fifth grade, and now she's saying things about me behind my back. How could she do that? I'll never trust her again. I'll get her for this. Mary can't stand her and is going to tell her off tomorrow." By this time she was sobbing.

She reached out her hand. I took it and squeezed, and she continued crying. After what seemed like an eternity, I said, "I think that's awful. If my best friend said that about me, I'd feel terrible."

[Empathy established; go to the next step.]

"Yeah, it really hurts, Dad. I don't know what I'll do, but I'm not going to let her get away with this." I remained silent. Finally she stopped crying and asked, "Why would she do something like that? I mean, what would make her turn on me like that? You don't talk about your best friend that way."

"Well," I said slowly, "several things could have happened."

"Like what?"

"Well, maybe she didn't say it at all. Maybe Mary's just making it up."

"I know she said it. Sara and Tanya both told me that she's been saying things about me behind my back, but I didn't believe them. But I know that Mary wouldn't lie to me."

"Well, if you're sure that she said it, there may be several things that could explain it. Maybe she's just a hateful person."

"No! At least not before today. She's really a very kind person."

"Maybe she's jealous of you."

"Why would she be jealous of me?"

"Have you gotten anything lately that she wanted?"

"No. Well, maybe. She tried out for the volleyball team but didn't make it. She also wasn't elected to anything today, either. That could have caused it." By this time she had stopped crying.

"How are you going to handle it?"

[You've let her know she's capable of taking care of the problem; go to the next step.]

"I don't know. Do you have any ideas?"

"I can tell you what some other teens have tried if you'd like."

"Yeah, I'd like that."

[You've obtained permission to share alternatives; go to the next step.]

"Well, you could go over to her house right now, and when she comes to the door, hit her in the mouth and tell her, 'I hate you and I'll never speak to you again as long as I live.'"

"That's stupid. All she'd do is get more angry at me. Besides, that's the way children handle problems."

"If you don't like that idea, you can always do nothing. Maybe the whole thing will just go away, and you both will forget about it."

"Nope. This one isn't going to go away. I've got to do something."

"Well, you could wait and let some of the other kids rough her up a bit and let her know she can't treat you that way."

"That might work. But I'd be letting them do the fighting for me, and she'd think that I'm weak."

"You could also sit down with her privately and talk with her. The Lord put it this way: 'If thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be reconciled.' [D&C 42:88.] Does that sound like it might work?"

"But what would I say to her?" Karen asked.

"You can tell her what you heard, describe how you feel about it, and explain what it's doing to your relationship."

"I've never done anything like that before. That sounds hard."

"Yeah, it would probably be tough, but I'm sure you can handle it. And if you handle it right, you'll be able to save a friendship. If you don't, you might hate each other all through high school. What do you think the Savior would do if he had a problem like this?"

"He'd probably talk to her and then forgive her. But I don't know if I can do that."

"There could be some benefit in thinking about it. You might also want to pray about it. One thing's for sure: your Father in Heaven knows what to do. Let me know if I can be of any help."

[You've looked at the consequences and you've let her decide to solve or not solve the problem.]

The next evening, as Karen and I sat on the living-room couch, she said, "Dad, I prayed about this last night, and I think the best way to handle this problem with Nancy is to talk to her myself. I haven't said anything to anyone about it, but everyone at school is so mad at her they could kill her."

"But I'll bet it feels good to have all of that support."

[Empathy established; go to the next step.]

"Yeah, it really does. But Nancy is the one I'm worried about. She's really in for a lot of trouble. I think we'd better work this out."

"How are you going to handle it?"

[You've let her know she's capable of taking care of the problem; go to the next step.]

"I don't know. Can you give me any ideas?"

[You've obtained permission to share alternatives; go to the next step.]

"Well, you can tell her you're sorry for your part in this problem."

"That's crazy. I didn't do anything."

"Okay. Another possibility is to really rip into her and tell her what a rotten friend she's been."

"That wouldn't work. All she'd do is get angry and hate me even more."

"Okay. Then you could tell her that you caught her red-handed and let her squirm."

"She would probably just get defensive and tell me she didn't do it. Then I'd have to call her a liar, and we'd get nothing solved."

"Well, one of the safest ways I know to handle problems like this is to describe the behavior by telling her what you heard, explain how you feel about it, let her know what she's doing to your relationship, and tell her what it would take to solve the problem."

"Hmm. That sounds tough, but maybe it would work. Can you give me an example?"

"Sure. What did she do?"

"She talked about me behind my back."

"Did you hear her say it?"

"No, but everybody else did."

"Well?"

"Oh, I see. So I should say, 'Some other people have told me that you've been talking behind my back.'"

"Good."

"Then what do I say?"

"Well, how did it make you feel?"

"I got really mad. But it also hurt a lot! That isn't the way best friends are supposed to treat each other."

"That's right. Tell her that."

"You mean, say those words to her?"

"It certainly would help her to understand how you feel. Next, what is her behavior doing to your relationship?"

"It's totally ruining it. I don't want her as a friend when she does that to me."

"You're right on track, so far. Now, what would you like to have her do about it?"

"I'd like her to stop talking about me behind my back. If I've done something to tick her off, I want her to tell me about it herself. I don't want to hear about it from somebody else."

"Well, it sounds as though you have at least one way of effectively handling the problem."

"Dad, can you think of anything else I should say?"

"You could tell her how important her friendship is to you. If you talk to her the way you just talked to me, I think she'll get the message and still be able to save face. You might be able to save a friendship. I'll be interested to hear how it turns out."

[You've looked at the consequences and let her decide to solve or not solve the problem; go to the next step.]

"I probably ought to do this before anyone else talks to her. Well, here goes." Her eyes had begun to sparkle. She got up, walked into the kitchen, and dialed Nancy's number. After the conversation, Karen described to me the phone call:

Karen: "I'd like to make an appointment for us in the counselor's office tomorrow."

Nancy: "Why?"

Karen: "Because a lot of people have told me that you've been talking about me behind my back, and I don't understand why you'd do that."

Nancy: "Oh, that's just great." (Silence.)

Karen: "All right, I'll make the appointment." Nancy then hung up.

Karen looked at me, smiled again, and said, "Now it's our problem. I already feel better."

Late the next afternoon, when I picked her up from volleyball practice, Karen excitedly described her meeting with Nancy in the counselor's office, shared their conversation about the problem, and summarized their agreement that if either person does anything to bug the other, she'll tell her about it.

"So how did things finally turn out?" I asked.

"We both cried and hugged each other. Now we're friends again. I felt so much in control. I knew exactly what I was doing. It was great. I never realized it could be so easy."

Thirty minutes later, as we knelt around our dinner table in family prayer, Karen said, "Heavenly Father, I'm so grateful to thee for helping me solve this problem with Nancy and that we can still be friends."

When we teach children to solve their own problems, we help them with skills they can use the rest of their lives. By including prayer in the process, they take advantage of their most valuable resource: their Father in Heaven. In the process, faith is built and testimonies are strengthened. They also come to know that regardless of their circumstances, they are never alone, and that God will hear and answer their prayers.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Harris, personal communication to authors, July 17, 1989.
