R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

20

Preparing Children for the Ordinances of the Priesthood

It should have been a day of excitement. Terry, my son, and Billy, his best friend, were going to be baptized within the hour. But as we changed to our baptismal clothes in the dressing room, something was obviously wrong. As Billy stooped to pull on his white socks, his hand started shaking. He then stood up, turned toward the wall, and wiped a tear from his cheek.

"Is anything wrong?" I asked. Billy didn't answer. Terry walked across the dressing room, put his hand on Billy's shoulder, and asked, "Is anything the matter?"

"I guess I'm just a little scared."

"How come?" Terry asked.

"'Cause I heard that some kids almost drown when they get baptized."

"That's crazy. Didn't anybody show you what's going to happen?"

"Nope."

"You don't need to worry. My dad's taken me through this a thousand times. You'll go into the water, and Brother Smith will take hold of your hands. After he says a prayer, and you grab your nose, he puts you under the water and pulls you out again. It'll be over in a second, and you won't even know what has happened. Here, let me show you how to do it."

Terry then held Billy's hand the same way I had held his so many times during the past month. He showed Billy how to stand, how to kneel down so his feet wouldn't pop up out of the water, and how to stand back up. Had I not reached out to catch them when they lost their balance, the two of them would have ended up in a pile on the floor.

After we stopped laughing, Terry said, "Would you like my dad to show you how to do it?" Billy nodded, so I took him by the hand and showed him exactly what he would experience, beginning with when he entered the baptismal font. We then repeated the process until he felt comfortable. After we concluded, I thought, "How unfortunate. Here we have one of the most important events in the life of this young man—his baptism into the church of Jesus Christ—and nobody has taken the time to help him understand something so simple as how to keep from drowning."

The Importance of Teaching Children about the Ordinances

The ordinances of the priesthood are central to the gospel of Jesus Christ, and they are of such significant import that only through them can we be exalted and return to live with God. Everything we do in the Church is designed to help prepare members to participate in those ordinances and to then keep the covenants they make during those sacred rites and ceremonies.

We as parents have the sacred responsibility to instill within our children a desire to participate in the priesthood ordinances and to help them prepare for those ordinances, so that the blessings and powers that the Lord wants to give them will be manifest in their lives. Specifically, children need to understand what the ordinances of the priesthood are, how and where they are performed, what the covenants are that accompany them, and why they are absolutely essential to their own eternal welfare. There are many ways we can accomplish this. For example, a mother of five described the preparation in her home in the following way:

We have always taken seriously the Lord's commandment to prepare our children for the ordinances of the priesthood. In the case of baptism, we typically start discussing the ordinance in family home evening about six months before the child turns eight. The Family Home Evening Resource Book has some wonderful lessons geared to help children prepare for the various ordinances, and we have found them to be enormously helpful. We read the scriptures and let them know what the Lord said about the subject. We also take our children to baptismal services so they can see what happens when people are baptized and confirmed members of the Church. In addition, we talk about it a lot around the dinner table and during our visits at bedtime. It's something the entire family looks forward to, and the closer the "big day" gets, the more excited we all become.

A father explained how he prepared his sons to receive the priesthood:

Ordinations are very important in our house. Only once, throughout all the eternities, will my sons be ordained to each office in the priesthood. Therefore, we spend a great deal of time reading the scriptures and helping them understand the covenants they'll make when they participate in the ordinances of the priesthood. We go to great lengths to explain to them exactly what they promise Heavenly Father to do and what he, in turn, promises he will do for them. Once they participate in the ordinance, much more is expected of them, and they must behave accordingly. The responsibility is just too great to treat lightly.

There are also some practical matters that relate to the ordinances. Daniel, our youngest son, was ordained a priest two weeks ago. Before he blessed the sacrament for the first time, I showed him where in the scriptures the prayers were located, and we talked about how meaningful it is to the Church members when the ordinance is conducted properly. He practiced the prayers several times. When he finally knelt to bless the bread for the first time, he was really nervous, but he did a marvelous job. He had a successful experience his first time up, and that is important.

Given the limited perspective of most children, particularly when they're younger, it seems unreasonable to expect them to understand all the implications of priesthood ordinances. Therefore, we need to build support systems to help reinforce the importance of what they have experienced and to instill within them the need to keep the covenants and obligations associated with those ordinances. This can be done in a variety of different ways. For example, part of this reinforcement comes automatically by participating in the normal activities and programs of the Church. One fourteen-year-old young man recounted his experience:

For me, life really began when I was ordained a deacon. Then all kinds of things started to happen. I started attending priesthood with the older guys and adults. I got to pass the sacrament, collect fast offerings, and sometimes be the bishop's messenger. I also got to attend general priesthood meeting and see the prophet.

At the same time I was ordained a deacon, I became a Scout, so I got to go to troop meetings and participate in Scout activities like hikes and campouts. I also got to go to Mutual activities and to do things I had never done before.

However, the responsibility for reinforcing the importance of ordinances lies with parents, and we can do a great deal to help our children understand that they have engaged in something very special. The father of four boys and a girl explained a unique approach that he and his wife found effective with their family:

We try to help make the ordinance relate to as much of their lives as possible, so we schedule some very specific changes in family patterns to coincide with the years in which they are baptized and ordained to the various offices in the priesthood or advanced through the Young Women's organization.

These changes often include increasing both their privileges and their responsibilities. For example, when our children get baptized, they get to select any restaurant in the city, and the whole family goes out to dinner as part of a celebration. They also get to negotiate their bedtime. The other side of it is that their responsibilities around the house also increase—not a lot, but enough to let them know that more is expected of them.

When our children turn twelve, they no longer have a bedtime, and they no longer need a baby-sitter when we go out for the evening. That is a major accomplishment for a twelve-year-old. But we also no longer get them up in the morning. It is their responsibility to get themselves out of bed. The boys are also expected to start wearing a coat and tie to church. They officiate in the priesthood ordinances, and they need to dress in a way consistent with that sacred responsibility.

Things continue to change as they get older. At fourteen, they get additional privileges. They also assume full responsibility for their school work, which means that we stop bugging them about doing their homework and studying for exams. When they turn sixteen, they get a set of keys to both cars; but they are also expected to pay for their own gasoline and to start picking up some of the cost for their clothes.

As is probably obvious by now, we have found that the most effective way to reinforce the importance of priesthood ordinances is to tie them to something tangible. These changes don't substitute for teaching them the gospel; they just add meaning to the importance of the ordinance. It helps them to understand that being baptized and being ordained to an office in the priesthood are privileges.

Successful parents can use a variety of different ways to help their children understand the sacred nature of priesthood ordinances. Regardless of the method, however, children also need to understand that participation in priesthood ordinances also brings with it a sacred responsibility. A recently married young man described how his own father taught him about one of the sacred responsibilities associated with receiving the Aaronic Priesthood:

When I was eleven, my dad told us in family home evening about an experience he had shortly after I was born. Sister Hanks, a member of his ward, had cancer. She had been bedridden for months, and she knew she was dying. More than anything else she desperately wanted to see her son grow to manhood. One night, at her request, her bishop gave her a blessing; and during that blessing the Spirit prompted him to promise her that she would live long enough to see her son become a man.

At the time Dad was teaching Course 11 in Sunday School. Her son was in his class, so he knew the family well, and he knew about that blessing. On the Sunday after the boy turned twelve, my dad, the bishop, and the entire Sunday School class met together in Sister Hanks's bedroom so she could witness her son's ordination to the office of deacon. A few days later she passed away.

Dad said that some people would question the bishop's inspiration when he promised her that she would see her son grow to be a man. Dad, however, was convinced that the prophecy the bishop made in his blessing was literally fulfilled. Dad said that when a boy receives the priesthood, he becomes a man in the Lord's eyes. That means that there is much more expected of him than before.

That story had a profound impact on my life. Dad told me that when I was given the Aaronic Priesthood, Heavenly Father thought of me as a man, and he expected me to act accordingly. I knew, for example, that the Lord expected me to help my brothers and sisters be happy and successful, and that meant I had to stop teasing and picking on them. I also knew that when my Dad left on a business trip, I had a responsibility to help take care of my mother and the rest of the family. Therefore, I did the best I could to live up to those expectations, and in the process I developed a great respect and love for the priesthood and for the power that Heavenly Father had given me.

We can also help our children understand the power of the priesthood by sharing examples and personal experiences from our own lives and from the lives of others. For example, the following story has played a significant role in helping many families understand the sacred nature of the priesthood and the protection it can provide:

Since the island of Tutuila in American Samoa is extremely mountainous, the villages are built by the sea shore. Prior to 1980, the village of Amanave, on the western shore of the island, had not had missionaries for several years. However, due to the efforts of Vialua Lameco, one of the few members of the Church in the village, the area was reopened for missionary work in the fall of 1980. Brother and Sister Lameco invited the new missionaries (Joseph Harris, from Idaho Falls, and Misiona Tuimaseve, a native Samoan from the island of Savai'i in Western Samoa) to live with their family.

The Lameco home, like the others in the village, had no walls. The tin roof was supported by posts, and the floor was made up of small pieces of rounded coral. For protection against the rain and wind, the family lowered curtains made of coconut thatch. Since the homes had no electricity, oil and gas lanterns were the only source of light at night.

Once the missionaries arrived, the Lameco family knelt together, and by the power of the priesthood Brother Lameco dedicated their home for missionary service. Although the home was humble in terms of worldly standards, it was a very sacred place.

During the month of October it rained constantly for three weeks. As a result the entire island was saturated with moisture. At four A.M. on October 28, 1980, an earthquake hit the island. The mountain above the village shifted, causing a mud slide that carried with it huge boulders that crushed and buried everything in its path.

The missionaries and the Lameco family were awakened by the earthquake. With Elder Harris's powerful gas lantern, they could see everything that was taking place within one hundred feet of their home. They first watched the torrents of water descend from the mountain and pass through the village. Within a few minutes, the water turned to mud, and then a four-foot wall of mud descended upon the village, crushing everything in its path, including trees and houses. The noise was almost deafening.

Then a miracle happened. The wall of mud came within two inches of the Lameco home, divided, completely encircled the house, joined together on the other side, and proceeded through the village, wiping out everything else in its path. The mud slide lasted for about one hour, but the Lameco home was untouched; the only evidence that anything had happened was a six-inch wall of mud two inches from the foundation. Almost everything else in the village of Amanave was destroyed. [^1]

Most experiences are not this miraculous. But powerful lessons can be learned when parents bear testimony of the importance of the priesthood in their lives and provide opportunities for their children to witness the power of the priesthood ordinances. With tears running down his cheeks, a grandfather shared the following experience with the members of his ward as he bore testimony about the importance of teaching children the gospel:

My daughter had very poor health when she was expecting her second child. One day she asked her husband and brother to give her a blessing. While they laid their hands upon her head and officiated in an ordinance of the priesthood that we prize so highly, Spencer, her energetic and inquisitive two-year-old son, sat on the couch and watched the proceedings from beginning to end without moving a muscle or making a peep! He was all eyes and ears. It was as if he fully understood the sacredness of that special occasion.

Several days later his mother was having a particularly difficult day. Early that afternoon she lay down on the couch and closed her eyes, all the while listening to Spencer play. He clearly understood that his mother was ill because she had told him on several occasions that they could not do this or that because "Mommy didn't feel good."

As she lay on the couch, she heard Spencer approach her and felt him standing near her. He laid his hands upon her head and said, "My mommy is sick." He then went on at length to bless her in a language comprehensible only to his Father in Heaven. While she pretended to be asleep, she shed tears of happiness for a child who, while in his infancy, was learning the ways of the Savior.

When the importance of priesthood ordinances is properly taught to our children, the lessons often create a desire in their hearts and motivate them to live worthy to receive those wonderful blessings. Sometimes, however, our teaching has a far greater impact on our children then we had ever imagined, as one mother explained:

We had the privilege of participating in the building of the Ogden Temple, and every member of our family made his or her financial contribution. We also talked about the temple and helped our children understand the kinds of things that go on in that sacred house and what a great blessing it is to be worthy to enter it and to receive the blessings the Lord has in store for us there.

Prior to leaving our home to take the tour of the temple before it was dedicated, my husband said, "Today we will stand together, as a family, in the celestial room of the temple. Pay careful attention to what you see and how you feel, because this will be the last time it will happen until each of you earns the right to be there. The only way we will be there together again is if each of you lives worthy to receive your endowments. This time it is for free. The next time you must earn the right to be there."

I'll never forget walking into the celestial room when we took our fifth child through the temple for his endowments. As our son stood there with the rest of the family, he looked at me and said, "Mom, I made it."

"What do you mean?"

"When we went through the temple before it was dedicated, Dad said that the next time we stood together in the celestial room, we had to earn the right to be here. I did it. I am worthy!"

To the best of my recollection, we had never talked about that experience; but it had such an impact on my son that thirteen years later he remembered it, word for word. We had set the stage prior to taking a tour of that wonderful building, and he had never forgotten it. Our son watched all of his brothers and sisters go through the temple. He was the last, and he made it. So again we were able to meet together in the celestial room of the temple because every one of them had earned the right to be there.

The very purpose of teaching the gospel in the home is to help our children understand gospel principles and to so live that they are worthy to participate in the priesthood ordinances. When gospel principles are taught with the companionship of the Spirit, they are embedded in the hearts and souls of those whom we teach. The impact of such teaching is profound.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Fay, Tickets to Success, 29.
