R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

21

Teaching Children Responsibility

It seemed hopeless. I had lectured, begged, pleaded, threatened, and coerced. But nothing had worked. The harder I tried to teach my ten-year-old responsibility, the more he resisted. I was getting nowhere, and I was making myself miserable in the process.

One afternoon my Relief Society visiting teacher shared a few pages from a book she had recently read. One particular passage struck me as the perfect answer:

I've got a friend who says she lends money to her kids. She's "Mom, the bank" at her house. She says she's just like the First National Bank, handing out money all the time. But she loves to do it because she does it just like the First National Bank—she requires promissory notes and collateral. Her kids always know when they're going to pay the loans back and what the collateral is. Once, for example, she repossessed a $29.00 tape recorder from her son. And I think her son was fortunate. Here he was—ten years old, and he learned all about banks and responsibility and collateral and repossessions. And all it cost him was a $29.00 tape recorder. Some people protect their kids, and the kids don't get to learn that lesson until they're 35, and somebody repossesses their $29,000 car. [^1]

I was amazed at how simple it was. I had consistently protected my son from the real world and then become frustrated because he wasn't learning to be responsible. By denying him the opportunities to make mistakes, I was, in fact, preventing him from the growth and development that come from experiencing the consequences of his behavior.

Teaching Children Responsibility

Teaching children responsibility means teaching them to be honest, dependable, and trustworthy. It also means helping them learn to make decisions and to then live with the natural consequences of their behavior. Unfortunately, helping our children to become responsible adults is almost always harder on us than it is on them, primarily because the natural consequences of behavior are often uncomfortable and occasionally painful; and we don't like to see our children experience pain.

Teaching children to be responsible is also no small task. In fact, most parents really don't understand for sure how to do it. As a father of seven children explained:

As far as I'm concerned, I can't tell you for sure how we teach our children to be responsible. Responsibility is something they have to learn for themselves. We can provide opportunities for them to learn, but they have to tough it out and learn the valuable lessons of life themselves. Responsibility can only be learned by experience. Therefore, one of the most important things we can do for children is to allow them to have the kinds of experiences that will prepare them for life. That means that we have to be willing to let them make mistakes and to then learn from the consequences.

Children who are protected from the consequences of their actions are not prepared to succeed in the real world. Fortunately, however, the real-world lessons of life can be learned much more inexpensively in our homes, when children are young.

A variety of things contribute to rearing responsible children, one of which is a clear set of family rules. Rules are essential to successful family life. They establish guidelines, state values, and define the limits of acceptable behavior. Parents who base all family decisions on the results of an applause meter are begging for serious trouble. On some issues we need to take an unwavering stand, regardless of the popularity of the decision. However, most issues aren't that black and white. Thus, a clear set of rules serves as a practical framework that children can rely on to help them set standards, make decisions, and resolve problems. Rules also help children understand family values and provide them with an anchor as they grow and develop.

Generally speaking, the fewer the number of formal rules, the better, as long as they are clearly understood and accepted by family members and are broad enough to provide the necessary guidelines for family living. As a father of five teenagers explained:

Although we don't spend a lot of time talking about it, we expect family members to live Church standards, treat our home with respect, and do their chores. As far as specific, formal rules are concerned, we have only three. First, we don't say or do anything that will undermine another family member's self-esteem.

Second, whenever we leave home, we tell someone (for children, it means one of the parents) where we are going, whom we will be with, and when we will return. If plans change, we notify the family by telephone so people will know when to expect us. The children will also let us know when they have arrived home, regardless of the hour.

Third, we will be where we are supposed to be when we are supposed to be there. In short, we are expected to be dependable.

We agreed as a family that everyone lives by the same set of rules, parents and children alike. No exceptions. These simple rules are fair to everyone, yet they are broad enough to set a standard for our behavior. We have found few problems that cannot be addressed by adhering to these three rules. But we expect everyone to keep them, and we do whatever is necessary to insure that we all live by the same set of standards. [^2]

Chores also provide excellent opportunities for children to learn responsibility. They help children understand that they have to work for what they get, and regularly fulfilling their responsibilities also helps them learn to work. As one father explained:

As I was growing up, my father was in the construction business, so I learned to work at his side. I worked full time during the summer and after school and on Saturdays during the school year. My children aren't so fortunate. I am in an office all day, so I can't work with my children. That is why chores are so important. They help my children learn to work. They also help teach them that they need to work for what they get. Helping with the load is part of the cost of living with someone.

The children in our house start doing chores when they are old enough to walk. For example, our two-year-old picks up his toys, puts his clothes away, and makes sure the bathroom towels and washcloths are hung up. When he does a good job, we tell him about it. If he needs help, we provide it. As he gets older, he will have more responsibility; and we don't do things for him that he can do for himself. Given my work life, this is about the only way we have to teach our children to work.

Chores can be assigned in a variety of different ways. A mother of three teenagers described how chores get handled in her home:

Most of the time we let our children choose what they want to do from a list of things that need to be done. We handle the things we don't like to do in two ways: we either rotate them through the family on a periodic basis, or we do them together. The weekly chores are to be completed no later than 4:30 P.M. on Saturday. Since our older children like to do things on Saturday night, the deadline provides a motivation for them, since getting chores done is a prerequisite to using the family car.

Regardless of our method of assigning chores, we need to follow through and make certain that our children fulfill their responsibilities. That is not always easy, particularly as the children get older. A practical mother of three children gave the following insight.

I give my children a responsibility, and then I hope that they make a mistake. Why? Because they will then learn something from it—and they will learn it at the cheapest possible price. I would much rather have my son learn to be responsible at age six than at sixteen or twenty-six. If he's supposed to vacuum the living room by the end of the day, I don't feel the least bit guilty about awakening him out of a deep sleep to complete his chores. That way he knows we mean business, he learns a valuable lesson about being dependable, and the living room gets vacuumed. Incidentally, I have never had to do something like that more than once with each of my children. It's amazing how responsible they become when they know we mean business. As long as it's done with love, we don't damage our relationship with our children.

Expecting children to behave responsibly prepares children for the real world, and that is what parenting is all about. Typically, the more practical the example, the richer the learning experience. A father of four described an important lesson that he learned in a simple way:

As I sat at our kitchen table, Mom took two dishes from the refrigerator and set one in front of me and one in front of my little sister.

"What's that?" I asked.

"It's lemon pudding—the kind of stuff that seven-year-old boys like you really enjoy."

"What's it taste like?"

"Try it and see," she said, smiling.

"It looks awful. I hate that stuff."

Mom smiled at me even more and said, "Oh, really? Well, that's okay, Jimmy, you don't have to eat it." She then promptly put my dish back in the refrigerator.

"Hey, I was just kidding."

"I don't mind. I'll just give it to one of your sisters."

"Mom!"

"I really don't mind. Some people just aren't cut out for lemon pudding."

"What am I going to have for dessert?"

"Don't know. Maybe some peanut butter and honey on a slice of bread."

"I don't want peanut butter and honey!" My four-year-old sister looked over her half-eaten dish of pudding and said, "Jimmy, dat was weally dumb ta say dat. Dis stuff is weally good."

Even though that incident took place forty years ago, I remember it as if it happened yesterday. It's amazing to me that such a simple event could help me to understand the implications of making judgments without accurate information. That was certainly the last time I ever turned up my nose at dessert before I tasted it. And since that time I've been very careful about jumping to conclusions without having all of the facts.

In the process of holding children accountable, we need to make it absolutely clear that we love them and that we care for them. That's why empathy and concern are so important. In fact, one of the worst possible things we can say to our children when we try to teach them to solve their own problems is "This is your problem," or "It's not my problem." It's much better to imply it by saying, "Well, that must feel pretty rotten," or "That's a real bummer," or some other phrase that lets them know that we care about them and that we understand their difficulty. [^3] A sixteen-year-old girl described how her father got that message across and still held her accountable:

We have a rule in our house that we can't drive the family car until we have completed a driver's education course. My two older brothers had adhered to the rules, and I was expected to do the same. Since the subject wasn't taught in our high school, Dad paid for the lessons. But we had to enroll in the course.

On my sixteenth birthday, my friend took me down to get my driver's license. However, it did me no good, because my folks wouldn't let me behind the wheel until I got the training; and I hadn't bothered to sign up.

Six weeks after turning sixteen, I enrolled in an intensive course—one where I could get the class and the eight hours of driving in a two-week period. Halfway through the second week, I got in a jam and needed to use the car. Dad refused.

"But Daddy," I pleaded, "I have only two more hours of driving, and then the class will be over."

He put his arms around me, hugged me, and said, "Sweetheart, I know it's a bummer not to be able to drive. I'm willing to take you where you need to go. But if I were to let you take the car after all I've said about this subject, you would never be able to really trust me again." He then kissed me, told me how much he loved me, and left me alone to solve my problem. How could you not love a guy like that?

Unfortunately, not all problems can be handled so easily, particularly when children get older. For example, what about stubborn teenagers. What if they refuse to do their chores? What do you do if your sixteen-year-old son refuses to do what you ask? There may be times when the following approach may be helpful:

If he refuses to do what I ask, I say to him, "Did I ask you in a nice way?"

"Yes," he'll say, "you asked me in a nice way."

"I asked you in a nice way, and you're still not going to do it? Hey, no problem. I'll do it myself," I reply.

And I do. I do it myself, and I don't make an issue of it whatsoever, but I don't forget.

Now maybe the next day the boy comes to me and he needs me. I don't know a kid alive who isn't going to need me as a parent. He says, "Hey, remember, this is Saturday. And you were going to take me out for a driving lesson."

I say, "Oh, yeah, I remember that, Pal. And you're even asking me in a nice way. But, rats! Guess what I learned last night—from you, by the way? I learned that asking in a nice way around this house just doesn't cut it. Try me again another time. I mean don't give up on me."

Or another technique I suggest to handle this big kid I can't overpower is to keep track of the time it takes to do the chore he won't do. Then when he comes to me on Saturday and asks if he can have a driving lesson, I say, "Well, probably so, except that I used up that time raking the leaves for you, so why don't you check back with me when I haven't used up the time." [^4]

We need to remember that teaching children responsibility involves a step-by-step process that takes years to accomplish. "All that's required is a consistent effort by patient, loving parents who respect their children too much to let them be infantile when they are ready to be nearly adult." [^5]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Blaine M. Yorgason, personal communication to authors, November 2, 1989.
[^2] For additional information on family rules, see William G. Dyer and Phillip R. Kunz, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1986), 44-48.
[^3] See Fay, Tickets to Success, 81.
[^4] Jim Fay, Helicopters, Drill Sergeants, and Consultants (Evergreen: Cline/Fay Institute, Inc., 1988), 95-96.
[^5] Victor B. Cline, How to Make Your Child a Winner (New York: Walker & Company, 1980), 86.
