R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

22

Teaching Missionaries

I opened the mailbox, and facing me from the top of the stack of bills sat that much-waited-for brown envelope containing a letter from our missionary son. I tore it open and hungrily read the almost illegible handwriting:

Dear Mom and Dad,

Thanks for your recent letter. I can't tell you how much it meant to me. You have no idea what I've been going through. I was beginning to believe all the negative stuff I've been hearing from those gentiles, and a week of having doors slammed in my face was really getting to me. When you told me about how the Lord had answered your prayers when Dad was sick and then bore your testimony to me about the importance of the work I am doing, I really felt the Spirit. It was awesome. I can't tell you how much better it made me feel. I love you dearly and am so grateful that you are my parents. Please keep the letters coming.

Could this be my son? I couldn't believe what I was reading. Before he left on his mission, he wouldn't give me the time of day. I had no idea what a positive impact a simple letter would have on his life. He isn't even the same boy.

Can We Really Teach Missionaries?

At first thought, the idea of teaching the gospel to our missionary children seems mildly absurd. In fact, we have heard some people argue just the opposite:

We have spent a lifetime teaching them the gospel and preparing them to serve missions. Now we have sent them out to teach the gospel, not to be taught. Our role, as parents, is to encourage, to support, to sustain them financially and with our love. They are in the Lord's hands, and there is really very little we can do to teach them the gospel. Besides, we don't know anything about missionary work, anyway. Our job in that area stopped when they walked through the doors of the Missionary Training Center!

However, the above perceptions could not be further from the truth. Consider, for example, the following observation by a father of two returned missionaries:

When my oldest son received his call from the prophet, there was nothing in that letter that released me from my responsibility as his father. Even though he is on the Lord's errand, he is still my son, and I have a sacred obligation to do all that I can to help him be successful in all of his righteous endeavors. The Lord's commandment to teach our children the gospel did not include the phrase "except while they are serving missions." In fact, I have come to understand that my opportunity to teach him is far greater now than it has been in years.

There are few times in our children's lives when they are so receptive to learning the truths of the restored gospel as when they are in the mission field. They spend one hundred percent of their time engaged in that great service. They are immersed in learning and teaching the principles of the gospel. The more we can help them with that difficult task, the more successful they will be.

A common barrier to teaching our children is their disinterest in what we have to say. In fact, one of the major reasons we are commanded to teach our children the gospel before the age of eight is that those are the years when they believe what we tell them. They have the childlike faith that God commanded all of us to have, and Satan has no power to tempt them. (See D&C 29:47.) The family is still far more influential than the peer group.

However, as they get older, their attitudes often start to change. They begin to question our judgment, particularly when they see inconsistencies between what we teach and the ways we sometimes behave. It is not surprising, then, that they become more skeptical and sometimes cynical.

The only time they approach that same childlike level of receptivity again is in the mission field. Their full-time jobs are to teach the principles of the gospel, and they are hungry for anything that will help them better accomplish that task. Their success as missionaries depends upon it. The father of four missionaries shared the following observations:

Shortly after our eldest son entered the Missionary Training Center, I realized that I had been granted, rather miraculously, a fresh opportunity to be his teacher. In his early years I had done much of that, but as his horizons had expanded, he had seemed to pay less and less attention to me, until there were times when I felt like an outsider in his life.

But now, in the midst of his commitment to serve the Lord on a mission, our son for the first time in his life discovered that he missed us. He was not necessarily homesick, but at least he missed us. And as all missionaries know, missing their families is best cured by letters from home.

Also understanding that, I sent those letters diligently. And only gradually did I come to the realization that my son was again a "captive" audience. No matter what I wrote, in his desperation for contact with home, he would read and even reread it, often many times.

From there it was an easy jump to including in my letters small lessons that I was learning or had learned, things that I thought might help him. These weren't major things but were usually items I had gleaned from family or personal scripture study, or personal experiences that seemed designed by a loving Heavenly Father to help me view one concept or another from an eternal perspective.

Then came a letter from our missionary telling of a problem or a situation and actually asking for counsel. I responded joyfully but carefully, using the scriptures as a guide, and I was gratified to see the counsel accepted. More letters came, more questions were asked, sometimes even about gospel topics, and more and more I found myself studying the gospel and writing letters with a new purpose—to locate and share gospel gemstones that would help our son find success in his labors for Christ.

A year passed and our second son departed for his mission, and three months later our daughter entered the MTC for her own mission experience. And within a month or so of her departure, my wife and I noticed an amazing coincidence. The letters from our newest missionaries were almost exact parallels of the earlier letters from our eldest elder, both in experiences shared and in questions asked. And all three were serving in widely separated locations around the earth, laboring within vastly divergent cultures.

Now, with three children home from their missions, and a fourth serving and again writing parallel letters, I am convinced of the tremendous opportunities parents have to teach their children the gospel. [^1]

This need to be spiritually fed has clear implications for what and how we communicate to our missionaries. Since letters are our only means for communicating with them, we need to exercise care in what we write. Letters containing criticism, complaints, and detailed descriptions of personal and family problems do not lift and motivate. As one missionary explained, "Letters from home are wonderful if they are newsy and positive. But it's difficult when I get a letter out here from my family members, and they talk about all the problems they're having. It's frustrating because I can't help. I can't do a single thing about it except wring my hands and worry. I hate getting those kinds of letters. Quite frankly, there are some things that I just don't want to know about right now."

On the other hand, letters that contain encouragement, statements of support, and detailed descriptions of successful experiences give uplifting and inspiring messages. Sharing spiritual experiences, reporting family members' accomplishments, quoting relevant scriptures, and bearing our testimonies can build faith and motivate our children in ways that cannot be duplicated by anyone else. We can teach them gospel principles and motivate them to the point that when they finish reading our letters, they feel uplifted, inspired, and more committed to building the kingdom. Never underestimate the influence of letters from home. Consider, for example, the impact of a letter about the importance of obedience:

It was great to get your letter this week. Dad, your letter has me so excited to work hard. That has got to be one of the most inspired letters you have ever written to me. So far I've read it twenty times, and I'm still excited every time I read it. I never really understood the relationship between obedience and the Lord blessing me in this work. Your letters are always such a strength to me. They always make me feel so good and strengthen my resolve to do my best. I love them. If I have a choice between getting a package of goodies from home and getting a letter, I'll take a letter any day.

A mother once told her missionary son about a spiritual experience the family had in dealing with a problem facing his younger brother. After describing the experience in detail, she assured him that all of the family members felt the same level of love and support for him as well. He described the impact of that letter to his uncle in the following way:

I just received the letter from mom telling me of the wonderful experience they had, how the family fasted and prayed together, and it was beautiful. The spirit that came from the letter was incredible, and I could not hold back the tears. Every time I read it, I am impressed at how much they love me, and how blessed I am to be a member of that family. There is no way I can fail with the support they have for me and the number of prayers that are being said for me every day.

Similar letters are sent thousands of times every week from grateful elders and sisters who are strengthened by messages of support and encouragement from their loved ones. However, the opportunity to bless missionaries is not restricted only to our children. A significant percentage of the missionary force of the Church is made up of married couples who have the same needs for support, love, and encouragement as their younger colleagues. As one father explained to his daughter:

I look forward to your letters more than you can imagine. They are very important to me. I see them as gestures of love on your part, and I feel very encouraged by them. They are an indication of your love for us. I think they are great. They show us that you trust us and have confidence that we can do the job we have been called to do. Most of the time you have much more confidence in us than we have in ourselves.

I love to hear about your feelings, your hopes, and the things you are interested in. I feel strengthened when you tell us about your prayers, and how they are answered. It is a wonderful feeling to know that we are loved and honored by those we love the most.

Most people don't realize that couples who go on missions need support and encouragement as much as the younger missionaries do. I don't think there has ever been a time in my life that I have needed to hear from my family and friends as much as I do now, even if it's only just half a page. The length is not nearly as important as the frequency. I would much rather have four short letters each month than one long one.

There are a lot of wonderful things about missionary work. But it gets very lonely sometimes. Letters are a great way of letting me know that I am supported.

Letters to all missionaries, whether they are single or married couples, provide unique opportunities for us to share warm expressions of the heart—those messages of love and appreciation that sometimes are awkward when we are talking face to face. For many people, some things are just easier to say in letters. Clearly, regular, positive letters have an impact on missionaries in ways that cannot be duplicated. We can do things for our missionaries that no one else can do, including teaching them gospel principles.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Blaine M. Yorgason, personal communication to authors, November 2, 1989.
