R. Wayne Boss, Leslee S. Boss, Are My Children Going to Make It? Real Help for Teaching the Gospel in the Home ( 1991)

23

When Children Rebel

"That's what you think," I said angrily to my twelve-year-old son. "You're going inside with me, even if I have to drag you by your ear." I jumped out of the car, walked to the other side, and reached for the car door. It wouldn't open. Danny had locked himself inside, and my keys were still in the ignition. I was so angry at that kid that I was ready to string him up. At that point, I had a decision to make. I could create a scene in the church parking lot, or I could go to sacrament meeting. Since I hate to fight battles I know I can't win, I chose the latter.

Danny had resisted going to church ever since we moved to town three months ago. This morning, when he told me he wasn't going, we had a pretty heated argument. Finally, in response to my threats, he reluctantly put on his Sunday clothes and got in the car. In retrospect, I really should have known better than to push him like that. My own fears and frustrations had gotten in the way of helping my son. The more I leaned on him, the more defiant he became.

I heard little that was said in sacrament meeting. I spent the entire time praying for help on how to resolve the problem with my son. Since it made no sense to let him sit in the car for three hours, particularly since I was not getting anything out of the meeting anyway, I skipped Sunday School and Relief Society.

Fortunately, I kept my mouth shut during the ride home. Once inside the house, however, Danny went straight to his room and closed the door. My announcement an hour later that dinner was ready was met with silence. I found him lying on his bed, looking at the ceiling.

"Son, I'm sorry about the way I treated you this morning. My behavior was uncalled for. I will try to never let that happen again. If you would like to talk about it, I'll be in the living room. I'll fix you a plate and put it in the oven so it'll stay warm until you're ready to eat." He continued to stare at the ceiling, and I walked out of the room.

Ninety minutes later he came into the living room and sat down on the sofa. "Thanks for dinner," he said quietly, looking at the floor.

"You're welcome. Hey, I'm really sorry about this morning. I'm sure you had a good reason for not wanting to go to church. The problem was that I didn't want to listen to you. Now I'm ready to listen."

Tears came to his eyes, and he said haltingly, "The kids at church make fun of me because of my teeth." He then started to cry. I felt sick inside. How could I have been so insensitive? He had complained for several months about how his two front teeth stuck out, but I had paid little attention to his concerns. What I had seen as rebellion against the Church was not really rebellion at all. He simply didn't want to be embarrassed again by the criticism of the other deacons.

When Children Rebel

The most effective way to prevent rebellion is to teach our children the gospel when they are young. A strong testimony provides the armor they need to withstand the influence of Satan. Children gain testimonies by learning the gospel and by having the Holy Ghost bear witness to them that what they have been taught is true. Many problems will be prevented when children know that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is a prophet, and that the restored gospel is true. However, children also have their free agency. And sometimes they choose to exercise that agency in ways that are inconsistent with gospel principles.

An important step in dealing with rebellious children is to understand that rebellion is always a power struggle, whether the child is two, fifteen, or forty. They are rebelling against something or someone. Understandably, then, authoritarian and coercive behavior on our part only alienates and offends them. Coercion is not part of the gospel plan, and it plays no useful role in teaching the gospel to our children. Thus, when dealing with rebellious children, our teaching needs to be characterized "by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile." (D&C 121:41-42.) Such an approach can work miracles. Consider, for example, the insight gained by a seventeen-year-old boy.

For several months I was inactive in the Church. However, during that entire time my parents never leaned on me. There was no badgering and no criticism. They allowed me to exercise my free agency and then respected my choices. They loved me. They continued to teach me as often as I would listen. They forgave me when I offended them. They prayed for me. But most of all, they loved me. Therefore, I had nothing to rebel against. Throughout it all I knew that they were genuinely concerned about my welfare. As a result, it was much easier for me to come back home and to come back to church.

Another important step in helping rebellious children is to identify what they are rebelling against. Put in medical terms, we always do a diagnosis before we prescribe treatment. Once we identify the cause of the problem, we can then generate acceptable alternative solutions, and the difficulties become much more manageable. A mother of five shared the following information about her fourth child.

Todd was a very determined young man, and during his early teenage years his strong-willed nature led him places he should not have gone. At first we thought he was rebelling against the standards he had been taught. But then we realized that he needed his freedom and independence, and he was determined to have it. We knew that our son could channel that determination into rebelling against us, or he could channel it in a more productive and positive direction. If we had fought him, I'm afraid he would have gone the other way. He would have had something to rebel against. Teenage rebellion is a power struggle. The only way you win is not to play the game. Fortunately, we gave him the freedom he needed, and he chose to keep the commandments.

However, in spite of our best efforts, children sometimes make poor decisions. When that happens, we must not let the unwise use of their agency prevent us from keeping the commandments. A single mother reported the following:

Shortly after my son turned fifteen, his church attendance dropped off. Then one day he announced that he didn't have a testimony, and he demanded that we stop reading the scriptures, having family prayer, and holding family home evening. Stunned though I was, I explained that regardless of how he felt, we intended to live the gospel. That meant that his thirteen-year-old sister and I would continue to kneel in family prayer each evening before dinner and to read the scriptures together after we finished eating. We would also hold family home evening every Monday night. He didn't have to join us in any of those activities. But they would be held, just the same.

Heartbroken though I was, I realized that the only chance I had to reach my son was to live in such a way that I was worthy to have the companionship of the Holy Ghost. I tried to make his time at home as pleasant as possible, and I continued to love him and, at the same time, respect his wishes. But not once during the following four years did my son join us in family prayer, and he consistently evaporated as soon as we pulled out our scriptures. He attended family home evening only five times, and those were holiday celebrations. To stand back and watch him make other unwise choices was almost more than I could bear.

Then last week he joined us in reading the scriptures. The next day he asked if I thought it would be possible for him to serve a mission. When I asked him what caused the change, he said, "You've continued to love and respect me despite my mistakes. You've also stuck to your guns, as far as the gospel is concerned, and your life is a lot better than mine. I've tried it my way, and it doesn't work very well. I think I'd like to try it your way for a while."

God has given all of his children their agency. In the process of choosing, mistakes will take place. Children will disappoint us. They will slip. They will be clumsy. They will sometimes do less than their best. That is part of mortality. Hence, we need to understand that our children's mistakes often say more about the poor judgment of the child than about the inadequacies of their parents.

Although teaching children the gospel is necessary for the salvation of both the parent and the child, it is not the only variable affecting the child's behavior. Other factors come into play, including the character traits and attributes they developed before they came to mortality. Not surprisingly, then, children reared in the same family can be quite different. In considering the differences among children, President Joseph F. Smith teaches us a valuable lesson about the impact of the premortal soul on our tendency to accept divine gospel truths while in mortality. Specifically, President Smith said:

Notwithstanding this fact that our recollection of former things was taken away, the character of our lives in the spirit world has much to do with our disposition, desires and mentality here in mortal life. This spirit influences the body to a great extent, just as the body in its desires and cravings has an influence on the spirit. . . . Environment and many other causes, however, have great influence on the progress and destiny of man, but we must not lose sight of the fact that the characteristics of the spirit which were developed through many ages of the former existence play a very important part in our progression through mortal life. [^1]

Despite our best efforts, children sometimes make choices that are inconsistent with gospel principles. Elder Orson F. Whitney gave the following comforting counsel to parents with wayward children:

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared—and he never taught more comforting doctrine—that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the Cause of Truth, would save not only themselves, but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the Shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of Divine Providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or the life to come, they will return. They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like a penitent Prodigal, to a loving and forgiving father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God.

Who are these straying sheep—these wayward sons and daughters? They are children of the Covenant, heirs to the promises, and have received, if baptized, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which makes manifest the things of God. Could all that go for naught? [^2]

The severe pain caused by a wayward child can only be understood by one who has experienced it. As a result, many silently suffer for years because of the heartbreak and helplessness they feel. However, we can still do something for them. We can love them, and we can pray for them. President Gordon B. Hinckley provided the following insightful counsel to parents under such circumstances.

It is very easy to say that if we will do this or that, all will go well. But I have seen conscientious men and women, people who are faithful and true, people who try to observe the teachings of the Church, who still experience broken hearts over the conduct of their children.

I know some of the answers to these problems, but I confess that I do not know all of them. Many of the problems are of our own making. In other cases, they seem to happen notwithstanding all that we do to guard against them. I think of some wonderful people I know. Their older children grew up and were married and went forward with their lives in a way that made the hearts of their parents glad. And then there was a younger son, a bright and able boy. It was the associations he had in high school that moved him in another direction. His hair grew long and his dress unkempt. He did other things which brought great distress to his father and mother. His father was distraught. He scolded and threatened; he wept and prayed and rebuked his son. But there was no response. The boy went his wayward course. His mother also wept and prayed. But she controlled her feelings and kept her voice low. She repeatedly expressed to her son her love for him. He left home. She kept his room tidy, his bed made, food for him in the refrigerator, and she told him that whenever he felt like coming home, he would be made welcome.

Months passed while hearts ached.

The love of his mother finally began to touch his heart. He came back occasionally to sleep. Without ever scolding, she smiled, joked with him, placed delicious food before him, put her arms around him, and expressed her love. Finally, he began to show increasing neatness in his person. He stayed home more. He came to realize that there was no other place as comfortable, no place as secure, no place as happy as that home which he had earlier left. He finally got his life under control. He went on a mission, at an age older than most young men do. He proved to be a successful missionary. He returned home, entered school, and began to apply himself. The last time I saw him, he and his mother, each blessed with a good voice, sang a duet while some who knew the history of that family shed tears.

To any within the sound of my voice who may have such sons or daughters, may I suggest that you never quit trying. They are never lost until you have given up. Remember that it is love, more than any other thing, that will bring them back. Punishment is not likely to do it. Reprimands without love will not accomplish it. Patience, expressions of appreciation, and that strange and remarkable power which comes with prayer will eventually win through. [^3]

Never underestimate the righteous influence parents can have on their children. We never know when something someone says or does will touch them. All it takes is one spiritual experience to change a person's life. It is up to us, as parents, to create an environment where such experiences regularly take place. Under these conditions the windows of heaven will be opened, and the blessings of the Lord will be poured out. Such blessings are worth working for.

---
Notas:
[^1] Blaine M. Yorgason, personal communication to authors, November 2, 1989.
[^2] For additional information on family rules, see William G. Dyer and Phillip R. Kunz, Effective Mormon Families: How They See Themselves (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1986), 44-48.
[^3] See Fay, Tickets to Success, 81.
